
                               1 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REMEMBERING VIETNAM

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 102 words


Take what they have left and what they have taught you with their dying and keep
it with your own. . .  And in that time when men decide and feel safe to call
the war insane, take one moment to embrace those gentle heroes you left behind.
. .

The words were written in Vietnam 14 years ago by Maj. Michael Davis O'Donnell
of Springfield, Ill., three months before he was lost when his helicopter was
shot down. Now, the major's poem and the writings of other Vietnam veterans,
their families and friends are being considered for inscription on a memorial
planned for lower Manhattan. Page B1.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Michael O'Donnell

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN INSURGENTS IN CLASH

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 315 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Sept. 30


Vietnamese troops and the Pol Pot guerrilla group traded artillery and mortar
fire in Cambodia for at least four hours today in the heaviest fighting of the
rainy season, Thai military sources and guerrilla spokesmen said.

The fighting took place four miles inside Cambodia in the mountainous Phnom
Malai area, they said.

The exchanges continued for about four hours and could be heard in the main Thai
border town of Aranyaprathet, 120 miles east of Bangkok, they said.

The sources said the fighting between Hanoi's troops and the Communist Pol Pot
group was the heaviest of the rainy season - usually a time to regroup and
resupply for Cambodian rebels fighting the North Vietnamese- backed Government.

There were no immediate details on casualties.

Military sources said the fighting began shortly after dawn today when about 400
Pol Pot soldiers attacked a Vietnamese base in the Phnom Malai mountain area
with mortars, 105-millimeter artillery and recoilless rifles. The Vietnamese
responded with heavy mortar and recoilless rifle fire.

The sources said the Pol Pot group attacked after hearing of plans by Hanoi's
forces to strike rebel strongholds to avenge the deaths of 12 Vietnamese
soldiers killed five days ago when their tank was blown up by guerrillas.

The Pol Pot group, which claims to have 40,000 armed insurgents, is the
strongest of three Cambodian guerrilla groups fighting about 170,000 Vietnamese
troops in Cambodia.

It ruled Cambodia - and was accused of putting millions to death - after ousting
the United States-backed Lon Nol regime in Phnom Penh in 1975.  But the Pol Pot
regime itself was ousted four years later by Vietnamese troops, who installed
the pro-Hanoi Heng Samrin regime.

China, which fought a brief war with Vietnam after Hanoi's takeover in Cambodia,
is the main source of weapons and supplies for the guerrillas.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Oudone Sananikone, 63, Dies; Former Defense Chief in Laos

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 169 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., Sept. 30


Oudone Sananikone, a former director general of the Laotian Defense Ministry who
settled in the United States in 1975 after the Communist takeover of his
country, died Thursday after a brief illness, his family said today. He was 63
years old.

Mr. Sananikone had been active in a public school effort to teach English to the
many refugees from Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam who have settled in Arlington, a
Washington suburb.

A member of an aristocratic Laotian family and a journalist by training, Mr.
Sananikone went into exile in 1940 when Japan invaded his country and he stayed
there after World War II to protest the return of the French colonial
government.

He edited a newspaper after he returned to Laos in 1948 and then embarked on a
public career that included army service. He was named chief of staff of the
Laotian armed forces in 1961 and eventually was appointed director general of
national defense. His last post in the Laotian Government was that of director
of national reconstruction.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition



;
VIETNAM VETERANS' WORDS ARE CREATING A MEMORIAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2984 words


If you are able, save for them a place inside of you . . .

In Vietnam, on New Year's Day 1970, Maj. Michael Davis O'Donnell began a poem
with those words. Three months later, the 24-year-old helicopter pilot was
reported missing in action.

Now his poem, contributed by his sister, is being considered for the city's
Vietnam Veterans Memorial in lower Manhattan. The words that American soldiers
wrote from the battlefields and base camps of Vietnam will be etched on a plain
glass wall 70 feet long and 14 feet high.

Since appealing for contributions last May, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Commission has heard from nearly 100 former servicemen, their families and
friends, who have sent about 250 items. They are mostly letters, but there are
also poems, discharge papers, clippings and a holy card on which a short-
timer's calendar was kept.

What follows are excerpts from some of those papers. Not all will find their way
onto the memorial. It cannot accommodate anywhere near the volume. But the
commission shared the letters in the hope of encouraging even more contributions
and having the broadest possible base from which to choose.

''It has been an extraordinarily emotional experience,'' said Peter P. Mahoney,
a veteran who is the commission's deputy director. ''A lot of it took me right
back to that time and place. What was amazing to me was the simple eloquence
that came out, in letter after letter - that quality that they weren't even
trying for.''

The commission will close its files on Nov. 11, Veterans Day, and then choose
perhaps 150 excerpts. It hopes to dedicate the memorial, in the former Jeannette
Park at Coenties Slip, between Water and South Streets, on May 7. Photocopies of
correspondence should be sent to Vietnam Letters, 110 Church Street, 17th Floor,
New York, N.Y. 10007.



Letter From Spec. 4 Jack Calamia of Glendale, Queens

Feb. 10, 1969


Hi Mom,

Well I am fine today and I hope that you are in good shape also. Today, I am at
the river swimming washing and taking in the sun. The beach is great, the sand
is white and the sky is clear. Boy I wish every day was like this. Then I
wouldn't have any problems while I'm here.

How is Dad's health? What are you doing and how are the peace talks. I have to
wonder if it is worth anything to be here. Nobody wants us and yet we still
maintain our position here. Well I guess that is what live is all about.

I heard that you and Jo's parents got together. It is about time if I am going
to marry her. I do suppose you should get together. I hope you like them because
you will be seeing alot of them when I get marry. My plans are all ready down in
my head. All I have to do now is wait till I am home to talk it over with Jo. I
will be a wonderful wedding.

I hope the family is fine and till my next letter I hope you are fine.  Love
Always

Jack



Newspaper Clipping, Nov. 6, 1969


Solemn requiem mass was offered Monday morning in St. Pancras R.C. Church for
Army Spec. 4 Jack Calamia, 21, of 71-57 71st Place, Glendale, who was killed
while serving in Vietnam. The Army report states he stepped on a land mine on
October 20.

According to his father, Calamia was very much against the war but continued
fighting as his duty as a soldier. He had earned a citation for killing an enemy
soldier with a hand grenade after the soldier had killed an American lieutenant.

Specialist Calamia was drafted on July 25, 1968. His family asked that he be
relieved of duty because he took care of Joseph, a retarded youth. The draft
board would not accept the reason as sufficient for being excused from service.

Jack formerly put Joseph on a bus for school. Since Jack has been in service
Joseph, now 16, has not been going to school. His parents have been faced with
deciding what is best for the retarded youth.

Four months after he was drafted, Calamia was sent to Vietnam. Prior to entering
the service he had been a teller for the First National City Bank and was
studying accounting in Pace College at night. He was a graduate of 14 Holy
Martyrs School and Bushwick High. In addition to his parents and brother, he is
survived by a brother Cito and sister, Maria.



Letters From Roger Barber of Conesus, N.Y., 8 years old, to Spec. 4 Frank A.
Russo


Dear Soldier Friend

Hi, My Name is Roger Barber I belong to Den 2 pack 79 i'm sorry you had to fight
in The war I don't like to fite do you? please watch out. I'm sending you some
gifts and i hope you like them please have fun.  Your Friend

Roger Barber

have a nice crismis

By!!


Dec. 18, 1971


Hi, Frank

Do you still remember me well Im Roger the one who sent the Christmas stuff to
you. Well now you know me I'll finish the rest of my letter.

I liked your letter but Frank why did you join the war? I'm sorry about your
friends who died. And I hope they let you get out this Christmas.

And Frank I will pray for you and your friends. I might get to send you another
present if my mother lets me. have a nice Christmas to and I hope you get some
presents.

And have a nice time to won't you.

Have you had snow yet? Well we have and we got three snowmobiles and there fun.
last year me and my little brother rode the snowmobiles and every time I turned
the corner real fast I tipped the snowmobile and then I looked back and he was
laying on the ground.  Well by and have fun

Roger David Barber




Excerpts From Letter to Spec. 4 Kenneth E. Peeples Jr. From His Mother and
Father in Queens

Feb. 20, 1967


Hello Son,

How are you feeling today? Hope this letter will find you successfully
recovering. Today we received your ''Purple Heart'' medal. I looked at it with
mixed emotions. Happy, because you are out of Viet Nam; sad, because of the
price you had to pay to get away from there. However, I do hope that you wont
have any serious complications and that you will fully recover and be restored
to health.

I also realize the thousands of boys who will never return home, and the parents
who have received the ''Purple Heart'' because of their sons death. When I think
of these things, I know that I shouldn't feel too bad about your condition. Our
main concern now is your recovery!

Let me say hear and now that I'm extremely proud of you, son. Not because you
were awarded the ''Heart,'' but because you did an honorable thing. I know that
you were bitterly against going into the service and rejected our reasons for
being in Viet Nam.

I also know of your feelings about the U.S. and its treatment of Negroes. I also
imagine that you were contemplating going AWOL. Yet, in spite of these
conditions you did everything that was asked of you. Whether it was to please
your mother or your grandmother I do not know.

But I do know that you made a prudent and honorable decision. It may not matter
at all to you, but you are coming home a hero to us. Not a war hero, because you
had to fight and get shot, but more so because you made a mans decision, and
stuck it out.

You should feel proud of yourself! You are now in a position to take every
advantage that is offered to a GI (and there are many). You can hold your head
high everywhere you go, and you can go anywhere you wish. Had you chosen the
alternative, these things would not be so.

I hope Richard will realize these things and take that ''chip'' off of his
shoulders! Everyone here is so concerned about you, all of our friends
constantly ask about you. Everyone at St. Rita knows that youve been wounded.
Your mother told one person about you on the telephone, and a few days later the
whole parish knew. Certainly will be glad when you are sent stateside. I hope it
will be St. Albans or in the near vicinity. Let us know as soon as you find out.
Love

Mom & Pop



Poem by Virginia Dabonka of Weehawken, N.J. Undated

MY SHINING STAR

There's a gold star in my window In memory of you It lights my darkest hours and
turns grey skies to blue There's a new star in the Heavens that I search for
every night For it stands for faith and courage and a cause you thought was
right You tried once to explain to me, my precious brave young son Just why we
have to fight this war and help get justice done There's a gold star in my
window That will guide me through the years Even though the road ahead is dark
and wet with tears So sleep on, my gallant hero, for even though you lost, you
won, The heart of a grateful nation You're second best to none



Letter From Spec. 4 Richard A. Sito to Clara Vaccaro

Nov. 11, 1968


Hi Clara Tony and Kids,

Well just a couple of lines to say hi!! How are you all I hope everything is
fine and you're all in the best of health.

By the way let me wish you a happy happy birthday sis and I hope you have many
more to come. Well I guess the kids are getting pretty big. I can hardly wait to
get home and see you all.

Tell Tony I said hello and to keep that bottle on ice. It won't be long now
about 59 Days left over here. Well I also want to wish you'se all a happy
Thanksgiving day. I went to Tokyo and R&R. I had italian food over there you'll
never guess what? veal pargmigna HA! HA! Well I really can't write too long.
Will be going out soon. I'm fine couldn't feel better, well anyway I'll say so
long for now and God Bless you all.  Your loving brother

Richie

P.S. 59 Days

Short



 Newspaper Clipping


Washington, Nov. 22 (UPI) - The Defense Department identified today U.S.
military personnel killed in Vietnam combat, including Army Spec. 4, Richard A.
Sito, Sr. of Kew Gardens, Queens; Pfc. William H. Nolte of East Northport, L.I.;
Marine, Lance Cpl. Joaquin Rodriguez of Brooklyn, N.Y., and Pfc. Frank Martinez
of the Bronx, N.Y.  Excerpts From Letters by Lieut. Marion Lee (Sandy) Kempner
to His Family in Galveston, Tex.

Aug. 7, 1966


I have just given a class on ambushes. I was chosen because of my charm,
intelligence and messianic-like personality, and besides, I am the only graduate
of the Basic School besides the Captain in the whole Company and therefore have
all the books.

So I gave a brilliant dissertation on the fine art and the finer points of
committing mayhem from a hidden position on unsuspecting and probably innocent
people to a sea of young and blank faces.

As I finished there were resounding cries of ''Bravo,'' ''Encore,'' etc.,
flowers were thrown, and I was carried off to my tent by my audience. As I think
I might have stated, my Sergeant got my people into shape and they are now
obeying orders without question, as exampled by the above.

Aug. 12, 1966


We have been doing a lot of work in the villages lately, of the community
development type, so it looks as though I will never get away from my Peace
Corps day.

We must really be messing up these people's minds: by day we treat their ills
and fix up their children and deliver their babies, and by night, if we receive
fire from the general direction of their hamlet, fire generally will reach them
albeit not intentionally; they must really be going around in circles.

But I guess that just points up the strangeness of this war. We have two hands,
both of which know what the other is doing, but does the opposite anyway, and in
the same obscure and not too reasonable manner - it all makes sense, I hope.

Sept. 2, 1966


Sorry to be so long in writing, but I have just come back from an abortion
called Operation Jackson and I spent a three-day's ''walk in the sun'' (and
paddies and fields and mountains and impenetrable jungle and saw- grass and
ants, and screwed-up radios and no word, and deaf radio operators, and no chow,
and too many C-rations, and blisters & torn trousers and jungle rot, and wet
socks and sprained ankles and no heels, and, and, and,) for a Battalion that
walked on roads and dykes the whole way and a Regiment that didn't even know
where the Battalion was, fiiished off by a 14,000 meter forced march on a hard
road.

My God, the epic poems I could write to that ambrosia of Marine Corps cuisine -
peanut butter and/or hot coffee after

three days of that

! The only person in the whole Battalion to see a V.C. was, of course, me.

I was walking along a trail doing a village sweep all alone and here comes
Charlie, rifle in hand, with not a care in the world until he sees me, and then
it's a race to see if he can get off the road before I can draw my .45 and get
off an accurate shot (he won).

Of course, there was an incident when four snipers took on the Battalion which
promptly, more to release the weight of all that unexpended ammunition than
anything else, threw everything at them but the Missouri; and that would have
been there too, except it could not get up the Sang Tra Bong. So goes about
$50,000 worth of ammo. They probably played it up as a second Iwo Jima at home,
but it wasn't.

Sept. 19, 1966



From the hospital at Chu Lai, after being wounded by a carbine round in an
ambush.


I am lying in bed here and it comes time for that most thrilling event, ''when
the General gives out the Purple Hearts''. The General in this case is a 2 star
type named General Fields, who is also Div. O. and a big, gruff, hearty type
whose first words to me were ''Aren't you the one who wrote on that form that
supplies weren't getting to the troops? Do you have any specific examples?''

So, what the hell, I gave him a few, and he, predictably enough, cut me off,
explaining how the folks back home were having to be forced to make utilities
and in a very small voice I pointed out that a great deal of the problem was
right here in River City.

He ignored that and never stopped smiling although it got a little forced after
awhile, and his entourage stood around with little grins etched into their empty
faces which occasionally laughed heartily whenever the General made a funny,
which was signalled by his own chuckling. All in all, it was a dreadful
performance by everyone, but in a way, a classic of stereotype, one of a large
number of stereotype characters and situations I have watched acted out much to
my growing concern. They finally left me sicker than I was before and with a
medal I never wanted anyway.

Oct. 20, 1966


This morning, my platoon and I were finishing up a three day patrol. Struggling
over steep hills covered with hedgerows, trees, and generally impenetrable
jungle, one of my men turned to me and pointed a hand, filled with cuts and
scratches, at a rather distinguished looking plant with soft red flowers waving
gayly in the downpour, (which had been going on ever since the patrol began),
and said, ''That is the first plant I have seen today which didn't have thorns
on it.'' I immediately thought of you.

The plant and the hill upon which it grew, was also representative of Viet Nam.
It is a country of thorns and cuts, of guns and marauding, of little hope and of
great failure, yet in the midst of it all, a beautiful thought, gesture and even
person can arise among it waving bravely at the death that pours down upon it.

Some day this hill will be burned by napalm, and the red flower will crackle up
and die among the thorns. So what was the use of it living and being a beauty
among the beasts, if it must, in the end, die because of them, and with them?

This is a question which is answered by Gertrude Stein's ''A rose is a rose is a
rose.'' You are what you are, what you are. Whether you believe in God, fate, or
the crumbling cookie, elements are so mixed in a being that make him what he is;
his salvation from the thorns around him lies in the fact that he existed at
all, in his very own personality.

There once was a time when the Jewish idea of heaven and hell was the thoughts
and opinions people had of you after you died.

But what if the plant was on an isolated hill and was never seen by anyone: that
is like the question of whether the falling tree makes a sound in the forest
primeval when no one is there to hear it: it makes a sound, and the plant was
beautiful and the thought was kind; and the person was humane, and
distinguished, and brave, not merely because other people recognized it as such,
but because it is, and it is, and it is.

Beauty, they say, is only skin-deep, but true beauty emanates from the soul
where it might not be recognized, seen, or appreciated as readily, but
nevertheless is there, even more than the skin-deep variety.

The flower will always live in the memory of a tired, wet Marine, and has thus
achieved a sort of immortality; but even if we had never gone on that hill, it
would still be a distinguished, soft, red, thornless flower growing among the
cutting, scratching plants, and that in itself is its own reward.




On patrol three weeks later, Nov. 11, Lieutenant Kempner was wounded in the
abdomen by a fragmentation device that had been tripped by another marine. He
ordered the corpsman to take care of the other injured man first. The
24-year-old lieutenant died aboard a helicopter on the way to a hospital in Chu
Lai.



Poem by Maj. Michael Davis O'Donnell of Springfield, Ill. Jan. 1, 1970



If you are able,

save for them a place

inside of you . . .

and save one backward glance

when you are leaving

for the places they can

no longer go . . .

Be not ashamed to say

you loved them,

though you may

or may not have always . . .

Take what they have left

and what they have taught you

with their dying

and keep it with your own . . .

And in that time

when men decide and feel safe

to call the war insane,

take one moment to embrace

those gentle heroes

you left behind . . .


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Pfc. John Dabonka; photo of Lieut. Marion Lee Kempner

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 1, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE SPEECH: GERALDINE A. FERRARO;
'OUT BETTER INSTINCTS' VS. APPEALS TO SELF-INTEREST

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1510 words


Candidates for President and Vice President vary their remarks from place to
place, but in most speeches there is a common body of material.

Earlier this year The New York Times published a series of such ''basic''
speeches by the candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination.

This is the second of four such texts, collected by The Times, by the
major-party candidates for President and Vice President.

This election will decide the direction of our country for years to come. It
offers us clear choices on critical issues. And the most important issue is
keeping the peace.

I've been to every corner of this nation in the last two months. From coast to
coast, people tell me that they are worried about the arms race. Their No. 1
concern is building a safer world for their children and grandchildren.

What I say to them is, elect Fritz Mondale and you'll have a President totally
committed to arms control. You'll have a leader committed to the freeze. And
you'll have a safer world.

This election will decide whether or not we protect our communities from crime.
I was a prosecutor in Queens. No one cares more than I do about restoring safety
to our streets. I want to step up the war against drug trafficking, reform
sentencing procedures and pass handgun control.

Values of Americans

This election will also be a referendum on what kind of people we are. And
that's what I want to talk about today.

I think we're a people who reward hard work, who give everyone a chance -
regardless of race or religion or sex - who take care of the elderly, and who
lend a hand to those less fortunate than we are. I believe we are a people of
compassion.

But sometimes for us to show that decency inherent in ourselves, it takes a
leader to summon the best that's in us. The very good leaders don't just govern:
they inspire. They don't just sign orders: they appeal, as Lincoln said, to the
better angels of our nature.

Real leaders don't ask us if we're better off than we were four years ago -
that's just part of the question. They ask us if our country is better off - and
that includes not only ourselves, but our neighbors, our parents, our children
and our whole community.

Appeal to Self-Interest

That isn't happening today. Instead of a leader who appeals to our better
instincts, we have a President who appeals to our self-interest. Instead of a
President who binds us together, Mr. Reagan divides us into isolated groups.

His vision is narrow: it just includes the top slice of society. And his
policies are not fair.

If you're one of the 90,000 profitable corporations that didn't pay taxes last
year, this Administration has had compassion for your interests. But if you're
an ordinary American making the average income, your taxes actually went up.

If you're a defense contractor, you received $2,000 for a 13-cent nut. But if
you're an elderly woman living on the minimum Social Security benefit, you were
told that $122 a month was too much and had to be cut.

If you're an oil company, your friends in the Government support oil drilling in
wilderness lands and off our most beautiful coasts. But if you are an average
family living near a toxic dump, your children are menaced by dangerous
chemicals.

This Administration says, if you're homeless, it's because you like it that way.
If you're hungry, have some cheese. If you're unemployed, vote with your feet.

Toward the hungry, the homeless and the disadvantaged, this Administration has
turned a cold shoulder. They have a calculator where their heart should be.

That's not right and - just as important - it's not smart. In the interests of
decency as well as common sense, Fritz Mondale and I declare, this country
belongs to us all.

If we're going to have a competitive economy in the future, we need the talents
of all our people, a skilled and educated work force.

Aid for Education

This Administration says it's for education. They should be increasing, not
reducing, education assistance.

This Administration wants to launch a teacher into space. I say let's help
teachers and students here on earth.

This Administration says it's for reducing deficits. But they won't tell us
their plan. I think I know why. If Mr. Reagan had a fair plan for cutting the
deficit, he'd tell us. And if he is re-elected, he will do just as he's done
before: make the deepest cuts in the programs that help the weakest people.

Let me give you just two examples.

Recently, this Administration took away disability support from a 56- year-old
woman who could not work because of crippling arthritis. The Reagan
Administration saved $297 a month, but it cost this woman her income and her
dignity.

In New Jersey, a Vietnam veteran named Bruce Merli is locked in combat with the
Reagan Administration. Mr. Merli served in Vietnam, and his injuries were so
severe that he was immediately discharged and granted full disability benefits.
But in 1981, Ronald Reagan's Administration decided Mr. Merli was well enough to
work again. After months of appeals, Bruce Merli was finally put back on the
program - not by this Administration, but by a judge.

Mixed Up' Priorities

When the Pentagon pays $7,000 for a coffee machine, but the Government abandons
a veteran who was wounded while serving his country, the priorities of this
Administration are mixed up. We need to save money in government, but not this
way. Fritz Mondale and I will reduce deficits. But we're going to do it fairly.

We are not going to do it by asking old women and young children to sacrifice
the most. And we're not going to make average families pay more taxes so the
rich can pay less.

In these ways, we will redirect the moral compass of our country. We cannot
change the character of this Administration. But let me say to this President:
don't tell me your policies are fair. Don't pretend to support the very things
your policies undermine.

In a photo opportunity, Ronald Reagan went to the Olympics to congratulate our
athletes, including female athletes. But back in Washington his Administration
has sided with those who would discriminate against women in sports.

I, too, congratulate our Olympic champions. But I am against sex discrimination
in federally assisted institutions. I want to help women get to the starting
block, not just pat them on the back after they cross the finish line.

In a campaign appearance, Ronald Reagan went to Buffalo to dedicate a senior
citizens' housing project and called it ''wonderful . . . a splendid example of
government and community partnership.'' But in the corridors of power, he had
decimated the program that built that very same project.

The Aged and the Rich

I want an Administration that shelters the elderly, not just the income of the
wealthy.

In a media event, Ronald Reagan visited a black family that was the victim of
bigotry. But in reality, he dragged his feet on the Voting Rights Act, and tried
to subvert the Civil Rights Commission.

I want an Administration that fully supports our civil rights laws, and not
segregated academies.

In a symbolic gesture, Ronald Reagan plans to dedicate a monument to the great
nature photographer, Ansel Adams. But in environmental affairs, he works against
everything that Ansel Adams loved.

I want an Administration that takes polluters to court, and not out to lunch.

In a recent speech, Ronald Reagan told a moving story about Dr. Giordano, who
saved the President's life - and how that doctor had risen from humble origins
in this society of opportunity. Everything Mr. Reagan said was true, and
praiseworthy. But he left out the crucial fact that Government loan programs had
helped Dr. Giordano complete his education. And today Dr. Giordano criticizes
Mr. Reagan for cutting Government programs and weakening civil rights.

Role of Government

I agree with the man who saved the President's life. Government does have a
role, a positive role, and the person who heads it should understand that.

In a tone of reverence, Mr. Reagan spoke nostalgically about John Kennedy. But
in point of fact, Mr. Reagan was a leader of Democrats for Nixon in 1960. He
tried to beat John Kennedy. And he has opposed nearly every decent cause which
that good President loved.

I say to Mr. Reagan: don't tell us you supported John Kennedy, because you
didn't. Don't tell us you clean up the environment, because you do not. Don't
tell us you've expanded opportunity because you haven't. And don't tell us, Mr.
President, that your policies have promoted fairness, because they cannot.

The American people will not be fooled. They know who's on their side, and who
isn't.

The United States is not a stage. People aren't characters. Problems aren't
story lines. Rhetoric will not persuade. The issues do matter. And the election
will not go according to this President's script.

In 1984, we face real challenges and authentic needs. One of the greatest needs
is to restore a sense of fairness in this land. The best way to do that is to
defeat Ronald Reagan and elect Walter Mondale.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A Lemon the Size of the Pentagon The saga of the Sergeant York air-defense gun
illustrates nearly everything that's wrong with the way the Pentagon buys
weapons. Though each gun costs $6.3 million, the weapon is so ineffective that
even Congress, which can usually swallow any major weapon system, has finally
choked.

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


The Sergeant York is a pair of radar-guided guns mounted on a tank chassis. Its
purpose is to protect against low-flying aircraft and helicopters.

The Army got the idea from the Shilka, an ineffective Russian gun captured by
the Israelis in 1973. Like all radar-guided guns, the Shilka has a fatal flaw.
To shoot down a plane, you must aim ahead of it in the direction it's about to
turn. But no computer can predict the random course of a maneuvering attack
aircraft.

One system that can, and does so effectively, is the human eye. Gunners may know
the attack path, and have visual cues denied to radar. They can see a plane
banking before it turns. Optically aimed guns shot down more than 4,000 jets in
the Korean, Vietnam and Arab-Israeli wars.

But the Army wasn't interested in a cheap system of proven combat effectiveness,
not when the Russians were fielding a radar-guided, computer- controlled,
high-technology mobile gun. It copied the Shilka and, after a decade of
struggle, now possesses a radar-guided, computer-controlled, armor- plated lemon
all its own.

The Sergeant York is no run-of-the-mill lemon. It can't shoot down maneuvering
planes, but what about helicopters? Almost anything can shoot down a helicopter
- the Army lost 4,643 in Vietnam, mostly to rifles and machine guns - but not
the Sergeant York. In its most recent tests it had great difficulty spotting a
helicopter target, until radar reflectors were attached to it. These egregious
design faults were followed by outstanding incompetence in procurement. The Army
held a competition for the $4.5 billion program, between General Dynamics and
Ford. Yet though the Ford gun ''did far worse,'' according to The Atlantic
Monthly, Ford got the contract. So lax was the Army's supervision that it failed
to notice that after the contract had been signed, Ford negotiated price
reductions with its subcontractors. That resulted in ''unfair, unreasonable and
invalid prices,'' in the opinion of the Pentagon's Inspector General, Joseph
Sherick.

By awarding the contract to a single source instead of arranging for competing
suppliers, the Army put itself at Ford's mercy. Thus it shares blame for the
failures and delays that caused it to complain to Ford Aerospace last March of
''totally unacceptable contract performance.''

More disquieting still was the Army's misrepresentation of test data to the
Pentagon review board that decided to go ahead with production. Charts attesting
to a high level of effectiveness in field trials, Mr. Sherick told Congress last
week, ''were oversimplified and, therefore, misleading and based on a selective
analysis of the results.''

How can so bad a weapon get so far into production? Why should Congress have to
second-guess the Pentagon at so detailed a level? How many other weapons have
slipped through with disabling but less glaring faults? Why does the Pentagon so
strenuously resist an independent testing office when the need for impartial
evaluation of what procurement officers produce is so achingly clear?

The most puzzling question of all raised by the Sergeant York saga: Why don't
people in authority at the Pentagon care more passionately about building
weapons that will actually work in combat?


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
DISMAL DIPLOMACY

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: PARIS It takes deeply rose


-tinted bifocals

to find grounds for President Reagan's claim of foreign policy ''gains'' during
this Administration. But measure the world from the Soviet side. Moscow's
scorecard has been terrible.

The Soviet and American political calendars are so different that it's hard to
fix a period for comparison. Andrei Gromyko has been Foreign Minister for 27
years, but he served three leaders during Mr. Reagan's tenure. Taking the Reagan
years as base, however, Soviet diplomacy has been a resounding failure. (Over
the longer term, it looks even worse.)

The war in Afghanistan drags on five years after what was intended as quick,
decisive surgery. It is beginning to be felt in Soviet families.

Lack of reaction during the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon was a serious
Russian setback in the Middle East. A role has been regained at the cost of
massive arms supplies to Syria, but it hasn't given Moscow added influence. The
U.S. has lost ground too, but not because of superior Soviet diplomacy, and
Moscow cannot turn that to its own advantage.

The Russians have been prudent in Iran, which doubtless saved them trouble, but
their prospects have not improved. Soviet arms are flowing to Iraq again, but
Iraq tilts increasingly westward.

The Kremlin can take a glint of satisfaction from the advancing Communization of
Ethiopia. But the important Somali base it built at Berbera is now at American
disposal. Mozambique and Angola, where it had high hopes, are dealing with South
Africa and waffling on the brink of better ties with the U.S. Guinea slid out of
the Soviet grasp. A pro-Communist coup in Gambia failed the same day. Moscow has
mishandled its chances in Africa.

Nothing in Latin America offers encouragement to Moscow. The wars in Central
America preoccupy the U.S., but there aren't any Communist successes. Cuba
remains a heavy economic drain. Fidel Castro keeps trying to flirt with
Washington. One day there may be a deal behind Moscow's back.

Confrontation with China has been averted. Still, basic antagonism persists.
Peking is getting along fairly well with Washington despite Mr. Reagan's initial
gestures, which might have drawn China back toward the Soviet side. Hong Kong
can no longer be expected to be an exploitable issue.

Vietnam's continuing troubles in Cambodia block any chance of relaxation between
Peking and Hanoi, certainly not a minus considering the importance of
American-built Vietnamese bases now serving the Russians. But there have long
been no gains.

Decay of the troubled Philippine regime might offer good pickings one day.
Moscow can't take much action though, except to prepare and hope. Asia generally
has been a draw, no real losses, no momentum.

Europe, which matters most to the Kremlin, has taken the most effort and been
the least rewarding. A way was finally found to put the lid on Poland without
taking huge risks. But it hasn't been ''normalized,'' as Czechoslovakia was
after 1968. It's a running sore, hardly a loyal ally. All of the bloc but
Rumania shaped up on the Los Angeles Olympics and the planned visits to Bonn,
though that amounted to little more than a symbolic save of face.  A lot of
table-pounding kept the East Germans from showing off their growing involvement
with West Germany. But they couldn't be made to use their harassment capacity to
scare and cajole West Germany out of accepting American missiles. They are
getting rather full of themselves.  Above all, the anti-Euromissile campaign was
a disaster. There were plenty of chances to compromise, but Moscow's hard line
only consolidated Western allies instead of wedging them away from the U.S. A
superpower's threats are supposed to be taken seriously. That's the point of all
those Russian missiles. Something went terribly wrong.  Meanwhile, Western
Communist parties are shrinking, as in France or Spain, or turning away from
loyal support for the Socialist motherland, as in Italy.  Soviet policy is stuck
in concrete. Now it's Mr. Reagan who has seized the ''peace initiative,'' not
because he was quick but because Moscow huffed and puffed so long. Finding a way
out without backing down won't be easy.  The great Soviet arsenal has not
brought commensurate political gains under Mr. Gromyko's long foreign policy
stewardship. Moscow has bumbled into a dangerous impasse, even as Washington has
been short on successes. But the peace of the world isn't a zero-sum game. Both
sides could use better diplomacy. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN'S BURDEN IN THE BEIRUT EMBASSY BOMBING

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 205 words


To the Editor:

The tired refrain of Pentagon inefficiency is heard again. The issue here is not
that our warriors were deficient in guarding the U.S. Embassy in East Beirut.
Rather it is best expressed in the words of a Lebanese guard on duty at the
embassy checkpoint who had probably the best chance of hindering, perhaps
stopping the terrorist attack (news story Sept. 21): ''I fired four or five
shots from my M-16 before it jammed.'' Ask any American soldier who has ever
handled a Colt M-16 semi- and automatic rifle what the gun's primary problem is
and he/she will tell you that it jams, that the ammunition fed from the magazine
into the chamber fouls the firing mechanism, making the weapon useless.  This
has been known for years; in fact, the Vietnam-era nickname for the gun was
''Jammin' Betty.'' However, the contract with Colt is too large and
long-standing (nearly 10 million produced since the early 1960's with
modifications) to void in order to procure another infantry standard-issue
rifle.  Jammed guns jeopardize our men. It's too late for those who died in East
Beirut.

JEFF NELLIGAN Cincinnati, Sept. 24, 1984

The writer is on the editorial board of The Cincinnati Enquirer.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Ellsworth Bunker Is Buried Near His Home in Vermont

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 29, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 129 words

DATELINE: BRATTLEBORO, Vt., Oct. 1


Ellsworth Bunker, the diplomat who served seven Presidents and became a symbol
of the United States intervention in Vietnam, was buried today in the rolling
Vermont countryside he adopted as his home.

Mr. Bunker, who died Thursday at the age of 90, was eulogized during a 40-
minute funeral ceremony as a ''peacemaker,'' then was buried at a private
ceremony in Dummerston, the southern Vermont community to which he retired in
1978.

''I feel that he was a man of emormous conviction and courage,'' former
President Nixon told reporters after the funeral. ''Sometimes we cannot see the
giants among us. There may be some, but it is hard to think of one that would
rate with Bunker.''

About 200 people attended the funeral at St. Michael's Episcopal Church.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IMMIGRATION AND THE RANDOMNESS OF ETHNIC MIX

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1234 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 1


Immigration to the United States from Asia was severely restricted for 80 years,
starting with the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882. From 1820 to 1979, only 6
percent of all immigrants came from Asia.

But last year there were 282,724 immigrants from Asia, representing half of all
legal immigration to the United States. The six largest sources of legal
immigrants, after Mexico, were all Asian countries.

The new statistics indicate how a change in immigration law and policy can
affect the ethnic mix of the American population. And behind the statistics is a
story of how no one, not even those in Washington who decree the change, can
predict the consequences.

In recent weeks, Congressional debate on a comprehensive immigration bill has
focused national attention on the issue. Most of the debate concerns immigrants
from Latin America, who join the nation's rapidly growing Hispanic population.
But statistics collected by the Immigration and Naturalization Service also show
remarkable growth in the number of Asians coming to this country.

'A Browning of America'


In fact, Lawrence H. Fuchs of Brandeis University, an expert on immigration and
ethnic history, says ''a browning of America'' may occur within six or seven
generations in which a growing proportion of the population will be nonwhite.

''Such trends do not alarm me,'' he hastened to add, ''because I believe that
immigrants and their children will commit themselves to American ideals and
values,'' just as previous generations of immigrants did.

Both houses of Congress have adopted legislation to curtail the influx of
illegal aliens. It is not intended to restrict or alter the flow of legal
immigrants. But history suggests that immigration laws often have unforeseen
consequences, and no one is sure precisely what will happen if Congress finally
adopts the measure. A House-Senate conference has resolved most differences
between the two versions of the bill, but members said today it appeared highly
unlikely that the measure would pass before Congress adjourns for this year.

From 1924 to 1965, the United States had immigration quotas, based on national
origin, that were designed to ''preserve the ethnic and racial composition of
the United States'' as it existed in 1920. Since repeal of those quotas in 1965,
there has been a gradual increase in immigration from Asia and a decline in
immigration from Europe. People who were barred under the old laws now enter in
large numbers. Last year there were more Asian immigrants than in the three
decades from 1931 to 1960.

'From Exclusion to Inclusion'


David M. Reimers, a professor of history at New York University, said American
policy toward Asian immigrants had shifted ''from exclusion to inclusion.''

Congress, he said, did not foresee the results that occurred after it repealed
the national origin quotas and established a ceiling of 20,000 immigrants for
each country (not counting refugees or immediate relatives of American
citizens). When Congress made the change in 1965, Representative Emanuel Celler,
a Brooklyn Democrat, told his colleagues, ''There will not be, comparatively,
many Asians or Africans entering this country.''

More generally, Mr. Reimers said, most immigrants to the United States now come
from third world countries. Europe accounted for 80 percent of all immigrants to
this country from 1820 to 1965. But now, Mr. Reimers said, ''Hispanics, South
and East Asians, Middle Easterners and non-Hispanic Caribbean migrants dominate
the immigration statistics.''

The largest number of legal immigrants last year came from Mexico, which sent
59,298, according to the immigration service. China, Hong Kong and Taiwan
together sent a total of 48,668. The next largest sources were the Philippines,
which sent 41,725; Vietnam, 39,821; Korea, 33,453; India, 25,535, and Laos,
23,917.

These countries are likely to dominate immigration in the future, since 1.1
million of their people have applied for immigrant visas and received
preliminary approval at the first stage of review.

Immigrants include people who received visas overseas, as well as refugees and
other aliens who obtain permanent resident status after entering this country.
Most of the Vietnamese and Laotians were admitted as refugees.

Four Agencies Involved


The immigration laws are administered by a small group of specialists from four
Federal agencies: the Justice Department, which has overall responsibility; the
State Department, which issues visas through embassies and consulates around the
world; the Labor Department, which certifies the need for alien workers; and the
Department of Health and Human Services, which provides aid to refugees who
resettle in this country.

The officials operate in the shadows except at times of crisis when the
immigration law becomes an instrument of foreign policy. President Carter, for
example, in 1980 imposed visa restrictions on Iranian students in this country
after the seizure of the American Embassy in Teheran.

Immigration officials do not have the power to increase or reduce immigration
quotas. Only Congress has that power. But the President and the Attorney General
do have the power, after consulting with Congress, to set the number of refugees
who will be admitted from a particular country.

In Washington, ethnic minority groups, which once had little influence on
immigration policy, now play an important role by lobbying against restrictions.

Laura Chin, executive director of the Organization of Chinese Americans, said:
''Some people might feel there are too many Asians coming into the United
States. They should remember that, for many years, Asians were excluded from
this country solely because of their race. The restrictive policies ended only
20 years ago.''

Affecting the Ethnic Mix


Asia, with 2.8 billion people, has nearly 60 percent of the world's population.
So, in numerical terms, it is perhaps not surprising that Asians account for
nearly half of immigration to the United States.

The new immigrants are bound to affect the ethnic mix of America. In the 1980
census, only 3.5 million people, or 1.5 percent of the population, described
themselves as Asian. The Census Bureau estimated there were 15.9 million
Hispanic Americans in 1983, accounting for 6.8 percent of the population. Both
groups are growing because of immigration as well as births.

The bureau estimates that legal immigration accounted for 25 percent of the
United States population growth last year. If illegal immigrants were included,
the proportion would be larger, officials say. The Government has no reliable
way to measure illegal immigration or to count the number of illegal aliens in
the country.

Mr. Fuchs, who served as executive director of the Select Commission on
Immigration and Refugee Policy, a Federal advisory panel, from 1979 to 1981,
said: ''We are probably going to have a browning of America over time. It will
take six or seven generations, but ultimately, I believe, a majority of the
population will be nonwhite. That is likely to occur because of immigration and
increasing rates of intermarriage between darker-skinned people and whites. But
concepts of color and race will probably change, and it's possible that
questions about color won't even be asked in the census 150 years from now.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 2, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY ;
Jeane Kirkpatrick Honored

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and Maurice Carroll

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 123 words


The National Committee on American Foreign Policy gave its Hans J. Morgenthau
Award, for exemplary contribution to foreign policy, to Jeane J. Kirkpatrick,
the chief United States delegate to the United Nations.

The award, a crystal oval on a wood base, was given by Henry A. Kissinger at the
committee's annual black-tie dinner last night at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. It
commemorates ''the contributions made by Professor Morgenthau to the theory and
the practice of American foreign policy,'' the program noted. Mr. Kissinger won
the award last year.

Dr. Morgenthau, who died in 1980, was a critic of the Vietnam War, an advocate
of nuclear arms control and an opponent of American intervention in the affairs
of other nations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 3, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON ;
IN PRAISE OF HECKLING

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 746 words


WASHINGTON Fritz Mondale has complained

about heckling in the Presidential campaign, and has called on President Reagan
to knock it off. He has a point, but he may be wrong on two points: He is
arguing that all heckling is bad, and assuming that the President, having
tolerated his supporters to engage in it, can now put an end to it.

There are two kinds of political heckling: one funny and the other nasty, one
intended merely to embarrass a political speaker, and the other to silence him
or interfere with an orderly presentation of his case. In this election, we are
getting the nasty kind.

The British have experimented with the art of heckling for hundreds of years,
and demonstrate every day in the House of Commons how to use it, and what's fair
and what's unfair.

Churchill was a master of this political heckling game and loved it: how to
employ humor against anger, how to use it and defend himself against it.

When he was out of office, he came to Brooklyn on a lecture tour, and an angry
man shouted out: ''What are you going to do about the plight of the Indians?''
Churchill replied: ''Whose Indians, yours or ours?''

In the early days of World War II, a Labor member demanded in the House of
Commons to know what Churchill, then Prime Minister, thought of the alliance
between Italy and Nazi Germany. ''I think it only fair,'' Churchill replied.
''We had the Italians in the last war.''

It is this kind of political heckling, the quick witty sort, that usually
counts. When Churchill was asked what he thought of Hitler's disaster at
Stalingrad, he replied that Hitler should have known that it snowed in Russia.
The British accept the right of the audience, within limits, to interrupt a
candidate briefly. Jimmy Maxton, a leader of a three-man Socialist party in
Britain, was making a campaign speech in Glasgow I well remember. He was a
dramatic and eloquent figure, with deep-set eyes and long hair down to his
shoulders. ''Just think,'' he shouted, his hair waving with the rhythm of his
speech, ''that there are over three million people now unemployed in the British
Islands.'' A voice from the back of the hall shouted, ''Half of them are
barbers!'' In this country, the cops would have tossed the intruder to the
photographers outside the hall, if not into the pokey wagon. We don't heckle
individually or humorously, but demonstrate angrily and en masse, carrying
vicious slurs against the candidates on sticks for the television cameras behind
police lines.  It goes back, I suppose, to the Vietnam days when, wherever
President Johnson went, he was met by demonstrators shouting, ''Hey, hey,
L.B.J., how many kids did you kill today?'' And finally, in despair, he gave up
and went back to the ranch.  It's not the same today, of course, but there's a
hangover of this vicious practice, and oddly it has been directed at Geraldine
Ferraro, the Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate, with signs shoved in her
face proclaiming ''Thou shalt not kill - Abortion is killing, Ferraro!'' And on
the other side, signs meeting the President with protests that he is encouraging
nuclear war.

This is not ''heckling,'' but intimidating and an insult to the democratic
process. It is an attempt to substitute force for reason.

Everything seems to favor the President's candidacy now. He has the power of his
office. He can go anywhere in Air Force One he likes with speeches prepared by
staff that he can read out over invisible mirrors. He avoids press conferences,
and it is only occasionally that he wanders into schoolrooms or gymnasiums where
he is asked questions.

Always he's in command, a respected and even heroic figure, but when he talks
nonsense about Beirut or Central America, why shouldn't somebody have the right
to shout out ''Who's in charge?''

We need, or so it seems here, a little ironic laughter from the galleries.
Otherwise for the next six critical weeks we are going to be drowned in lies and
deceptions, claims of success in the face of obvious failures, hopes for the
future with no basis in fact, and blamings of the past for failures.

Maybe the dreams of the candidates are right on both sides, but they should not
be accepted in silence. We need a little more skepticism and a little more
civilized heckling. Sometimes good manners tolerate bad policies. Street
demonstrations we don't need, but a lot more skepticism and a little pointed and
humorous heckling between now and November might not hurt. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 4, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MORE SECURE THAN 4 YEARS AGO

BYLINE: By Kenneth L. Adelman ;
Kenneth L. Adelman is director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament
Agency. This article is adapted from a speech to the World Affairs Council of
San Diego.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 947 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It has become fashionable to depict American- Soviet relations as tumbling to
their lowest point ever in the postwar era. It is sometimes even suggested that
we are on a road to nuclear war in the not-too-distant future. But is it all
really true?

Many of the words from Moscow have been harsh, indeed aggravating. The Russians'
refusal to participate in nuclear arms talks is lamentable. The increased
patroling of Soviet submarines off American coasts is worrisome, even though
they have prowled these waters for many years.

But are we really less secure today than we were earlier, or just four years
ago? I think not. Quite the contrary.

Look back just two decades, for example, and compare President John F. Kennedy's
1,000 days in office to President Reagan's first 1,200 days. The Kennedy era is
popularly recalled as one of smooth and skillful American stewardship over
foreign affairs. Yet, during that brief time, we endured the Bay of Pigs fiasco,
a disastrous superpower summit meeting in Vienna, a buildup of American
involvement in Vietnam, the construction of the Berlin Wall and the Cuban
missile crisis. Those were dangerous days. Events during the past three and a
half years certainly do not match that cascade of crises.

Even in the 1970's, when the dialogue between Washington and Moscow was so rich
and hopes for detente so high, regional crises were still severe. From 1970 to
1976, while American and Soviet leaders held five summit meetings and an array
of arms control negotiations, the Soviet Union backed and armed the continuing
infiltration of North Vietnamese troops into South Vietnam - making a peaceful
settlement of the conflict impossible. The Middle East erupted and the Russians
threatened to intervene with their own troops, prompting us to go on strategic
nuclear alert. Those too were dangerous days.

In many ways, 1979 symbolized the

whole decade. During the first six months, Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and
Ambassador Anatoly F. Dobrynin met some 25 times, followed by the
Carter-Brezhnev summit meeting in Vienna where the second strategic arms
limitation treaty was signed. Still, regional crises flared. There was the flap
over a Soviet brigade in Cuba. False Soviet statements about American actions in
Iran added fuel to the already blazing fires after the American hostages were
seized. Finally, the Russians invaded Afghanistan, initiating what President
Carter called the greatest crisis since World War II.  Each year from 1975 to
1980, armies largely supplied by Moscow or Soviet forces invaded or seized
control of a different third world country: South Vietnam in 1975, Angola in
1975-76, Ethiopia in 1977, Cambodia in 1978 and Afghanistan in 1979.

Nothing like this has happened in the past three years. Soviet expansionism has
been slowed, and there have been no full-scale crises. None of the three major
wars during this period - Iran-Iraq, Lebanon and the Falklands - have led to
confrontation between the superpowers.

Clearly, the world is not more dangerous today. What has made it more stable?
Active American diplomacy and increased deterrent strength.

To be sure, we need to improve the current state of affairs. President Reagan is
attempting to do just that. Besides strengthening our relationships with our
allies and others and restoring more credible military power, he has sought to
reopen and deepen the dialogue with Moscow - particularly in arms control.  At
this stage, it is difficult to forecast when or whether the Soviet Union will
bring itself to accept significant nuclear arms limitations. We do not know
whether it will accept deep reductions in nuclear forces. We do not know whether
our very different strategic concepts can be made compatible enough for us to
agree on how to distinguish the more threatening kinds of weapons. We do not
know if the Russians will accept true strategic equality or continue to mask
their demand for strategic superiority in the guise of what they call ''equal
security.'' But we do know that we cannot find out unless we try. If, after
enough time and with enough incentives, the answers to these central questions
are ''no,'' then we will have learned something rather important about the
Soviet Union and its real intentions. If the answers turn out to be ''yes,'' we
will have taken a giant step forward.  I, for one, have hope for the future of
arms control. This hope is grounded in several reasons.  First is the simple
fact of continuity that will come with a second Reagan Administration. It will
bring a considerable amount of accumulated expertise and lessons learned both
about arms control in particular and about dealing with the Russians in general.
Second, the President's strategic modernization program started in 1981, with
its base of a much healthier American economy, provides considerably more
incentives to the Russians to come to terms. The President's strategic defense
initiative - popularly criticized as ''Star Wars'' - also adds incentives.
Third, the intermediate-range nuclear missiles already deployed in Western
Europe also help prepare the ground for negotiating with Moscow.  Fourth, the
Russians will surely not change leadership as often as they have over the past
four years - and should thus be able and willing to engage in real negotiations.
Finally, we are ready for tough bargaining and equally tough trade-offs once the
Russians return to the negotiating table.  Arms control has not been killed. Nor
is it dying. The United States, from the President on down, must hang tough and
persevere in its objectives if we are ever to fulfill the promise of arms
control. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 4, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and Maurice Carroll

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 61 words


Restaurant Dish: Saigon Knish


An item on the menu of Healthworks

is Saigon Knish.

''The wrapping is rice paper,'' said Joseph Margolin, owner of the fast- food
establishment at the Citicorp Building, ''but it's mostly meat inside.''

So why not call it an egg roll? ''Our chef's Vietnamese,'' Mr. Margolin
explained. ''It's in honor of him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
DEBATING DR. FEELGOOD

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 775 words


The first debate with President

Reagan on Sunday night offers

Walter Mondale his best and probably his last chance to turn the Presidential
campaign into a close race. That he might do so seems to me a somewhat better
bet than the polls suggest.

Two precedents are worth noting. On Sept. 30, 1968, Hubert Humphrey, the
Democratic nominee, was about as far behind Richard Nixon (15 points in the
Gallup Poll) as Mr. Mondale trails Mr. Reagan. But that night, from Salt Lake
City, Mr. Humphrey delivered a nationally televised speech in which he separated
himself from President Johnson's position on peace negotiations in Vietnam.

That turned the campaign around. By Oct. 12, Mr. Nixon's lead in the Gallup Poll
had been cut to 43-31; by Oct. 21, to 44-36; and on Nov. 2, both Gallup and the
Harris Poll had the two major candidates all but even at 42-40. Mr. Humphrey
actually surged ahead, 43-40, in the last Harris Poll and ultimately lost by an
eyelash - Nixon 43.4 percent, Humphrey 42.7, George Wallace 13.5.

So big leads can be quickly overcome, although it should be pointed out that no
incumbent was running in 1968, and no single issue seems as dominant this year
as Vietnam was then.

The second precedent consists of the results of all three previous Presidential
debates: Nixon-Kennedy in 1960, Carter-Ford in 1976 and Carter- Reagan in 1980.
In each, an incumbent suffered by allowing his challenger to appear on the same
platform, at Presidential level (in 1960, Mr. Nixon had been Vice President for
eight years and was considered virtually an incumbent). Polls suggested, for
example, that the Carter- Reagan race in 1980 was close until Mr. Reagan's
performance in their debate began to break it open for him.  Political
precedents only suggest possibilities. But other evidence indicates - at least
to me - that the President's big lead could yet be shaken. The third terrorist
bombing in Beirut, followed by the lame excuses from which Mr. Reagan had to
retreat, followed by the evidence of laxity in providing security at a clearly
endangered embassy, threatens his leadership reputation and mocks his
don't-push-America-around rhetoric.  The negative results of the Reagan- Gromyko
meeting, which the White House designed to camouflage the deepened
Soviet-American hostility Mr. Reagan has produced, may have called more
attention to that hostility than Mr. Mondale could have by himself. The
Administration's embarrassment at being forced to reject a Contadora treaty that
Nicaragua is willing to sign tends to confirm that Mr. Reagan doesn't want a
peaceful settlement with that country; he wants its Sandinista Government
overthrown.  The indictment of Secretary of Labor Donovan, which won't come to
trial until after the election, may revive the dormant ''sleaze issue.'' The
pressures that forced Vice President Bush to disclose his income tax returns may
mean that the Republican candidates can no longer sail along as serenely above
the real world as they did in September.  Does any of that really matter? Maybe
not. Mr. Reagan is campaigning effectively as Dr. Feelgood, dispensing
patriotism, optimism and eyewash, with nothing missing but rose- colored glasses
and an Uncle Sam suit. He's so neatly packaged for TV he could be sponsored
again by Borax.  The economy looks good on the surface, nobody seems to care
about the deficit and too many Democrats think the biggest national problem is
Walter Mondale's whine. Unless the Beirut fiasco has shaken it, the President's
ability to portray ''strong leadership'' is an invaluable asset that his
challenger seems unable to match.  Mr. Mondale's tax program is bold but
ill-considered, and his protectionism isn't even bold; but over all he's making
more sense than Mr. Reagan, notably on arms control and Soviet- American
relations. His problem isn't with the issues but that Mr. Reagan professes to
see no issues that can't be resolved by prayer in the schools and money in the
Pentagon.  Even in the debates, Mr. Reagan's packagers have seen to it that
he'll be screened from the challenger by willing reporters, which makes it all
the more difficult for Mr. Mondale to inflict scar tissue on the Presidential
image. He might win on points, as Mr. Carter probably did in 1980, and still
lose in the perception of the public, as Mr. Carter surely did.  Still, Mr.
Reagan's vulnerabilities exist, somewhere under Dr. Feelgood's jolly
performance. If Mr. Mondale can get at them in debate, it won't necessarily win
him the election but it might remind the public that two candidates are in the
race and neither is running for cheerleader. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Says It's Open To Emigration Proposal

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Oct. 4


Vietnam said today that it agreed in principle to an American proposal for the
emigration of some 40,000 Vietnamese to the United States, including some 10,000
political prisoners and 8,000 American soldiers' children and their mothers.

Vietnam's Deputy Foreign Minister, Li Mai, said his country was ready to allow
the migration if Washington would accept all ''criminals'' being held in
Vietnamese ''re-education'' camps.

''If the U.S. Government agreed to receive all the criminals, the two countries
can sit down and talk,'' he told reporters after a daylong meeting with Robert
L. Funseth, a Deputy Assistant Secretary of State involved in refugee programs,
at the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Statue for Vietnam Veterans Memorial Nears Completion

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A worker, left, putting finishing touches on a bronze cast of the
sculpture ''Three Fightingmen'' yesterday at the Joel Meisner & Company foundry
in Plainview, L.I. Observing are Joel M. Meisner, right, the compa- ny's
president, and Jay Steinberg, its financial director.  The sculpture, designed
by Frederick Hart, will be placed at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington. It will be dedicated at a ceremony there Nov. 11. The New York
Times/Ruby Washington

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 102 words


The New York Times/Ruby Washington Statue for Vietnam Veterans Memorial Nears
Completion A worker, left, putting finishing touches on a bronze cast of the
sculpture ''Three Fightingmen'' yesterday at the Joel Meisner & Company foundry
in Plainview, L.I. Observing are Joel M. Meisner, right, the compa- ny's
president, and Jay Steinberg, its financial director.  The sculpture, designed
by Frederick Hart, will be placed at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington. It will be dedicated at a ceremony there Nov. 11.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
The Worries On Wall Street

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 980 words


WHAT is the stock market so worried about? Is it inflation? Or is it recession
and deflation - and the fallout on many business corporations?

Inflationary expectations took deep root in the public mind during that long
spell of rising prices that lasted from the buildup of the Vietnam War to the
deep recession of 1981-82. Those inflationary expectations are still being
nourished by worries about the huge budget deficits stretching, as David A.
Stockman, director of the Office of Management and Budget, said in one of his
characteristically unguarded moments, ''as far as the eye can see.'' But some
economists believe that inflation has been crushed more effectively than most
people realize.



The Consumer Price Index rose by 4.2 percent during the 12 months to August of
this year, and the Producer Price Index of finished goods rose by 2 percent in
that period. But Edward M. Bernstein of the Brookings Institution believes that
both price indexes overstate the underlying inflation.

The commodity component of the Consumer Price Index rose by 2.9 percent over the
12 months up to August and at an annual rate of only 1.4 percent in the last six
months. Rising costs of services accounted for most of the rise in the Consumer
Price Index.

Even the Producer Price Index appears to overstate the underlying inflation
because it makes no distinction between labor and other costs and profit
margins. Over the year to the second quarter of 1984, costs and profits per unit
of United States domestic product, which were $1 per unit in 1972, rose from
$2.13, to $2.192. Of that increase of 6.2 cents, labor compensation rose
six-tenths of a cent, non-labor costs fell eight-tenths of a cent, and corporate
profits increased by 6.4 cents. Thus rising profits accounted for the whole
increase in the Producer Price Index in the last year.

That rise has restored profit margins to what they were in 1976, although they
remain lower than they were before 1970. Even with wider profit margins, the
Producer Price Index declined by one- tenth of 1 percent in August, as energy
prices dropped significantly and food prices showed a small decline.

These low inflation readings suggest that the economy has the capacity to handle
existing demand without much strain. An index of industrial commodities, using
1947-49 as a base of 100, climbed from 200 at the start of 1983 to over 250 last
April. Since then the index has fallen back more than 20 points.

In addition, the percentage of purchasing agents reporting slower deliveries has
begun to drop, suggesting that production has caught up with shipments and that
a lack of capacity is not a problem in most industries. Today's industrial
capacity utilization rate of 82 1/2 percent, which is roughly in line with the
postwar average, is not likely to put inflationary pressure on industry.

The Morgan Economic Quarterly, published by the Morgan Bank, notes in its
current issue that relatively stable inflation, even in periods of rapid
economic growth, is not unprecedented in the postwar period. ''Although
inflation responds to the business cycle,'' the bank says, ''the relationship
between the two has been loose.''

In fact, genuinely inflationary periods in the United States have commonly been
a consequence, not of the business cycle, but of shocks - the Revolutionary War,
the Civil War, World Wars I and II, Korea, Vietnam, and the oil shocks of the
1980's, the first of which stemmed from the Arab-Israeli war.

The ability of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to exploit its
then stronger quasi- monopoly position kept the inflationary pressures on
through most of the last decade. But the price overshooting by OPEC has produced
curtailed demand for energy, an expanded supply and an oil glut that shows
little signs of evaporating in the period just ahead.

The case for a flattened inflationary trend is strengthened by the continued
sluggishness of the world economy and the outlook for the American economy to
slow down in the coming years. The case is reinforced by the wage trend; the
average rate of wage increase was running at about 10 percent in this country as
late as 1981. But the steep recession forced that rate down to a bit more than 3
percent - a wage trend that has been reinforced by the collective bargaining
settlements in autos and clothes. With productivity rising, the rate of increase
in unit labor costs is slight.



But the end of the inflationary trend is not an unmixed blessing for all
businesses. Inflation makes some business executives and entrepreneurs look like
geniuses - as it did in such fields as real estate, banking and oil. But when
the inflation stops, many lose their assets and their reputations.

Following the near-collapse of the Continental Illinois National Bank and Trust
Company of Chicago, and the failures of many smaller banks, the current weakness
in the stock market is centered on the problems of overextended and overexposed
financial institutions. This week's announcement by the First National Bank of
Chicago of a loss of $70 million to $74 million in the first quarter because of
bad energy and agriculture loans dealt the markets a severe shock and raised
anxiety about other banks' global and domestic loans.

Concern about the financial fallout from the end of inflation appears to be
staying the Federal Reserve's hand from tightening credit too much. If the
economy should slide into recession next year, the Fed would be likely to ease
up further in an effort to bring down interest rates. But the need to avoid
inflationary financing of the budget deficit and to keep foreign deposits in
American banks complicates the need to push interest rates down for domestic
reasons.

In such a dilemma, the need to counteract too steep a recession is likely to
dominate the Fed's monetary policy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 430 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 6, 1984 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

'STRIKEBOUND' RECOUNTS AUSTRAILIAN MINE UNREST

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Cultural Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 574 words


''Strikebound'' is an earnest, worthy Australian film that reconstructs the true
story of a coal miners' strike in the small town of Korumburra in the mid-30's.
It was written and directed by Richard Lowenstein, who is only 24 years old, and
is based on interviews conducted over a period of years by his mother, Wendy
Lowenstein, an oral historian.

''Strikebound,'' which is feature- length, will be shown at Alice Tully Hall in
the New York Film Festival tonight at 6 o'clock and tomorrow at 4:30 P.M. On the
same program is ''How Far Home,'' a 29-minute documentary about the gathering of
veterans at the National Statue to Vietnam Veterans in Washington on Veterans
Day 1982.

Considering the youth of its writer- director and the comparatively small budget
on which it was made, ''Strikebound'' is a technically impressive film that
firmly avoids souped-up melodramatics. The eventually successful strike of the
100 miners at Korumburra apparently occupies a special place in the history of
the Australian labor movement, which, at that time, looked to the Communist
Party for leadership in the absence of any real support by the Labor Party.

The film is based on the real-life story of two remarkable characters, Wattie
Doig (Chris Haywood), a miner who became a militant Communist activist, and his
wife, Agnes (Carol Burns), who progressed from staunch Presbyterianism to
membership in the Salvation Army and, finally, to labor organization. Agnes,
well played by Miss Burns, provides ''Strikebound'' with a passionate heart.

The film otherwise seems to fall between fiction and fact. It denies itself the
kind of speculation that fiction allows, and, since it is, after all, a
reconstruction, it seldom discovers the unexpected events and feelings that can
illuminate a documentary. Every frame of the film has been so carefully composed
- even its soundtrack has a self-consciously deliberate manner - that one can
never forget for a second that one is required to react with reverence and awe.

''Strikebound'' is a good film but never a surprising one.

Though much shorter, ''How Far Home'' packs a lot more emotional weight than the
feature it accompanies. The veterans we see and hear - who come in all sizes,
shapes, colors and degrees of articulateness - create a panorama of pathos and
courage of a sort that is not necessarily beyond fiction, just different from
it. The film makers responsible for ''How Far Home'' are Bestor Cram, the
director; Rusty Sachs, the associate director, and Donald Scott, the executive
producer. They and their associates have done fine work.

The Cast

STRIKEBOUND, direction and screenplay by Richard Lowenstein; photography by
Andrew DeGroot; edited by Jill Bilcock; music by Declan Affley; produced by
Miranda Bain and Timothy White. At Alice Tully Hall, as part of the 22d New York
Film Festival. Running time: 100 minutes. This film has no rating.

Wattie Doig . . . . . Chris Haywood
Agnes Doig . . . . . Carol Burns
Idris Williams . . . . . Hugh Keays-Bryne
Charlie Nelson . . . . . Rob Steele
Harry Bell . . . . . Nik Forster
Police Sergeant . . . . . Anthony Hawkins
Mine manager . . . . . David Kendall
Meg . . . . . Marion Edward
Yugoslav scab . . . . . Lazar Rodic
Ernie . . . . . Reg Evans
Salvation Army Officer . . . . . May Howlett
Welsh singer . . . . . Declan Affley
Politician . . . . . Denzil Howson
Grocer . . . . . Charles Gilroy
Reverend Busby . . . . . Ivor Bowyer
Mrs. King . . . . . Kirsty Grant

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 6, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PEACE MOVES RENEWED ON CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 5


New diplomatic moves aimed at finding a political solution in Cambodia have
begun in Southeast Asia, Japan and New York.

But the tasks to be accomplished - bringing about an end to civil war while
arranging a withdrawal of Vietnamese forces - are so great that diplomats,
political leaders and scholars in the region suggest that, short of a dramatic
gesture from Hanoi, negotiations are likely to drag on for years.

Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, who met this week with Thai leaders
and then went to Tokyo to hear Japanese proposals for giving aid to Vietnam in
return for a troop withdrawal, has been saying repeatedly that there is no new
''peace plan.''

Mr. Thach also plans to meet with Southeast Asian foreign ministers attending
the United Nations General Assembly.

Economic Problems in Vietnam


Southeast Asian leaders believe the Vietnamese, who admit having serious
economic problems, could benefit from better relations with their more
technologically advanced neighbors.  The stumbling block to improved relations,
however, has been the presence of at least 170,000 Vietnamese troops in
Cambodia, which Vietnam invaded in December 1978 to overthrow the Government of
Pol Pot.

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations - Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore,
Indonesia, Brunei and the Philippines - has refused to recognize the Government
of Heng Samrin, which Vietnam installed early in 1979 in Phnom Penh. So has
China, the country that many in the region believe will play the pivotal role in
any Cambodian solution. Peking continues to be Hanoi's greatest strategic
threat.

Officials point out that not only does China provide weapons and political
support to rebel groups trying to overthrow the Heng Samrin Government, but it
also poses a danger to Vietnam itself, which has fought several large battles
with Chinese forces along their common border.

''Vietnam knows in the end it will not get Cambodia,'' Lau Teik Soon of the
National University of Singapore, a scholar of Southeast Asia and a member of
the Singapore Parliament who is close to Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, said in an
interview. ''But it will have to get some concessions. An independent Cambodia
will have to safeguard Vietnamese interests. Cambodia cannot be too closely
allied with China.''

China Backs Pol Pot Group


Meanwhile, China has continued to support the Pol Pot group within the Cambodian
rebel coalition. It was Mr. Pol Pot and his followers who terrorized Cambodia
from 1975 until late 1978, leaving millions dead.

The Pol Pot rebels could become the biggest diplomatic headache for the Asian
nations trying to arrange a political solution for Cambodia. Many Cambodians -
and a number of foreign governments - would not welcome a Pol Pot presence in a
coalition government. Vietnam fears those rebels would simply oust their
non-Communist, democratic allies and regain control of Phnom Penh.

When Asian diplomats have proposed elections for Cambodia after the removal of
Vietnamese forces, Hanoi has regularly countered with the demand that the Pol
Pot group be ''eliminated'' first.

Diplomats here say they discount the view that Cambodia is a major drain on
Vietnam, militarily or economically. They say Vietnam has more than a million
troops, the world's third-largest army. Its economy suffers more from problems
of political decision-making than from foreign ventures, experts in
international lending institutions say. Vietnam is also running a large trade
deficit with the Soviet bloc and is desperately short of capital for
development.

Although Cambodia may not be a major drain on Hanoi, diplomats say, Vietnamese
troops are not having an easy time there. The three Cambodian guerrilla
factions, loosely joined and often squabbling in a coalition that has not only
regional but also United States support, are growing stronger.

Rebel Recruits Said to Increase


The conservative Thai Government has turned its back on supplies from China and
elsewhere that pass through Thailand to the rebels, who live in a kind of no
man's land among a quarter of a million people displaced by years of strife.

Rebel recruits are reported to be rising, among them defectors from the
Government army who the rebels say ''don't want to kill their own people.''
Occasionally Vietnamese troops are reported to defect, but they appear to be
headed for Thailand and the West, not into rebel forces. The number of rebels is
put in the tens of thousands. They are backed by civilian militias and porters.

Last week a spokesman for one of the two non-Communist coalition factions, the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front, said American and exiled Vietnamese
veterans of the Vietnam War were volunteering to join as soldiers. They were
being told, he said, to send cash instead.

Troops of the Pol Pot group, still at least nominally under Mr. Pol Pot's
direction, are thought to control a 10- to 15-mile strip of Cambodian territory
south of the town of Poipet, on the Thai border. The Pol Pot group, experts say,
is the strongest militarily of the three coalition factions. But the two non-
Communist groups, particularly the party led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, are
better at organization and administration.

Retaliation by the Vietnamese


Over the last few weeks retaliation from Vietnamese troops appears to have
increased. Fighting in Cambodia has been heavy on several occasions. Reporters
visiting the Thai-Cambodian border last weekend heard sustained heavy artillery
fire on the Cambodian side.

The rebels have demonstrated their ability to strike at targets well inside
Cambodia, according to reports confirmed by diplomats and Thai military
officials. Only the eastern part of the country, sheltered by Laos and Vietnam,
appears to be calm, according to diplomats.

Rebel radio broadcasts report almost daily strikes by one or another of the
guerrilla armies. Many of these cannot be confirmed. But last month
international refugee sources were able to verify a reported attack at Meanok on
a train heading from Phnom Penh to Pursat.

Many civilians were reported to have died in an explosion followed by gunfire.
The rebel radio reported only the capture of many weapons as well as ''four
bicycles'' and ''17 rucksacks.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDES SAY SALVADOR ARMY IS NOW ON TOP

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 6


The Reagan Administration says the Salvadoran military has broken a long
stalemate with guerrilla forces and is capable of neutralizing the insurgents by
the end of 1986 if current military and political trends continue.

''There has been a recent convergence of developments that, if continued, will
promote eventual success in getting the insurgents under control,'' the Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy, Fred C. Ikle, said in an interview on Friday.

Another senior Pentagon official at the interview said, ''The Salvadoran Army
has turned the corner.''

Independent military experts questioned the optimistic assessment, saying that
the war remains a stalemate and that the Salvadoran Army, while improved, cannot
defeat the guerrillas.



General Is Optimistic


If American military and economic aid continues near current levels - military
assistance in the fiscal year that ended last week was $196 million, more than
double the amount the previ- ous year, and economic aid was $332 million - the
Defense Department thinks that the guerrillas can be contained in small pockets,
and effectively eliminated as a major threat, by the end of 1986, the
Administration officials said.

This view is shared by Gen. Paul F. Gorman, the commander of United States
military forces in Latin America. General Gorman told Congress in public
testimony in August that the Salvadoran military could have 80 to 90 percent of
the country under its control within two years if Congress approved the level of
military aid requested by the White House.

The United States Ambassador to El Salvador, Thomas R. Pickering, and senior
officials at the State Department and White House agree that the Salvadoran
military has gained the upper hand this year in fighting against the guerrillas,
according to State Department and White House aides.

But one of the dissenters from this view, Edward L. King, a retired United
States Army colonel and an expert in counterinsurgency warfare who has traveled
extensively in El Salvador, said: ''There's no question that the Salvadoran
armed forces have made great progress. Their battle leadership is much better.
But the war is still a stalemate.''

He added: ''To say they've turned the corner is like saying in the middle of the
Vietnam War that there was light at the end of the tunnel. You can't win a war
like this unless you obliterate the insurgents and the army lacks the troops and
firepower to do that.''

The Salvadoran armed forces number 32,000, with an additional 10,000 security
troops and militiamen, according to the Defense Department. Estimates of
guerrilla strength vary, but most place the number of insurgents at 6,000 to
9,000. According to widely accepted counterinsurgency theory, government troops
should outnumber guerrilla forces by a ratio of 10 to 1 to win a military
victory.

Mr. Ikle, the third ranking civilian official at the Pentagon, said that
Government forces have for the first time gained and retained the initiative in
fighting and have increased their mobility with an infusion of United States
aid, including a new fleet of combat helicopters.

In September, the United States provided El Salvador with 10 additional UH-1H
helicopters, bringing the Salvadoran fleet to 32 operational aircraft, according
to the officials. Thirteen more helicopters are expected to be delivered by
early December.

Mr. Ikle and other Defense Department officials said the Salvadoran Army was
poised to launch a more aggressive campaign designed by General Gorman that will
make use of improved air mobility to attack and pursue the guerrillas.

Mr. Ikle and other officials said that the guerrillas remain capable of
conducting ''high visibility'' attacks or terrorist acts but lack the manpower
and supplies to sustain a major offensive. ''There will be hit-and-run attacks,
maybe urban terrorism, but they can't produce a big offensive or hold a
strategic target,'' one Pentagon official said.

Mr. King questioned the ability of the Salvadoran Army to adjust to the kind of
mobile tactics recommended by the United States. ''It takes very good small
units commanders, sergeants and lieutenants, to handle those kind of quick,
in-and-out attacks and the Salvadorans simply don't have them yet.''

He also questioned whether Salvadoran intelligence and communications systems
were adequate to support the expected increase in air mobility.

Mr. Ikle and other officials attributed the improved position of the Salvadoran
military to a number of factors. They said these included the election in May of
Jose Napoleon Duarte as President of El Salvador, the subsequent approval by
Congress for the first time of almost all the military aid the Administration
asked, improvements in the leadership of the Salvadoran military and the
containment of outside support to the guerrillas.

They also cited reductions in human rights abuses in El Salvador and increased
United States economic aid as adding to a political climate that was less
hospitable to insurgents.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Fred Ikle

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodia Rebels Report Attacks on Vietnamese

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 126 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 6


The Pol Pot guerrillas said today that they had inflicted heavy damage on
Vietnamese transport and supply links in Cambodia, and had ''crushed down'' more
than 10,000 Vietnamese soldiers during fighting in the rainy season, from May to
September.

The Pol Pot forces' radio, monitored in Bangkok, said they cut off railroads to
the Cambodian capital of Phnom Penh from the seaport of Kompongsom and from
Battambang Province.

The radio report did not say what it meant by ''crushed down.''

The Pol Pot forces, who ruled Cambodia from 1975 to 1978 and have been held
responsible for killing hundreds of thousands of Cambodians, were driven out of
Phnom Penh by the Vietnamese invasion in 1978. Vietnam then installed a
Government headed by Heng Samrin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENT MOVEMENT OF '64 REMEMBERED AT BERKELEY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 79, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 877 words

DATELINE: BERKELEY, Calif., Oct. 5


The leaders of the Free Speech Movement who returned to the campus of the
University of California here this week to commemorate the events of 20 years
ago met a student body accustomed to the changes their movement had brought to
Berkeley and other campuses.

They also found new issues to talk about, some of them related to the policies
of President Reagan, whose election as Governor of California the student
movement of the 1960's inadvertently helped to bring about.

Most of the students who attended the week of panel discussions, speeches and
films that had been organized in honor of the anniversary were not born when
Jack Weinberg, one of the movement's leaders, coined the phrase, ''Don't trust
anyone over 30.''

But both generations were united on the issue of free speech. A major
anniversary event was a rally Tuesday at which some of the leaders of the 1964
movement spoke, while Students Against Reaganism did a brisk business in
T-shirts emblazoned ''Reaganbusters.''

Reaction Would Be Same

Christopher Phillips, a post-doctoral research fellow in mathematics who is the
president of the Berkeley College Republicans, said it was ''an anti-Reagan
rally,'' not a commemoration of free speech.

But he said the student reaction of 20 years ago would be repeated today if the
university administration tried to stop political activity on campus. ''It's the
one thing that would unite all the political groups on campus,'' he said.

The students attending the events this week were in some ways more diverse than
the students of 1964. Undergraduates today are more likely to be members of
racial or ethnic minorities: 14 percent of Berkeley's entering freshmen this
year are black or Hispanic students; 25 percent of its undergraduate students
are of Asian descent. In 1966 the combined total for these groups was 7 percent.

The students today are also more likely to be seeking degrees in engineering,
economics and business rather than the social sciences or medicine.

Kim Flores, a senior majoring in civil engineering who is acting president of
the Berkeley College Democrats, said most students accept a freer way of life as
one of the lasting contributions of the student movement of the 1960's.

She said it was hard for students today to believe that at the time of the Free
Speech Movement male students wore coats and ties to campus, dormitories in
which both men and women lived were unheard of, and female students were subject
to an 11 P.M. curfew.

Arrest Started Movement

The Free Speech Movement, which soon spread to campuses all over the country,
began on Oct. 1, 1964, with the arrest of Mr. Weinberg, a 24-year-old former
student, for violating the campus ban on distributing literature and soliciting
funds for political organizations. The arrest galvanized the political
sensibilities of the students. The university administration found itself no
match for the student tacticians.  Jackie Goldberg, who now teaches high school
in the Los Angeles area, recalled the arrest to 3,000 people at the anniversary
rally Tuesday. ''If I had made it up, I couldn't have asked for anything more,''
she said. ''They expected us to walk by as if a little ripple had occurred.''

Instead, hundreds of students surrounded the police car with Mr. Weinberg
inside, trapping it for 32 hours in Sproul Plaza at the entrance to the campus
and transforming it into a rostrum from which a 21-year-old philosophy student,
Mario Savio, spoke.

Eight weeks later, when negotiations with the administration over political
activity on the campus and disciplinary action against the demonstrators had
collapsed, Mr. Savio led more than a thousand students and faculty members in an
occupation of the administration building, Sproul Hall. Before it was over, 773
of the demonstrators were arrested.

Savio Speaks at Rally

At Tuesday's rally a gaunt and graying Mr. Savio, now a graduate student in
physics at San Francisco State University, spoke in Sproul Plaza again. He told
the students he was concerned that Nicaragua would become this generation's
Vietnam. ''We are now confronted with the cold war in America in its last
stand,'' he said.

Mr. Weinberg, now 44, returned for Tuesday's rally as well. Recently laid off
from his job in a steel mill in Gary, Ind., Mr. Weinberg recalled: ''I was
radical in one way. I had no respect for constituted authority.''

He urged the students to work against the dangers of a nuclear war that he said
could ''destroy Shakespere, destroy Plato, destroy the Rolling Stones.''

One result unforeseen by the demonstrators was the political backlash that
catapulted Ronald Reagan into the Governor's mansion. His pledge to control the
Berkeley campus was a major issue in his defeat of Gov. Edmund G. Brown in 1966.

Governor Reagan had noted with approval the work of two Alameda County deputy
district attorneys who helped prosecute the demonstrators arrested in Sproul
Hall. They were Edwin Meese 3d and Lowell Jensen. Today Mr. Meese is President
Reagan's Attorney General-designate and Mr. Jensen is an Assistant United States
Attorney General.

Noting these facts at the rally Tuesday, Mr. Weinberg said, ''It's still too
early to say who won.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GEORGE BUSH - LOYALTY TO THE CAUSE

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines

SECTION: Section 6; Page 76, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4900 words


Francis X. Clines is a White House reporter for The Times.  ONCE THERE was a
time, a mere instant, when George Bush would not go gentle into the twilight of
the Vice Presidency. It was in 1980, when his closest aides had to confront him
with the inevitable defeat of his Presidential campaign and coax him off the
treadmill of his candidacy before the rabid pursuit of Ronald Reagan proved
fatal.

''I would have remained an asterisk,'' Vice President Bush now says gratefully,
looking back in proclaimed happiness from his own secondary yet quietly
substantial place in the White House. This is a place earned through the sweat
of a typically relentless transition from suspect ''moderate'' to dedicated
Reaganite. His place now is one of secret confidences with the President and of
near-misery in public on those rare occasions when he is found to be differing
even one iota from the collected wisdom of Ronald Reagan.

The Vice President prefers to be an effervescent human being who seems to trust
serendipity the way other politicians believe in money. He is the great
incumbent survivor of the post-Watergate Republican Party as much as Ronald
Reagan is its savior. And as he alternately cherishes and regrets these
competitive days of 1984 - the laceration of campaigning that proves he is still
alive in politics - Bush is obviously a candidate delighted to be running in
defense of President Reagan rather than against him.

Challenged this time by Democratic Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, the
first woman who would be more than an asterisk on a major party ticket and with
whom he is scheduled to debate Thursday, Bush finds the current campaign a
matter of discipline and wariness as much as his 1980 effort was a matter of
hope and frenzy. With his career dossier fattened by some effective surrogate
work for the President, Bush remains uncomplaining as he crisscrosses the nation
endlessly these days. He denounces the Mondale-Ferraro campaign with the nasal
enthusiasm that has become his trademark. He seeks air time for the Reagan
banner in television markets too medium-size to be worth the gloss and time of
his boss.

''If you walk like a duck, and quack like a duck, and say youre a duck, you're a
duck!'' Bush breathlessly declaims in his inimitable way on the stump, making
his message sound more like a tinny fraternity cheer than a denunciation of the
Marxist-Leninist leanings of the Nicaraguan Government. (A tape-recording of
this moment has become a private collector's item at the White House and beyond,
proving again that Bush can never quite escape the image of squirrelly
earnestness that haunts his political style.)

''No more nit-picking - it's 'Zip-a-Dee-Doo-Dah,' '' he says at another point in
trying to dismiss an early gaffe of the Reagan-Bush campaign in which the
candidates were out of sync on the question of tax increases.

His protective strategy in office has been that of Spartan self-denial, and
nowhere was its value more winning than during the hours and days after the
assassination attempt on the President in 1981. In a shrewd stroke amid the
general anxiety, Bush first decided that his emergency return to Washington
should not be completed, as some aides wanted, with a helicopter landing on the
White House pad; his deference toward the trappings of the jet- age throne
became a symbol of Reagan's continuing power.  Likewise, in temporarily running
various White House meetings during Reagan's recovery, Bush chose to leave the
main executive chair empty.  It is small wonder that Bush's dedication to
self-abnegation has won over Ronald Reagan, who thrives on uncomplicated
friendships.  Even more, it early on prompted the President to take aside
Barbara Bush, the Vice President's wife, and ask her: ''Is George happy in his
job? How can we make it better?''

The ultimate answer to that question, of course, would be a future anointment of
Bush by Reagan in the 1988 Presidential election, assuming Reagan is re-elected
next month. Bush, at age 60, seems to have dedicated his Vice Presidential
labors toward that unspoken goal, and it is a measure of his relative progress
that a few ranking Reagan aides say that this is no longer such an improbable
dream.

Like most of the forgotten predecessors of his office, George Bush has donned
veepish sublimation like a hairshirt. But he also has contributed to the modern
evolution of that office to something vaguely substantial. This is a trend that
he generously credits to former Vice President Walter F. Mondale, President
Reagan's challenger, with starting when he talked Jimmy Carter into being the
first President to grant office space within the White House to the Vice
President. That presence, plus such crucial perquisites as Bush's receiving
copies of each day's paper flow to the President's desk, has made the office
worth far more than it was in the old days. In the past, an incumbent like
Garret Augustus Hobart, William McKinley's first Vice President, candidly
outfitted his office, far off in the capital, with a velour ''slumber robe.''
This was for those special moments of Vice Presidential ennui at being ''out of
the loop,'' as the Reaganites put it.

''You become a little duller, a little less exciting copy,'' Bush concedes.
''But that's all offset by this relationship with the President that I really do
value both on the personal and professional level,'' he says - lean, handsome
and loyal - as he talks in his White House office.

President Reagan has admitted that he chose George Bush for the 1980 ticket with
clear hesitation after failing to bargain former President Gerald R. Ford into
place as the needed ''moderate'' running mate to appeal to independent
Democrats. ''But the Lord was watching out for me,'' Reagan later added in an
interview in which he praised Bush's loyal service and private advice, and
pointedly dashed the hopes of his party's right wing to dump Bush from the 1984
ticket.

''What have I done?'' candidate Bush is remembered asking, minutes after Reagan
reluctantly invited him onto the ticket in 1980. ''Can I work it out?''

Bush's friend Representative Barber B. Conable Jr. of New York remembers well
that private moment of self- doubt, and celebrates Bush's service since then as
Vice President as part of a process of dogged, impressive maturation by Bush
from more callow days in 1967, when he was a freshman in Congress brandishing
his odd mix of Yankee pedigree and Texas opportunism.

''George was always a master of the quick study,'' says Mr. Conable, a respected
20- year Capitol veteran. ''But back then one got the impres sion he was young
and ambitious and didn't have a long attention span.''

At least one White House official complains that that still is the case, and
that even President Reagan is more likely than George Bush to wade through his
day's allotted ''homework'' reading from the staff. But others insist Bush has
demonstrated his substance undeniably in far more important assignments, such as
his journey in the President's service to Europe in 1983. On that trip, he won
over a number of critics both in Europe and within the Republican Party as he
worked to calm popular criticism among allies at the advent of a new generation
of American missiles there.

Bush's experience in international tasks began mushrooming in 1970, after his
four years in Congress and his two losing bids to be Senator from Texas; he then
embarked on a crazy-quilt decade of party and Federal service. He became
chairman of the Republican National Committee during Watergate, director of the
Central Intelligence Agency during its post-Watergate period of scrutiny,
permanent representative to the United Nations and chief of the liaison office
to China. In all these posts, Bush cultivated numerous friends and added them to
his ever growing personal correspondence list, which is the envy of working
politicians who know him. ''He's got everyone he ever met down in books
somewhere,'' one Bush partisan says, ''and when he finally runs again for the
big one, out will come the books.''

More important, according to Conable, that decade of work, which ended with
Bush's half-a-loaf success in the 1980 sweepstakes, satisfactorily answered what
seems a perpetual question in his life: Whether George Bush can apply the right
blend of labor and vision to transcend his image of privilege and pragmatism.

''I found the broad 10-year sweep of politics and Federal office that began in
'70 had matured George a great deal,'' Conable says. ''I thought he had
developed a maturity and stability that supplemented his easy brilliance and
quick study. In other words, George has made the most of the experience he has
had.''

As Vice President, Bush has garnered some praise and complaints that doubtlessly
would be underlined in any future candidacy. Conservatives can be reminded by
Bush of how he ran the President's ''special situation group'' that oversaw the
initial planning of the invasion of Grenada. For moderates, Bush might recall
his warning to Salvadoran authorities, after months of outside criticism, to do
something about the death squads. A staunch defender of Reagan's Lebanon policy,
Bush privately is credited with encouraging a decisive retreat after the loss of
more than 260 American lives had shocked the public.

His domestic duties have included overseeing the Administration's deregulation
effort. Great claims of savings in money and labor are being made in this area
by the White House, but it remains difficult to assess, particularly with the
President himself continuing to campaign against the intransigence of
government. More clear is at least one result of the Administration's
concentrated effort against illicit drug importation, overseen by Bush.
Specialists say traffic in the initial target area in Florida has been slowed,
but hardly stopped, with some of the dealing simply having detoured around the
showcase crackdown while the national problem continues to rage full- scale.
GEORGE BUSH'S basic image as Vice President is as the loyal globe-trotter and
official mourner, the President's envoy in checking on a trouble spot or
greeting the latest Soviet leader during the funeral of his predecessor. Bush
tells of the quiet virtue of sidling up to Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak at a
funeral in Guinea: ''You get briefed up on the latest stuff, try to move
something forward.''

''Let 'em laugh,'' Bush says, leaning back at his immaculate desk, where he
keeps his favorite licorice Ronald Reagan jellybeans on hand. He shows
sensitivity to jokes about his role of diplomatic keening. ''Let the cynics out
there, the joke writers who come up when things are a little slow with something
about the Vice President. There's a lot going on, and it's substantive and I
like it.''

In presiding over the Senate, Bush has cast his few tie- breaking votes in
behalf of the President's proposals for the MX missile and nerve-gas weapons.
His party chairman's experience as a schmoozer and stroker of the political
bestiary has not been forgotten as he takes part regularly in strategy meetings
of the Senate's Republican Policy Committee.

At its heart, the office of Vice President has always been the vehicle for some
of the more awkward social necessities that the President dare not undertake
directly. Critics, for example, point to Bush's 1981 mission of praise for
President Ferdinand E. Marcos of the Philippines, whose regime is criticized for
human-rights abuses. ''We love your adherence to the democratic principle and to
the democratic process,'' Bush toasted Marcos. He says his regrets about that
incident are related not so much to his description of the political scene there
as to the fact that ''you have to explain it.'' ''Maybe it would have been
better to use different phraseology,'' he says, and adds, ''On a scale of one to
10, they are far ahead of Nicaragua or Vietnam today.''

More recently, the Vice President was dispatched to deliver a beaming address to
a Teamsters leadership convention that endorsed the Reagan-Bush ticket, one of
its few official blessings from organized labor. This was from a union
controversial for the chronic charges of corruption aimed at some of its
leaders. ''I don't view them as dirty deals at all,'' Bush says, speaking
enthusiastically of his Philippine and Teamsters missions.

There are Republicans who gag on the aspirations of George Bush beyond this
campaign. ''He's the dog that doesn't bark,'' says Richard Viguerie, the
conservative fund-raiser who has done well by darkly propping up Bush as the
Eastern Establishmentarian ghost of Nelson A. Rockefeller.

Bush, who first caught a glimmer of national attention in 1967 as that rare
Texas Congressman moderate enough to vote for the open- housing bill, walks,
talks and hopes like a conservative. ''Yes! Yes!'' he replies when asked whether
he is conservative. He snipes back at the ''nut'' cabal of his ''right- wing''
conservative critics, echoing the President's private complaint that Viguerie is
the sort of conservative whose orthodoxy allowed him to first support John B.
Connally, the ambitious turncoat Democrat, before falling behind the victorious
Reagan ranks.

It is a measure of the restiveness of the 1984 campaign that many Republicans
are looking beyond a November victory they consider inevitable and talking more
about 1988 and the personal gamble that George Bush will have to take. This will
be his early need, if re-elected, to ease his total deference to President
Reagan, a role that he clearly has come to enjoy, and to start reviving his own
image as an independent politician. It is the task that Walter Mondale had to
undertake with sometimes stumbling results. It is the task of avoiding the 1968
fate of Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey, the perception, fair or not, of a
politician who made too Faustian a bargain in securing his short-term office.

''I don't have to buy in yet,'' Vice President Bush insists, preferring thoughts
of the current campaign to any admitted coveting of the office so near and yet
so far from his, down a serene corridor bend at the White House. ''Maybe I'll
have to shortly after the election. I don't know. People keep telling me I
will.''

Bush talks lately as if he's psyching himself up more for the role of Hamlet
than President. ''Stay out of that,'' he cautions himself of premature
politicking. ''Keep my sights on '84 and then, not being unrealistic, recognize
that, if I decide to do something, I'll probably have to make some - not final -
but some decisions along the way after that, sometime. I don't know how soon,
either.''

Such soliloquy is fascinating from the lips of a politician who by now was to
have been preoccupied in facing up to Mrs. Ferraro. ''Everybody says she's
tough,'' he says. There is obvious respect in his voice, but also the hint of a
frontrunner who has heard the Republicans' backstage glee that Mrs. Ferraro has
been as busy debating accountants and bishops as much as George Bush.

He is grateful that Reagan's popularity so far is providing him with a cushion
for absorbing what White House strategists say is the essentially no-win part of
the Ferraro challenge. ''If you're polite, they say you're weak; if you come on
strong, they say you're a bully,'' he summarizes. ''I wouldn't treat her as a
frivolous opponent by a long shot,'' Bush declares, saying he had no choice but
to reject the advice he received against debating her.

In this campaign, the Reagan strategists' efforts to minimize gaffes extends
particularly to the Vice President's plane. Bush has been kept far more aloof
than usual from news reporters in his travels. He says they are ''a bullpen
seething with mischief'' in trying to draw out distinctions between and within
the tickets. This is an accusation to which journalists plead guilty on a good
day. ''Difference! Difference!'' Bush cries out with a smile in mimicking the
news media and summarizing his tortured experience with them.

His tenderness in public is understandable, because he still carries like a
cross his 1980 denunciation of the Reagan economic plan as ''voodoo economics.''
He later tried to deny he ever said that, much as he erroneously tried this year
to slip from a small knot of past difference with Reagan over the 1980 abortion
issue. Television archivists summoned up a tape of the ''voodoo'' line in living
color from his primary challenge to Reagan; now Bush insists Reaganomics is
good, and that the earlier remark was about something he understood to be
different.  IN HIS ZEAL TO BE IDENTI

fied with the President, Bush has

been testy on the stump, trying to

lecture reporters last month and reject their questions when they sought his
detailed views on abortion. Mrs. Ferraro was being duly grilled then on the
issue. ''My position is like Ronald Reagan's,'' Bush finally declared in
frustration. ''Put that down, mark it down. Good. You got it.''

The irony of his distress was that the abortion issue was first stirred
strategically by his running mate, the President. Reagan used it to appeal to
Catholics and Christian fundamentalists, and he also obliquely questioned the
''compassion'' on the issue of such Catholic critics among the Democrats as Mrs.
Ferraro and Governor Cuomo. Bush's fervor only underlined the traditional risk
of any Vice President. The compulsion to support his President can blur
independent identity as he scurries to the leader's coattails.

''I love the guy,'' says one Bush loyalist trying to survive somewhere left of
the party's dominant conservative stripe. ''But the thing that bothers me most
for '88 is I don't know what George stands for. I think of George Bush and get
certain impressions - loyalty, hard work. But tell me what he stands for.''

Other politicians insist this is a slander based on the stereotype of George
Bush as a keen ''preppie'' who is rooted in shallow enthusiasms and the faded
dreams of the party's once dominant Eastern aristocracy.

''Ronald Reagan and George Bush have one great thing in common: throughout their
careers they both have been underestimated by their opposition,'' says Vic Gold,
a conservative supporter and speechwriter. In vouching for Bush's authenticity
as a conservative, Gold notes his own credentials as an early acolyte of Barry
Goldwater and a dedicated worker for Vice President Spiro T. Agnew. ''George
Bush has nothing to do with the old Rockefeller thing; that's a simplistic
stereotype.''

He does not necessarily get an argument from such party rivals as Representative
Newt Gingrich of Georgia, one of the young conservative lions and a supporter of
Jack Kemp, a Bush competitor as the future Presidential candidate. Gingrich
senses more the echo of Richard M. Nixon than Rockefeller about the Bush career.
''Bush has done yeoman's work as the President's lieutenant, and in that
framework he's made a considerable number of friends,'' he says. ''Bush has the
potential to be where Richard Nixon was in 1960 in that he could make himself
the 'inevitable' candidate. I don't know yet how he'll do that, but his goal
after the election has to be to dominate the political horizon and not get
caught in drawn-out warfare.''

Politicians who feel that Bush's current situation has robbed him of principle
should hear him explain how his loyalty to Reagan is rooted in philosophical
views that are, he says - despite his heated run against Reagan four years ago -
quite similar to the President's. ''Sometimes they say, 'Well, you're signing
away your identity,' but that to me is all irrelevant, compared with whether you
can make it worth something, and the only thing that determines that is whether
the President has confidence in you or whether he has to keep looking over his
shoulder.'' Still, because of just such adaptability Bush is measured more as a
party pragmatist than a fervid conservative; but pragmatism these days is
synonymous with conservative Reagan fervor.


The image of the button-down drip- dry politician carefully fostered by Bush's
critics - and lightly enjoyed by some of his friends, too - is a puzzle to some
people who know him well. ''He really is an unknown person,'' says for me r
Senator Nicholas Brady of New Jersey, who, through old family ties, has been a
friend for years. Interesting facts of Bush's life remain unexploited
politically, in the view of Brady. He recalled one past campaign moment when
Bush lost his temper with a radio questioner who complained about Bush's wealth
and social standing as the Yalie from Greenwich who married a publishing scion's
daughter from Rye. ''You don't really know hard times,'' he was taunted. Bush
found his tongue, Brady recalls, by briefly, tartly mentioning the agonizing
death of his daughter from leukemia. '' 'I know hard times,' George told the
guy,'' says Brady.

In the campaign, Bush's style contrasts thinly with that of Reagan, the
electronic age's ultimate candidate at turning the personal narrative of his
life into billboard Americana. Unlike Reagan, who did his World War II service
in the trenches of a Hollywood morale-building unit, Bush became an 18- year-old
combat pilot. Not only was he shot down in the Pacific, but he was decorated for
completing his mission in a burning plane. On the stump, Reagan could weave a
sky-rocketing tapestry of such reality. But Bush, though he's willing to try to
capitalize on the well publicized military mission with campaign photographs of
his rescue, is more likely to let it slip away than perorate. ''I must admit
that it happened so long ago that the feelings and emotions are hard to conjure
up,'' he says.

Such moments lend a John Cheever touch of comic complexity to Bush's Yankee
profile. This is an image that Bush himself, in stressing his later life as a
Texas oil entrepreneur, can reinforce charmingly in the very vehemence of his
denial. ''Here I am,'' he says, leaning across his Vice President's desk,
pointing to parts of his attire. ''Take a look. Yeah, the watchband has stripes,
but look at the tie.'' No stripes. ''And look at the collar.'' No buttons.
''It's funny, I've wondered why the perpetuation of this, and I just don't
know,'' he says.

In Washington, people still ask Mark Russell, the satirist, to play a bit of his
1980 song ''Two-Gun Georgie Bush,'' set to ''Yellow Rose of Texas.'' ''He'll
tell you he's a Texan though he's got those Eastern ways, eatin' lots of
barbecue with a sauce that's called bearnaise. . . .''

''Preppie?'' asks Bush. ''That's a new word. Does it mean that you live in a
kind of cloistered environment and have nothing different other than to fit what
is a perceived, privileged mold? My life has been very different from that.''
MRS. BUSH IS ACKNOWLedged by the Vice President's friends and enemies to be one
of his strengths, a white-haired woman who, after 39 years of marriage, does not
smile that long-suffering rictus that is the occupational risk of political
spouses. She is friendly and witty, but somewhat jaded about the ''preppie''
knock. ''I've come to the sad, cynical conclusion that perception's what counts
in life, not truth,'' she says. In such a light, she speculates that her
husband's gentle qualities may show through too well. ''You know,'' she says,
''thoughtfulness and sensitivity do not a weak man make.''

Her life in politics goes back 32 years, when George Bush, obviously mindful of
the busy political career of his father, Senator Prescott Bush of Connecticut,
first ventured back from his offshore oil wells into the then anemic world of
Texas Republican politics. Mr. and Mrs. Bush ran a primary-voting precinct in
Midland, and in a day's waiting only one voter showed up. He was a drunk
Democrat, and his vote was accepted, according to Mrs. Bush, who has some of the
politician's sense for keeping score. She says she lost her fervor for the
proposed equal-rights amendment - once celebrated when George Bush was running
against Ronald Reagan - when she saw her friend Representative Millicent Fenwick
of New Jersey rejected by feminist organizations.


She and her husband take a loss in politics as ''a large, big fat death,'' she
says flatly. But while she has wept on the tennis court the day after losing,
George was busy telephoning thanks to everyone. She expresses various doubts
about the practicality of trying to run for President after having held the No.
2 job. But she is amused by an inquirer's notion that the Bushes are addicted to
politics. ''We had a great time without you,'' she says with a big smile. ''I
hate to tell you. Fabulous.''

George Bush's initial mandate to his staff to avoid all office discussion of his
separate political career has held through four years. Still, his eyes glow when
the talk of future possibilities is raised by an outsider asking after his
political health.

''I've taken a few shots,'' he says. '' 'Bush doesn't even provide any
leadership at cabinet meetings,' '' he says, scornfully echoing White House
gossip. ''Well, what they don't understand is I'm trying to define what the Vice
Presidency ought to be about and try to do it.'' He is defending his style of
speaking confidentially only in one-on-one situations with the President,
usually at their weekly private luncheons where all staff is barred, or in the
various brief daily visits he makes to the Oval Office, where Bush enjoys
relaxed drop-in privileges.

By keeping this relationship leakproof, with gossips and rivals left to
guesswork, Bush has wrought an unusual White House sanctuary for a Vice
President. He has the ear of the President, ergo he has power, although of a
still undefined magnitude. There is clear evidence that the President has come
to genuinely like George Bush, and no less important, Nancy Reagan has, too. She
took care to invite George and Barbara Bush to a dinner foursome with the
Reagans for a relaxed moment just before the campaign began.

Even some of the backroom knocks on Bush at the White House seem to serve him.
One is that his staff, for the most part, is politically passive and
uncombative. ''Yeah, well he'd be in big trouble if he had a gang of political
pistols in there with him playing games,'' one high Presidential official
countered in Bush's defense. Others recall Bush staff members working very well
with the Reagan staff during the troubled days after the assassination attempt.

His staff includes Daniel J. Murphy, a quiet-spoken retired admiral who worked
as a deputy for Bush at the C.I.A.; C. Boyden Gray, general counsel; Donald
Gregg, national security adviser; Steve Rhodes, domestic policy adviser and
deputy chief of staff; and Peter Teeley, an experienced press secretary who can
bridle quietly at the Vice President's usual task of not making news. It was
Teeley who spoke for the Vice President recently when he said that Bush had no
intention of revoking a blind trust to allow him to release income- tax returns
for the years since he took office. Bush had said earlier that he might consider
releasing the returns if there were a way to do so under the provisions of the
trust.  But on Sept. 26 he announced that he would release ''the essential
information'' of his 1981, 1982 and 1983 returns.  Teeley noted that there was
no legal barrier to prevent revocation of the trust, but he said Bush did not
intend to do so.

Bush's most dedicated aide may be Jennifer A. Fitzgerald, his executive
assistant, who has been privately denounced as overly protective and dictatorial
by other Bush workers. A number of Bush executives have had run-ins with her
over the years and quit his staff, but he remains quite loyal to her. ''That's a
bum rap,'' he says. ''She has my full confidence.''

Such flaps seem marginal, because Bush essentially is in a holding action while
his old Texas friend and 1980 campaign director, James A. Baker 3d, tries to
direct the re- election of the Reagan-Bush team. Baker is now the President's
chief of staff, reflecting Bush's reputation as a good political talent scout.
Baker is credited with forcing a fanatical Bush to quit his 1980 Reagan primary
challenge early enough to survive as a contender for the running mate's slot.

The remembrance of such turnings undoubtedly leaves Bush sincere when he says he
does not know what will happen to his career. ''It's crazy,'' he says. ''I got
up with my kids for vacation with the grandchildren,'' he continues, referring
to his family compound in Kennebunkport, Me. ''I went out looking for bluefish,
and I think: 'You know, this is pretty good stuff. Nobody's yelling at you, and
you don't have to worry about what you say. You don't have to think somebody
will misunderstand. You don't have to worry about a faction of this or a faction
of that. It's good for the soul.' ''

The thought seems such poignant relief for him that a White House visitor almost
expects the Vice President to announce his retirement. ''Then you come back,''
adds the politician who runs with Ronald Reagan. ''And you say: 'Wait a minute.
What we're doing is the thing we got to keep our sights on!' '' He smiles, and
George Bush's enthusiasm is once again on display in the White House, that
uncertain corridor's length away from the Oval Office.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Bush

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE POLITICS OF BLAME

BYLINE: By Hedrick Smith; Hedrick Smith is The New York Times's chief Washington
correspondent.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4495 words


CRISSCROSSING AMERICA THIS FALL, WALter F. Mondale has taunted President Reagan
with running ''a government of the rich, by the rich and for the rich.'' In the
farm country of western Tennessee, Mr. Mondale accused the President of creating
''superbowl deficits'' that have had ''dust bowl consequences'' for the family
farm. At the B'nai B'rith convention in Washington, in response to Mr. Reagan's
charge that people who oppose school prayer are intolerant of religion, he
accused the President of ''moral McCarthyism.''

Loftily, President Reagan has waved away his Democratic contender with
luxurious, symphonic, red-white-and-blue television commercials wrapping viewers
in an aura of patriotic good feelings. He has often met Mr. Mondale's sallies
with ridicule, derisively dismissing ''that pack of pessimists roaming our
land.'' On the stump in Nashville, he offered the homespun put-down that ''some
people have labored so long making Government bigger, they've developed a
knee-jerk addiction to tax increases, and every time their knee jerks, we get
kicked.''

Partisan zings and arrows have long been a staple of Presidential campaigns, of
course - the old game of putting the blame on your opposition and sidestepping
the most burning issues of the day. But the highly dramatized, polarized
politics of the television era give unprecedented bite to the politics of blame.
Setting out an honest agenda does not play as well. And that is just one of a
host of trends, reaching a crescendo this year, that pose dangers for some basic
elements in our system of government.

Presidential elections, by definition, represent the essence of that system.
They are the principal means by which we choose a leader and set a political
course for the next four years. Elections are also our means for holding public
officials, our previous choices, accountable. Yet, in the view of many
politicians, political scientists and former government officials, the politics
of today's campaigns work at cross purposes to the politics of governing.

''There's an increasing disparity between the tests for winning office and
what's required in governing,'' says James MacGregor Burns, author and professor
of political science at Williams College. ''The kinds of quick, dextrous ploys,
mainly public relations ploys, that are called for in public campaigning are a
very far cry from the very solid coalition-building that is needed to make this
system of ours work.''

Campaigns thrive on the cut-and-thrust of partisan polemics to mobilize support,
but governing requires the quiet spadework of compromise, often across party
lines. ''If we get a leader who's good at both, we're lucky,'' comments Austin
Ranney, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington.

Part of the difficulty lies with the voters themselves. Says John Deardourff, a
veteran campaign consultant who worked on President Gerald R. Ford's campaign in
1976: ''Vietnam and Watergate together produced such a sense of doubt and
skepticism that politicians came to the conclusion that it was hard to be
credible with making promises. Many politicians came to feel you could gain more
mileage by running down the other guy than by putting forward your own
affirmative proposals.''

But changes in the organization and technology of campaigning have also
accentuated the mismatch. Modern free-for-all primaries put a premium on a
candidate's ability to cater to special interest support and to appeal directly
to the voters - not on his abilities as a leader able to mold the broad power
coalitions of government. Slick new techniques of selling candidates on
television bolster that trend.

This year is special in other ways. The normal partisan cleavage is sharpened by
two candidates long known as polarizing figures. Ronald Reagan, the missionary
California conservative, has moved the Republican Party to the right. Walter
Mondale, a hard partisan battler, is well left of the Democratic center.
Moreover, Mr. Reagan's very ample lead in the polls has seemed to move Mr.
Mondale toward even more shrill confrontation, and the President's aides are not
shy about admitting that they have their own arsenal of negative ads ready to
strike back hard, if necessary.

That kind of campaign is inevitably damaging. It builds up rages and grudges
that linger on in Washington long after the campaign is over. The tendency to
blame the opposition - in Congress as on the stump - increases geometrically.
Consider the soaring Federal deficit, a festering problem that the American
Government has been helpless to cope with. Quarrels have often replaced serious
efforts at solutions. If Congress had only given him all the budget cuts he
wanted, the President insists, this year's $174 billion deficit would be ''$40
to $50 billion less.'' Hold on, retorts House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. If
Congress had given Mr. Reagan all the additional military spending and tax cuts
he wanted, the deficit ''would be $20 billion higher.''

THE ROOTS OF the clash between campaigning and effective governing lie in modern
American voting habits. Nowadays, whoever wins the Presidential campaign will
almost certainly face at least one house of Congress controlled by the opposing
party.

A politically divided government, according to James L. Sundquist, a senior
fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington, has existed for 18 of the
last 30 years. ''This is the only country in the world,'' he says, ''where you
have a built-in requirement for coalition government most of the time.''

The danger of a divided government, says Lloyd Cutler, former White House
Counsel to President Jimmy Carter, is, ''Everybody shifts the blame to everybody
else.'' Congress and the White House blame each other and each has some justice
on its side, he notes, but decisions are put off while charge and countercharge
fill the air. Thus, as Mr. Cutler points out, ''Nobody can fairly be held
accountable, and that's the greatest vice of our system.''

The history of the last 15 years provides ample evidence of the perils of
divided government. President Richard M. Nixon engaged in titanic fights with
Congress when he sought to impound funds for Democratic programs of which he
disapproved. In the veto-ridden tenure of President Ford, government was so
stalemated that he later complained of ''an imperiled Presidency,'' hamstrung by
Congress. Even with his own party in control of Congress, President Carter
proved inept at developing legislative coalitions.

The Reagan Presidency offered a brief break in that trend. By setting out a
clear program of tax cuts, budget cuts and increased military spending in 1980,
Mr. Reagan won what every Presidential candidate seeks, a mandate from the
voters. For a dazzling six-month period in 1981, the President pushed through an
impressive array of legislation although he faced a House of Representatives
controlled by the Democrats. It took almost total support from the 192 House
Republicans, the strongest show of party discipline since the days of Speaker
Joe Cannon, the Republican ''czar'' of the House 75 years ago. And it also
required help from 29 to 35 Southern Democratic conservatives.

But the Reagan conservative coalition broke down after six months. By early
1982, the legislative initiative passed to Congress. From then on, sporadic
compromises - the tax increase of 1982 and the modest deficit- reduction package
this year, for example - were usually pushed on the President by party leaders
in Congress. More often, partisan antagonisms deadlocked the two branches of
government on such key issues as the MX missile and covert aid to Nicaraguan
rebels.

Reagan strategists, looking to a second term, hope the President will lead the
party to gains of 25 to 40 seats in the House, not enough for a Republican
majority but enough to revive the conservative coalition. Recent history is
against them: the re-election of Republican Presidents saw a net loss of two
House seats in 1956 and a gain of just 12 in 1972.

Even with a landslide, solid support from House Republicans would be difficult
to maintain. Already, some moderates and conservatives have split with the
President over taxes and spending priorities. And with various contenders
already openly competing for the party leadership in 1988, Mr. Reagan's ability
to maintain unity will be limited by his lame-duck status.

Even in the Senate, with its 55-to-45 Republican advantage, there may be
trouble. The loss of just one or two seats could give more leverage to the small
band of liberal and moderate Republican Senators, moving the Republican majority
leftward and away from Mr. Reagan.

As for Walter Mondale, should he squeak through to victory, he would almost
surely be confronted by a Republican Senate.

Divided government is not, however, simply a fluke of an election or two, but
the function of stunning changes in modern voting patterns. Some analysts see a
built-in tilt favoring Republicans in Presidential elections balanced by strong
insurance for Democrats in Congressional elections.

According to Horace W. Busby, a former aide to President Lyndon B. Johnson, the
Republicans have maintained an advantage in the Electoral College since Dwight
D. Eisenhower broke the Democratic hold on the West and the once-solid South in
the 1952 and 1956 elections.

Mr. Busby's tally shows one state, Arizona, going Republican in each of the
eight elections since that time. Sixteen other states have gone Republican in
seven of these elections, 10 of them in the Rocky Mountains and Farm Belt
regions west of the Mississippi River plus California, Oregon, Virginia,
Indiana, Vermont and New Hampshire. Twelve other states, including Maine, New
Jersey, Florida, Kentucky, Tennessee, Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin and four Western
states, went Republican six times.

With Southern and Western states gaining population and electoral votes over the
last two decades, those 29 states now control 289 electoral votes, more than
enough to win the Presidency.

On the other hand, the Democrats have won a majority in the House all but twice
in the last half century. So many Congressional districts are considered safe
for the Democrats that a still-private Republican campaign study found that in
225 of them, no Republican had been elected in the last 20 years. Most of those
''safe seats'' are in large cities where racial and ethnic minorities favor the
Democrats, and in the South, where membership in the Democratic Party is almost
a birthright to many people.

Republicans contend that Democratic legislatures have gerrymandered district
lines to favor their party. But many scholars say the main reason for divided
government is the ticket-splitting habit of many Southern voters. That was
dramatically demonstrated in 1980. In the 11 states of the old Confederacy,
President Reagan carried 62 percent of the 108 Congressional districts - but the
Democrats won 64 percent of the Congressional races. Nationwide, just about
one-third of the Congressional Districts split their vote, going one way for
President and the other way for Congress.

ANOTHER FUNDAmental change has been wrought in American politics by the spread
of the Presidential primaries during the last 15 years. Together with the
cynicism spawned by Watergate and Vietnam, this development has greatly widened
the gulf between campaigning and governing.

In an insightful book, ''Consequences of Party Reform,'' Nelson W. Polsby of the
University of California at Berkeley cites the Carter Presidency as a classic
example of the problem.

According to Mr. Polsby's analysis, widely shared by other political scientists,
the traditional way to win the Presidential nomination was to pull together a
coalition of influential governors, mayors and other party leaders. That process
provided the candidate with the machinery to deliver votes in the election and
with a reliable network of supporters during his term in office. But to line up
that kind of support, a candidate was expected to have a solid track record as a
public official. He also had to have skills as a mediator and compromiser -
otherwise, he could never create the coalition to gain the Presidential
nomination in the first place.

In a primary campaign, however, candidates can bypass political power brokers,
making a direct appeal to voters on the basis of what Mr. Polsby calls
''television popularity.'' He pictures Mr. Carter, for example, as a politician
who shrewdly mastered the politics of the primaries and television but lacked
the traditional credentials for the Presidency. He failed, the professor says,
because of an ''inability to win over and to learn to cooperate productively
with members of Congress and leaders of interest groups.''

Moreover, Mr. Polsby argues that when President Carter found his Administration
in serious trouble in 1979, over the national energy crisis, he went back to
primary-style politics and tried to appeal to the electorate over the head of
Congress. At this point, the professor insists, Mr. Carter should have been
working for an accommodation with the power structure in Washington.

Political analysts attribute another ill to the primary system. They say that it
exposes Presidential candidates to new pressures to take extreme positions on
issues - positions that make life more difficult for them after they get
elected. In the Republican Party, this pressure comes from the right wing; in
the Democratic Party, from the left.

''The primaries have put a tremendous emphasis on candidates who can mobilize
devoted workers,'' says Samuel P. Huntington, professor of government at Harvard
University, ''and that generally means people of a strong ideological view.'' He
continues: ''That's created problems for the past two Administrations in terms
of dealing with reality once they got in office. In the primaries, candidates
get pulled toward the extremes and then they come into office with all kinds of
baggage from the campaign.''

Mr. Huntington, who served on the Carter national security staff, cited
President Carter's promise during the primaries to pull the American 2d Division
out of Korea. ''He eventually got disengaged from that,'' the professor said.
''But - my god - it took a lot of work. Also, his commitment to reduce the
defense budget. That took a couple of years to reverse.''

According to Mr. Huntington, Ronald Reagan also got himself in trouble with
campaign comments about foreign affairs. ''Look at his relations with Russia and
China,'' the professor said. ''He'd gotten himself in a position where after
what he'd said getting the nomination and even when he first got in office, it
was difficult for him to deal with Russia and China in the first couple of
years.''

IN THE AGE OF TELEvision, the Presidential primaries and the election itself,
have become - first and foremost - showtime. Ever more, the focus is on style
and personality rather than issues, on slip-ups rather than substance. Of course
the main line of political reporting has always been the horse race, but today,
as the media consultants would say, the Presidential campaign has become a
shoot-out at the O.K. Corral, with the powerful flinty-eyed victor ready and
able to impose his law upon the land.

That John Wayne image troubles many students of American government. ''The
fantasy of an all-powerful Chief Executive,'' as Austin Ranney calls it, sets up
both the President and the voters for a post-election let-down. The glamour and
spectacle of the campaign as presented on television leaves little prime time
for a reasoned discussion of the hard issues a candidate must confront as
President or the problems raised for him by a divided government.

Most voters seem to have little taste for that kind of ''inside baseball,'' and
most candidates for office consider it a handicap rather than an asset to betray
too much acquaintance with the inner workings of Washington.

''If you are a member of Congress,'' said Norman Ornstein, a specialist on
Congressional politics at Catholic University, ''the last thing you want is to
be lumped in with all the creeps in Washington.''

''The easiest thing to do,'' he continued, ''is say, 'I'm Wyatt Earp. I'm back
here trying to clean up that mess.' You distance yourself from the Washington
crowd, and in the process you reinforce the public's cynicism about Washington
and thus make it harder to mobilize public support for necessary programs later
on.''

Many politicians have read the lesson of the last two elections, Jimmy Carter
winning the Presidency in 1976 by running as an outsider against Washington and
Ronald Reagan doing the same thing in 1980. Nor has it escaped notice that
Senate Majority Leader Howard H. Baker Jr., who has earned a reputation as one
of the most skillful legislative leaders in years, found that of little help in
his bid for the Presidential nomination in 1980.

Walter Mondale is another case in point. Says Mr. Ornstein: ''Mondale's
experience has turned out to be a handicap. In the primary campaign, his
opponents attacked it as a weakness. He's been seen as a candidate of special
interests. He hasn't found it smart politics yet to come out and say, 'I know
how to put a coalition together, and that's how Washington really works.' ''

Meanwhile, Ronald Reagan continues - even as President - to run against
Washington. ''Reagan has spent the last 25 years in politics and government,''
commented Mr. Deardourff, the Republican campaign consultant, ''and yet he's
still perceived as a non- politician. He gets himself positioned so that it
becomes us versus them, and, 'I'm with you against all those politicians who
promise things and don't deliver.' ''

THE PRIMACY OF television in today's Presidential campaigns has changed the
process in a hundred ways. Many political scientists, for example, feel that
politicians are more likely to become locked into rash or damaging statements
made during their campaigns. In the old days of smoke-filled rooms, commitments
to a particular leader or interest group were made privately. By the time word
leaked out, it was vague and indirect.

Now, campaign promises or accusations are made in public and instantly relayed
by television to the entire nation, making them harder to disavow or modify. Mr.
Reagan's declarations to the fundamentalist Christian right about abortion and
school prayer in the 1980 campaign, for example, were used by conservative
Senators to prod the President into action after the election.

More broadly, many politicians and political scientists fault television for
helping sharpen the dichotomy between campaigning and governing. Television,
they note, plays up drama and conflict, covers a candidate's 16-hour campaign
day in staccato 60- second bites, and focuses on personalities and trends, thus
rewarding glib candidates with smooth on-camera personalities, a facility for
quips and slogans, and a staff that can stage flashy events.

''There's no question that television tends to polarize politics, because it
needs conflict to generate interest and hold audiences,'' observes Mr. Ranney,
who has written a book, ''Channels of Power,'' about the impact of television on
politics. ''Newspapers always did that, too, but television bites harder, and
with a lot more people in the audience.''

Moreover, as an advertising medium, television has become the main battleground
for the negative advertising campaigns that are a hallmark of the modern
campaign. Initially, politicians used ads simply to push their own candidacies.
A few years later, media consultants coached candidates in negative advertising
techniques, attacking their opponents, making invidious comparisons. Now, in a
still more sophisticated evolution, campaigns have elaborate strategies: spots
are shown; polls track reactions on a daily basis; ''antidote,'' or
''counterpunch,'' spots are launched to blunt the other side's negative
campaigning.

For campaign strategists, ''free media,'' as they call news coverage, has
greater credibility with viewers, and they spend hours devising media events to
capture a spot on the nightly news. This fall the Reagan campaign has
outperformed the Mondale camp by producing upbeat, cheering crowds that help
reinforce the President's optimistic message. ''The campaign is keyed to
television, which puts a premium on cleverness, catchiness, on saying something
pithy,'' says Mr. Ranney, ''and that's not the essence of good governing.''

Controversy often captures the spotlight from substance. In mid-September, for
example, Mr. Mondale delivered a major address at the American Legion convention
pledging a six-month pause in American nuclear testing to set the groundwork for
a summit meeting with Soviet leaders. But that same day, House Speaker Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr. criticized Mr. Mondale for not being aggressive enough, and his
comments got the nightly news play. Later, Mr. Mondale complained that Mr.
O'Neill had ''stepped on my line.''

This year, so much attention has focused on Geraldine A. Ferraro's financial
problems, the debate between Democratic politicians and religious spokesmen over
abortion and school prayer, the tactical miscues of the Mondale campaign and the
President's incantations of patriotism that economic policy and arms control
have often seemed secondary.

Understanding the ways of mass communication, political consultants advise
front-runners to leave tough issues to their challengers. This fall, for
example, Reagan strategists have orchestrated a campaign keyed to symbolic
politics. It deliberately plays down issues and plays up images of leadership
and hope, invokes shared American values and engenders public feelings of
optimism around the President.

Mr. Reagan has sidestepped Mr. Mondale's challenge to spell out his future
economic program. In fact, the White House has actually instructed
Administration officials to postpone normal preparation of the next budget for
fear of leaks that might offend one or another group of voters.

In frustration, Mr. Mondale protested ''the emptiness'' of President Reagan's
''happy- talk campaign.'' But Reagan strategists reckon that the political cost
of vagueness about next year's governing priorities is far less than the cost of
being too explicit now.

FINDING REMEDIES to bring campaign politics closer into line with the politics
of governing is not easy. Few specialists see much prospect for change in the
role and nature of television coverage or in the tactics of political
polarization practiced by so many politicians.

Democratic Party leaders have reacted to charges that, by cutting office-holders
out of the nominating process, Presidential primary campaigns have destroyed
coalition building. In 1982, after President Carter's defeat, a party commission
revised the delegate rules for this year, creating a new group of
''superdelegates,'' who did not have to be elected in primaries. This group,
numbering 568 delegates out of a total of 3,933 votes, were Governors, Mayors,
members of the House and Senate, party officials - the very type of party
leaders around whom political coalitions used to be built.

Not surprisingly, given Mr. Mondale's long record in Washington, this group gave
him lopsided support at the San Francisco convention. Indeed, without them, he
might not have been the nominee. But now the partisans of Senator Gary Hart and
the Rev. Jesse Jackson, contending that their popular support was
under-represented, are pushing for counter-reforms for 1988.

Many political analysts favor reviving the power and cohesion of political
parties, the main building blocks of governing coalitions. One means to that end
would be to give the parties more authority over political money, both Federal
subsidies and the donations of the ubiquitous political action committees. This
would theoretically reduce the political independence of individual candidates
by making them more dependent on the party for campaign support and thus more
likely to follow party leaders once in office.

Considerably more radical revisions of the governmental structure have been
proposed to combat the problem of divided government. They are being developed
by an influential bipartisan group - the Committee on the Constitutional System
- made up of more than 200 former members of Congress, former Cabinet officials
and political scientists.

Probably the most drastic change, advocated by Lloyd Cutler, former White House
counsel under President Carter, would call for a ''team ticket.'' It would have
the candidates for President, Vice President, Senator and Congress on a single
slate in each state and would force voters to choose between party slates.
Another proposal would make the American system operate more like the British.
Whenever the divided government became too stalemated, either the President or a
majority of both houses of Congress would be empowered to dissolve the
Government and call for new elections.

Less radical and more widely mentioned than those two approaches is an idea for
lengthening the Presidential term to six years, stretching the term in the House
of Representatives from two to three years, and electing half of the Senate once
every three years instead of electing one-third of the Senate every two years,
as at present. A variation of that scheme would keep the four- year Presidential
term, but lengthen House terms to four years and Senate terms to eight years.

According to Mr. Cutler, a co-chairman of the group, the plan ''would give
legislators the same time-horizons as the President, so they wouldn't have to be
running for office all the time and could sometimes take steps that have
unfavorable short-term political consequences but longer-term policy dividends,
such as steps to balance the budget.''

Synchronizing Congressional and Presidential elections might also increase the
coattail effect of the Presidential race, giving a winning President more
partisan support to count on in Congress after the race is over.

President Reagan and many conservatives approach the divided-government problem
from another tack: more power for the President, less for Congress. They favor
constitutional amendments that require a balanced budget and that give the
President a line-item veto, which would let him cut out single items in an
appropriations bill rather than having to veto an entire bill.

But most of these remedies, as Mr. Sundquist of the Brookings Institution points
out, have the same practical problems. ''The Democrats in the House,'' he says,
''would see no advantage in a 'team ticket,' no advantage in being tied to Jimmy
Carter or Walter Mondale. That's the problem with many of these reform ideas.
The political losers have to persuade the political winners, the people in
power, to try something that involves giving up some of their power. That's
pretty hard to do.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3403 words


FICTION

BODIES OF THE RICH. By John J. Clayton. (University of Illinois, $11.95.) John
J. Clayton's short story collection, ''Bodies of the Rich,'' struggle with some
central dilemmas of our time. Peter in ''An Old 3 A.M. Story'' and Herb in
''Part-time Father'' confront the demands and responsibilities of paternity and
the need to deal fairly with former wives. Chris in ''Cambridge Is Sinking!''
and David in ''Fantasy for a Friday Afternoon'' wrestle with finding meaningful
work and fulfilling earlier promise. All the men are marked by the passage from
the 1960's to the 1980's and by the need to retain self-respect and commitment
in a world in which youthful ideals have faded and in which (as Herb says) they
must ''handle, somehow, the pressures.'' Mr. Clayton (an O. Henry Prize winner)
is clearly not comfortable with the easy formulas of despair that have become
conventional in recent American fiction. His male characters (and many of his
women) meet the world with resources and senses intact, and most are able to
wrest victories (albeit simple ones) from their daily encounters. The collection
also contains several rather nostalgic stories that are set in the 1950's or
before - ''Bodies Like Mouths,'' ''Prewar Quality'' and the title story. Each of
these marks a rite in the life of a young protagonist, and in each an older
woman unlocks mysteries great and small: sex and death, life in the city, or the
meaning of taste and even of a spurious kind of ''high-class'' behavior. These
stories display a gift for wry (and even slapstick) humor that the author too
often withholds in his more serious tales of present-day conflict, and they are
marked by an inventiveness of language and imagery unaffected by the rather
tedious experimental flights of a story such as ''Cambridge Is Sinking!'' At
times, Mr. Clayton relies unduly upon formulaic solutions. His titles, for
instance, are all drawn from ''meaningful'' passages in his text (a device that
wears thin in a collection); his women (especially the younger women) are often
more ephemeral than his men, while some of the male figures seem
interchangeable. Still, the tales rarely flag in their originality, diction or
willingness to take on big questions as well as the more mundane issues of daily
life.- Donald H. Bell

FINAL HARBOR. By David Martin. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $15.95) David Martin's
third novel, ''Final Harbor,'' deserves a place within the vernacular tradition
of American fiction. It is satirical, occasionally grotesque, often humorous and
reminiscent - in its parody and dark vision of American misfits - of Bret
Harte's ''The Luck of Roaring Camp.'' The novel is set in 1980 in Harper's
Ferry, West Virginia, where the abolitionist John Brown's rebellion was quashed
in 1859. Mr. Martin introduces a bizarre and memorable group of fanatics and con
men who have gathered there to promote their own causes or to seek salvation.
There are religious zealots who believe that Jesus Christ appeared in Cleveland
in 1968 and those who try to persuade audiences of the evils of abortion by
displaying fetuses in jars of formaldehyde - these ''abortion abolitionists''
have an ''unaffiliated network'' that ''has little to do with law or logic or
civil rights; it is spasmodic and mystical.'' There are also Mr. Relle, an
enormous old black man, now semiretired and reading philosphy, who once appeared
at revivals and political rallies where he would eat glass, swallow nails and
bite the heads off live chickens; Barclay Coppac, a fast talker set on amassing
a fortune by establishing theaters in which he charges the performers and pays
the audience - a man whose insincerity rivals that of the most smarmy talk-show
hosts - and the Colonel, a lonely 60-year-old bachelor whose company once
marketed sheets patterned after Christ's burial cloth. At the center of all this
is Colleen Timmerand, an insistent virgin who has a mystical effect on the men
she meets. Once in Harper's Ferry, she decides to make her mark by ascending
upward for all to see in an ''amazing supernatural defiance of gravity.'' The
month-long gathering of these characters provide Mr. Martin with a perfect
vehicle for satire. By placing the novel's events within the context of past
evangelical movements, the Iranian hostage crisis of 1980 and the rise of the
Moral Majority, he has added a frightening edge to what one wishes were simply a
tall tale. - Nancy Ramsey

THE DISCOVERY. By Stephen Sagan. (Perigord/Morrow, $15.95.) The latest novel by
Steve Shagan, the author of ''Save the Tiger'' and ''The Formula,'' is indeed
about a discovery. But the central disclosure comes only after a number of
murders, unexpected twists and narrowly arverted, life-threatening encounters
involving Gabriella, a lovely Italian epigrapher (whose brilliance at
deciphering cuneiform tablets leads to all the trouble), and Jack, a tough Los
Angeles homicide detective. Gabriella translates a tablet found at the 4,000-
year-old level of a dig in Syria that is actually the will of Ithamar,
''messenger of Moses, guardian of Yahweh's last word.'' The will not only leads
to a search in Israel for further clues to the location of the last words of God
spoken to man but also makes plain that the Syrians, sworn ememies of Israel,
have been warring with their Jewish blood brothers. The Syrians do not find such
information in their best interests and close down the dig immediately, but
Gabriella ingeniously smuggles out photographs of the script giving directions
as to where to look in Israel for God's last words. Then the hunt begins - not
only for the ancient information in Israel but also for the money to finance the
search and for the murderer (or the reason for the murder) of Jack's ex-wife.
Despite the complexity of his story, Mr. Shagan ties all these diverse elements
together and brings Jack and Gabriella together plausibly. With the possible
exception of there being some extant last words of God to man, disbelief in
''The Discovery'' does not set in readily. Some questions, however, are left for
the reader. Did Jack do what he does at the end on purpose or was it forced on
him? (He doesn't know himself.) Are the two large coincidences at the novel's
end the author's creation, or does he imply they come from a higher power? A
suspenseful and intriguing book, but one wishes the author's style had made the
issues seem more immeditate or as overwhelmingly significant as we are told they
are. - Robert P. Mills

FROM SEA TO SHINING SEA.  By James Alexander Thom. (Villard, cloth, $19.95.
Ballantine, paper, $7.95.) Ever since the Daniel Boone legend was first told in
his autobiography, actually written by John Filson in 1784, writers have been
drawn to retelling sagas of the pioneers. James Alexander Thom's third novel
continues the tradition in grand heroic style. Mr. Thom, who traveled the entire
route of the Lewis and Clark expedition while writing ''From Sea to Shining
Sea,'' has filled his 900-page historical romance with the exploits of Clark,
popularly remembered as the ''father of Kentucky,'' and his younger brother
William, the lesser-known half of the Lewis and Clark duo. The story follows
them and their eight brothers and sisters from the first stirrings of revolt
against Britain in 1773 to Lewis and Clark's triumphant return from the Pacific
in 1806. If Mr. Thom leaves out George Rogers Clark's later descent into
alcoholism and Meriwether Lewis's likely suicide, it is perhaps because he is
unwilling to compromise their heroism. He also claims far too much for the
Rogers and Clark families, such as attributing the first complete English Bible
to the clan's founder instead of to its true translator, Miles Coverdale. But
this sort of history is the book's strength as well as its weakness. For by
exaggerating the Clarks' place in history, Mr. Thom is able to introduce, as
their friends and associates, everyone from Patrick Henry to the Indian guide
Sacajawea. Reading the novel may often resemble a trip to Disneyland to see Abe
Lincoln brought to life via audioanimatronics. The historical figures walk
stiffly and speak a stilted tongue no human being every spoke: ''Want t' get 'im
bled ere his heart stops, y'see?'' More serious readers with an interest in the
period may prefer a sharp historical novel like Robert Graves's ''Sergeant
Lamb's America,'' but ''From Sea to Shining Sea'' is a harmless enough way to
learn a few of our country's more cherished myths. - D. G. Myers

THE GRACE OF SHORTSTOPS. By Robert Mayer. (Doubleday, $14.95) ''The Grace of
Shortstops'' is a complex of small mysteries that Robert Mayer has tried to
illuminate with imagery drawn from baseball in general and the 1947 World Series
in particular. The Brooklyn Dodgers' hopes for the pennant and the World Series
are the main concern of the 8-year-old hero, a Bronx boy named Peewee Brunig;
but meanwhile, unbeknownst to him, his home is riddled with intrigue. His
father, the self-effacing rabbi Louis Brunig, is running guns into Palestine.
Peewee's grandmother, Miriam Lester, is catapulted into a stroke by memories of
her premarriage, pre-immigration lover - the real father of Peewee's mother,
Ruth. Ruth herself is desperately trying to end an affair with Mickey Hirsch,
her policeman brother-in-law. When Mickey's careless philandering results in the
abduction of his infant daughter, Peewee organizes her rescue from the local bag
lady, an effort that does not greatly resemble a baseball game, though the
author strives to make it do so. Afterward, by an unrelated coincidence, Peewee
discovers his mother's infidelity. To soften the pain of the betrayal, and to
convince Peewee not to disclose it, Grandmother Lester tells him that ''it's
your secrets that make you you.'' This strong and well-earned line unites many
of the book's diffuse elements, but not all of them. Too many secrets make for
formal disorganization, and though each thread of the plot is nicely spun, Mr.
Mayer does not succeed in weaving them all together. The real substance of this
novel has little to do with baseball, and the game as metaphor is insufficient
to encompass it. - Madison Bell

NONFICTION

VIETNAM VOICES: Perspectives on the War Years 1941-1982. Edited by John Clark
Pratt. (Viking, Cloth, $25. Penguin, Paper, $12.95.) These perspectives on
America's immersion in Indochina are really a cacophony of voices, and it could
not be otherwise. John Clark Pratt, a former Air Force lieutenant colonel who is
now a professor of English at Colorado State University, has collected documents
that suggest the war's reach and complexity - cables between Washington and
Saigon; sections of Vietnam novels, from Graham Greene's ''The Quiet American''
to the outpouring of more recent fiction; successive, if not always consistent,
statements of purpose by the National Security Council and Ho Chi Minh; touching
letters (and tape recordings) sent home by American combat troops; excerpts from
memoirs, press conferences, Presidential speeches and Congressional testimony;
lots of poetry, much of it bad, all of it telling; accounts of antiwar
demonstrations; official and unofficial reports of battles; some of the best
journalism of the period, including Michael Herr's extraordinary work; graffiti
from the G.I. underground. All of this is presented without comment, but ''
Vietnam Voices'' does suggest the enormous scope of the material that must be
reckoned with to appreciate what now seems a distant memory. David Halberstam, a
New York Times correspondent in Vietnam in the early 1960's, suggests the
personal intensity that characterizes virtually all these voices. ''Never . . .
had life seemed so real to me, never had I felt so connected to a particular
moment,'' he recalls, but without forgetting the surrealism that always attended
the moment - ''it was as if we were watching movies of ourselves.'' - Charles
Trueheart

BIOPHILIA. By Edward O. Wilson. (Harvard University, $15.) Edward O. Wilson, the
Frank B. Baird Jr. Professor of Science at Harvard University and the author of
''Sociobiology: The New Synthesis'' and ''On Human Nature,'' defines
''biophilia'' as ''the innate tendency to focus on life and lifelike
processes,'' and he elaborates by revealing his own ties to nature. His book is
most compelling when, for example, he shares his intimate view of a colony of
ants and recalls his fascination with snakes. No one can doubt Mr. Wilson is
powerfully drawn to other creatures, but he wants to make some larger points:
human attraction to other living things is innate, and this natural affinity
should serve as the philosophical basis for a new conservation ethic. While the
human mind was evolving, he writes, ''Snakes mattered. The smell of water, the
hum of a bee, the directional bend of a plant stalk mattered.'' And so those
humans who were alert to the natural world survived. Biophilia was passed on.
''It follows,'' he adds, ''that the destruction of the natural world in which
the brain was assembled over millions of years is a risky step.'' But Mr. Wilson
never discusses what, exactly, the ruination of nature would do to the human
mind. Nor does he probe deeply enough into the question of why we destroy nature
when we are innately bound to it. His attempt to promote conservation is noble
and appealing, but ''Biophilia'' is more impressionistic than analytical. Mr.
Wilson flits from a reverie about time scales to a reminiscence about his work
in biogeography (the study of the distribution of plants and animals around the
world) and, in the tangle of all his meditations, loses the thread of his main
argument - Madison Belle

PIECES OF MY MIND. By Andrew A. Rooney. (Atheneum, $12.95.) In ''Pieces of My
Mind,'' a collection of syndicated newspaper columns, Andy Rooney, the resident
kvetch of ''60 Minutes,'' again laments everyday conditions. An unabashed fogy,
Mr. Rooney assails such aspects of modern life as nondairy creamers, electronic
bank transactions, new refrigerators and the cost of beer at ball parks, and he
celebrates those things that have remained constant, like wastebaskets and the
seasons. It is Mr. Rooney's particular talent to turn ordinary occurrences into
opportunities for rumination. A chance encounter with a stranger at a parking
garage leads him to comment on the irrational lure of exorbitantly priced
products, and a traffic crossing inspires a meditation on the loss of trust
among people. Mr. Rooney is not a trenchant analyst or a polished essayist, but
to expect this of him is to fail to take his work on its own terms. As he
writes, ''I just try to put down on paper some of the thoughts that have crossed
my mind because I'm average enough so they've probably crossed the reader's,
too.'' This unpretentious approach can be winning and no doubt accounts for the
appeal of Mr. Rooney's previous best sellers, ''A Few Minutes With Andy Rooney''
and ''And More by Andy Rooney.'' It can also be trying, especially when he plays
dumb with such remarks as ''Most art in any form is junk.'' Still, Mr. Rooney's
populist observations are often refreshing. - Sue M. Halpern

LOVE AND EXILE.  By Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Doubleday, $17.95.) Collected in
''Love and Exile'' are Isaac Bashevis Singer's three books of memoirs, ''A
Little Boy in Search of God,'' ''A Young Man in Search of Love'' and ''Lost in
America,'' with the addition of the new ''The Beginning,'' a brief, thin
prologue. ''The Beginning'' reaches back to Mr. Singer's earliest memories of
two villages he lived in as a boy before moving to Warsaw, but it quickly shifts
to Warsaw and Krochmalna Street, ''which was always full of people and they all
seemed to be screaming.'' He recalls the horses at a funeral ''wrapped in black
with holes cut out for their huge eyes.'' Once again Mr. Singer briefly sketches
the themes that mark his three memoirs - memories of his mother and father, his
doubts about God's mercy, his reasons for becoming a writer, his despair at the
world's cruelty, his early awareness that ''every human character appears only
once in the history of human beings.'' This gathering of his memoirs is welcome,
for their cumulative strength overwhelms their redundancies and facile moments.
If Mr. Singer sometimes seems to have written these books with one hand - almost
as spinoffs of his fiction - and from the vantage point of an old age that
renders their descriptions of youth remote, he has still re-created a murdered
world with feverish clarity, color, humor and unforgettable imagery. ''Lost in
America,'' the last and best of the memoirs, details the immigrant's journey to
America, passing through Nazi Germany and watching with horror from a train
window Jews not as lucky as he.  - David Evanier

THE ELEMENTS OF INTERNATIONAL STRATEGY: A Primer for the Nuclear Age. By Louis
J. Halle (University Press of America, $12.50.) Since 1945 the field of
strategic studies has blossomed in the West and especially the United States. It
is, in the words of Louis J. Halle, the author of ''The Cold War as History''
and other books, ''the branch of political studies concerned with the political
implications of the war-making capacity available to nations.'' ''The Elements
of International Strategy'' - a volume in the series ''American Values Projected
Abroad,'' funded by the Exxon Education Foundation - provides an introduction to
this field. Strategic studies has roots in older disciplines. It is like
international law, but its emphasis is not on how countries ought to conduct
foreign affairs but on how they do conduct them. It resembles diplomatic
history, but its focus is on recent events for which full documentation is not
yet available. It is a close cousin of military studies, but its central issue
is not how wars are to be fought but how they can be avoided. Avoiding war is
paramount, of course, because the central fact of international politics since
1945, and therefore the point of departure for strategic studies, is the
existence of nuclear weapons. These have given new importance to the three
familiar topics - deterrence, limited war and arms control - on which the
practitioners of strategic studies have concentrated. Mr. Halle's judgment of
what peace requires - a stable balance of power among rival nations and in
particular between the United States and the Soviet Union - is sober and
sensible. And the conditions for stability form yet another relevant subject for
inquiry by specialists in strategic studies.  - Michael Mandelbaum

CITIES BUILT TO MUSIC: Aesthetic Theories of the Victorian Gothic Revival. By
Michael Bright. (Ohio State University, $20.) This evaluation of 19th-century
Gothic Revival architecture is an attractive study, once the reader adjusts to
the great distance it keeps from actual buildings. Michael Bright, a professor
of English at Eastern Kentucky University, tries to explain the popularity of
the Gothic Revival style among English Victorians, whose writings about
architecture provide the basis of his analysis. He starts with A. W. N. Pugin's
passionate description of the chaotic state of architecture following the fading
of Renaissance ideals - a ''carnival of architecture. . . . Oh! miserable
degradation.'' Mr. Bright sees the revivalists as trying to establish the Gothic
sytle to stem that chaos. And he sees the Gothic style as achieving its
dominance by satisfying theorists and giving pleasure to people who ''liked the
way it looked.'' The style was satisfying, Mr. Bright says, because it fitted
with many contemporary interests - new notions of pleasure in art, for example.
Mr. Bright considers the reform not just of architecture but of society to be
the final objective of the Revival architects. Behind the adoption of the Gothic
style, he argues, is the notion that society can be reformed ''according to an
ideal by imitating an artistic manifestation of that ideal.'' This has been an
ambition of architects ever since. The parallel between the situation of Mr.
Bright's architects and contemporary ones is striking. With the fading of the
Modern movement, the architectural ''carnival'' is upon us once again. And like
the Victorians, we need a principled architecture that reflects contemporary
ideals. - Paul S. Byar

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 763 words


Oct. 7, 1984Fiction*1

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.  *2

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) King Arthur, fulfilling
a prophecy of Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  *3

GRANDMASTER, by Warren Murphy and Molly Cochran. (Pinnacle, $3.95.) Two chess
prodigies in the world of espionage.  *4

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) Three generations of a San
Francisco family.  *5*

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) Money and power in
Tinseltown.  *6

BLOOD AND ORCHIDS, by Norman Katkov.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four Hawaiian youths
are accused of raping a Navy officer's wife.  *7*

SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Berkley, $3.95.) The romance and ambitions of a
young man in the Old South.  *8

MORETA: Dragonlady of Pern, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.)
Humans and dragons battle spores on a distant planet, *9

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Warner, $4.50.) The five-year relationship of two
women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  10

FIRST LOVE, WILD LOVE, by Janelle Taylor.  (Zebra, $3.75.) An innocent beauty
finds rapture in the arms of a Texas cattle baron. 11

MONIMBO, by Robert Moss and Arnaud de Borchgrave. (Pocket, $3.95.) Fidel Castro
unveils a plan to create chaos in the United States.  12

MISTRAL'S DAUGHTER, by Judith Krantz.  (Bantam, $4.50.) The art world of the
20's and the fashion business of the 80's.  13

THE DAYS OF ETERNITY, by Gordon Glasco.  (Bantam, $3.95.) Love survives 25 years
of separation.  14

WHEN LOVE COMMANDS, by Jennifer Wilde.  (Avon, $3.95.) An Englishwoman in the
clutches of a sadistic Russian count. 15

THE MADNESS OF A SEDUCED WOMAN, by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer. (Bantam, $3.95.) A
woman's search for love ends in murder charges and institutionalization.  The
listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.  *An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.


Nonfiction

General *1

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) Americans flee an
Iranian prison.  *2

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of a respected
physician and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  3

MOTHERHOOD, THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION, by Erma Bombeck. (Dell, $3.95.) Humor
by the syndicated columnist. *4*

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from American corporations.  *5

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) The plight of men who have
never grown up: a psychologist's analysis.  *6

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) A helicopter pilot's Vietnam
experiences.  *7

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  *8

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.  *9

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
autobiography.  10

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.



Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous *1

GARFIELD LOSES HIS FEET, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.  *2*


NO MORE SECRETS FOR ME, by Oralee Wachter.  (Little, Brown, $4.95.) How children
can defend themselves against sexual abuse.  *3

IN SEARCH OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson.  (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $4.95.) A
new collection of the syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.  *4

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  *5

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
For 1984.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRITICS' CHOICES

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder Cable TV

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 2, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 278 words


For an example of Hollywood moviemaking at its best, no one need look much
beyond ''The Big Chill,'' which turns up for the first time on cable this week -
Sunday at 8 P.M. and 4:10 A.M. on Cinemax and on WHT at 8 P.M. and on Thursday
at 8 P.M. on Cinemax.

This slick, bittersweet 1983 comedy - the opening night attraction at last
year's New York Film Festival - is a story of college friends from the 60's
reunited, amid lost dreams and betrayed ideals, for the funeral of one of their
comrades, who has committed suicide.

The director and co-author of the screenplay is Lawrence Kasdan, who made his
debut as a director with ''Body Heat'' after writing the scripts for
''Continental Divide'' and - in conjunction with George Lucas - for ''Raiders of
the Lost Ark'' and ''The Empire Strikes Back.''

Here Mr. Kasdan blends both words and images with wit and skill as he assembles
his alumni - the public defender turned corporate lawyer, the popular television
star, the would-be novelist who writes for People magazine, the wounded Vietnam
veteran, and the married suburbanites (he a successful shoe retailer; she a
physician) who are the hosts of the funeral weekend at their mansion in South
Carolina.

Not only does ''The Big Chill'' boast a fine cast - Tom Berenger, Glenn Close,
Jeff Goldblum, William Hurt, Kevin Kline, Mary Kay Place, Meg Tilly and JoBeth
Williams in the leading roles; it boasts something rare in such films:
oustanding ensemble acting.

Adding to the evocative impact is the music - pop tunes, deftly chosen to evoke
an era when a generation of militant students embodied a dream of a better
world.  Lawrence Van Gelder

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 7, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UNUSUAL TEACHER FOR UNUSUAL PIANO CLASS

BYLINE: By DEBORAH HOFMANN

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 27, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


STUART HEMINGWAY of Riverside is rare among piano teachers.  Most of his 35
students are blind, mentally or physically disabled, or have temporary
depressions or other emotional disorders.

They are unable to play piano by traditional notation.

So is their teacher. Mr. Hemingway is blind.

He instructs his students by having them listen to and memorize tape-recorded
arrangements of popular music. He creates arrangements for each student
according to his ability.

He begins by establishing a bond with each student.

''They see that I'm vulnerable, and they don't feel as vulnerable,'' he said.
''It is apparent to them that I have gone over many of the same hurdles. If it's
useful, I will talk about being thrown out of school, my experiences in
hospitals, or the doctor who, when I was little, said I was retarded.''

The students acquire self-reliance as they become less dependent on the tapes
and more confident of their own instincts.

Improvisation is the second step. Students are expected to perform assigned
pieces, but Mr. Hemingway also encourages them to ''play what they hear.''
Distress or other problems often become apparent in the music. Often, Mr.
Hemingway said, musical inventions reveal sources of anxiety or fear.

A young suicidal pupil, Mr. Hemingway said, played pieces that sounded ''linear
and haunting.''

''She was in a very dark place,'' he said. ''I helped her get out of there.''

A withdrawn child played a series of chimelike notes over and over, reliving the
trauma of a family funeral.

An angry Vietnam veteran, addicted to amphetamines, resisted playing Beethoven's
''Moonlight Sonata'' in proper measure. ''He was playing it triple time, like a
machine gun,'' Mr. Hemingway said. ''So I taught him to play the piece slowly,
and to relax without dope. ''

Mr. Hemingway, 42 years old, has had five eye operations, including the removal
of the right eye when he was 9.

''I wanted to play music and couldn't until I was 18,'' he said. ''I had to
either stand up to my disease - something I absolutely hate - or agree to be
exiled. In the music, I began to find myself and happiness.''

His parents found a teacher in Auburn, N.Y., who was able to teach him complex
Bach inventions. He learned by rote, eight measures at a time.

At 19, he began three years of study with John Mehegan, who was a jazz critic
for The New York Herald Tribune and a teacher at Juilliard.

Mr. Hemingway began working with a small band. Later, he coached high school
bands, supplementing his income by creating piano arrangements.

In 1966, a social worker persuaded him to work in the nursery for retarded and
disturbed children at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx,
where he worked until 1973.

''By that time, I had lost all vision,'' he said. ''It was crucial that I not
dwell on my problem, but work with these children on their problems and lose
myself with them.''

During those years, he wrote many of the simpler songs he is using in his
teaching. Some songs talk about feeling bad about oneself.

In ''The Stupid Song,'' a ''stupid'' cat barks and a ''stupid'' dog meows. ''The
lyrics say, 'Maybe they're not stupid/Just nobody taught them how,' '' Mr.
Hemingway said. ''The lesson is maybe the same thing happened to you.

''They see that I accept them for who they are, because I want someone to accept
me for who I am. I just take things they say and give it back to them, as a way
of saying, 'I see you.' ''

Dick Nazzari, 29, of Norwalk, is physically and mentally retarded. Ten years of
study have resulted in a collaborative teacher-pupil album, ''I Love to Sing a
Song,'' paid for by his parents, produced by Mr. Hemingway and featuring
original material.

Mr. Nazzari said of the title song: ''That's the one I did all by myself. My
name is the only one on it!''

Mr. Hemingway encourages his students to emulate role models, and Mr. Nazzari
looks to such performers as John Lennon.

''Dick comes in with part of a melody, flowing and expressive,'' Mr. Hemingway
said. ''I just help him structure it.''

Mr. Hemingway set the stage, announcing, ''Here he is, Dick Nazzari at the
piano.'' The microphone was in place, and the synthesizer and other electronic
equipments were turned on.

Mr. Nazzari ends each lesson with a line made famous by the Beatles, ''And I
hope we passed the audition.''

''These things are not miracles,'' Mr. Hemingway said. ''But through the music,
we can do some things that are rather remarkable.''

Maria Sweeney, who is 17 and blind, has been studying with Mr. Hemingway for
almost a year. Prior attempts, under traditional instruction, were frustrating.
If she could master the technique, she said, there was still the tedium of
playing songs ''that were not up to my age.''

So the team applies a rock beat to dreaded exercises; ''Lightly Row'' resembles
a hit pop tune.

Mr. Hemingway tells her that the corners she feels herself ''backing into'' are
psychological and that they will pass.

Miss Sweeney is working on a recent top-40 song made popular by Donna Summer,
''Unconditional Love.'' Mr. Hemingway hums the notes as Miss Sweeney plays the
chords. ''I reach with my hearing,'' she said.

To guide Miss Sweeney's hands, he tells a story of ''notes that chase each other
and then take a little rest on a trip from 'A root' to 'C sharp' and back again
to 'D.' ''

After Miss Sweeney played a lengthy passage without hesitation, Mr. Hemingway
said:

''Terrific! You made it all the way to 'B' without stumbling. You're getting
your hands to do what you want them to, when you want them to.''

Mr. Hemingway tells Miss Sweeney that finding her way through neighborhood
streets is similar to finding one's way on the keyboard.

''I've got to learn it,'' he said about moving into his new neighborhood last
May. ''People ask me, 'Do you know where you are?'

''As I get better at it, they're surprised when I tell them I do. I use all the
signs and plants as guides.''

''The hardest piece for me,'' Miss Sweeney said, ''is 'Music Box Dancer.' I got
really frustrated. I wanted to stop. But once you start a piece with him, he's
not going to let you quit.

''He says to me, 'Maria, I know you can do it.' He says, 'You have a lot of
talent.' He makes me feel I could get up high, above anybody else.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Stuart Hemingway with Dick Nazzari

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STATE DEPARTMENT;
STALEMATES WILL SURVIVE THE ELECTION

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1907 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


Reagan Administration officials and other foreign policy specialists now see a
long stalemate ahead in international diplomacy, whoever wins the Presidential
election.

While Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic nominee, might prove more flexible than
a re-elected President Reagan, the sense of the Administration officials and
outside experts is that the forces for stalemate - military balances of power,
the internal politics of the major adversaries, the daunting extent of
differences in negotiating positions - outweigh pressures for progress.

To be sure, the official Administration position is that Mr. Reagan has spent
the last four years reconstituting American strength and reversing the
pro-Communist momentum of previous years, and that the key elements for
diplomatic successes are now in place. But privately the talk is much less
sanguine.

State Department diplomats are torn over the consequences of the stalemates.
Some are content to ''manage'' problems to keep them from erupting.

Others argue that unless the peace process is moved along, eruptions are
inevitable. Whatever the case, officials say that among political leaders of the
Reagan Administration there remains a strong tendency to let military strength
speak for itself and to rely less on prospects for negotiated resolution of
conflict.

Possible New U.S. Stance

Secretary of State George P. Shultz has been musing about all this in recent
weeks, according to State Department officials, as he looks ahead to what the
Reagan Administration should try to accomplish in a possible second term.

The officials say he seems weary of the intractability of most problems, that he
is playing with the idea of the United States standing back somewhat from the
fray, not quite so active as it has been, forcing others to take more
responsibility for settling their own disputes.

''It's not that he is prepared to abandon diplomacy,'' one official said.
''Politically, that's impossible, and our friends and allies wouldn't stand for
that. It's just that he feels the more involved we are, the more responsibility
we take on, the less others will face the hard decisions for themselves. They'll
always be looking for us to save them or for us to blame. That's what Shultz has
been saying.''

Mr. Shultz already appears to be putting these thoughts into action in the
Middle East. His aides told reporters recently that Washington would not become
an intermediary between Syria and Israel regarding an Israeli military pullout
from Lebanon until the parties themselves had made much more progress toward
settlement.

Administration officials and other foreign policy specialists list several
reasons for a long stalemate in foreign affairs. For one thing, they say,
efforts to resolve a number of regional and global conflicts were derailed in
the last year of the Carter Administration and have ground to a halt in the
Reagan Administration.

Of Balances of Power

What is more, they note, almost everywhere there is now a stalemate- inducing
balance of power, between the Sandinistas and the rebels in Nicaragua, between
the guerrillas and the Government in El Salvador, between Israel and its Arab
adversaries, between Iran and Iraq, between the United States and the Soviet
Union.

Thus the parties cannot be forced to make concessions nor force concessions upon
others. Further, leadership groups in almost all of these countries are either
ideologically indisposed toward major compromises with adversaries or too weak
to make them and keep power.

Also, policymakers and diplomats say it is simply daunting to figure out
solutions to the West Bank problem and controlling the new, small and highly
mobile cruise missiles in any arms control pact.


Soviet-U.S. Relations

By almost all accounts, the European Bureau of the State Department has
prevailed in the bureaucracy on one key point, the need to show allies and the
American public that the Administration can ''manage'' Soviet relations.
Otherwise, as one bureau official put it, ''It would look like things were
getting out of control.''

Accordingly, for almost three years now the bureau has been recommending that
the Administration engage in across-the-board contacts with Moscow on almost all
issues at all diplomatic levels. Mr. Reagan incorporated this idea into his
recent speech at the United Nations.

But there appears to be little hope in the Administration that these contacts
will produce concrete results other than in such small matters as consular and
fishing arrangements and crisis ''hot line'' communications: The important thing
to do is apparently to improve the atmosphere, to fix appearances.



Fix Appearances? Perhaps

''It is not necessary to make big compromises in order to change appearances,
and perhaps fixing appearances is enough,'' said Robert W. Tucker, a professor
of international affairs at Johns Hopkins University. Current conflicts between
the two superpowers are less explosive, or ''safer'' than before, he says. ''The
crucial territorial issues that could have caused direct conflict like Berlin
and the Persian Gulf have largely gone by the boards.''

Former Defense Secretary James R. Schlesinger says appearances are not enough,
particularly in the nuclear arena. Nonetheless, he said, ''The path to
successful arms control negotiations is difficult at best.''

''First,'' he said, ''the Politburo must find the Adminstration credible before
serious negotiations can proceed. Second, the President will have to provide an
Adminstration structure more conducive to negotiations. Substantively, the
Administration will have to accept curtailment of its strategic defense or
star-war ambitions, and the Soviets major restraints in their counterforce
capabilities. These are substantial but not insurmountable obstacles.''

There is also a feeling in the upper reaches of the Administration that time is
on their side, that the Russians are having severe internal difficulties, and
that the Adminstration has restored the superpower military balance. Also, by
the reckoning of senior Administration officials, Soviet leadership is weak and
divided and thus unable to make big concessions. There is also great uncertainy
inside the Administration over whether Mr. Reagan, in a second term, will be
genuinely more conciliatory toward Moscow or become even tougher.


Central America

Officials cite recent give-and- take by Nicaragua and by the Administration
itself over a draft peace treaty for the region put together by the Contadora
group - Panama, Mexico, Colombia and Venezuela. This, they said, shows just how
deep the chasm is between the warring parties. The Sandinistas accepted the
treaty because it placed little or no real contraints on internal Nicaraguan
changes and invoked only general procedures for verifying bans and limits on
military aid to and activity in the region.

Officials of the Administration said there was no way it would accept an
agreement with the Sandinista Government as it is currently made up. ''We simply
could not trust their keeping their end of the bargain if the present group
remains in power,'' one official said. By the same token, this official and
others acknowledged that the Sandinistas were not about to sign anything that
could jeopardize their internal control.

These officials said they had seen intelligence reports on conflicts in the
ruling Sandinista junta about how far they should go in the negotiations, but
that these disagreements largely concern appearances. As Administration experts
see it, the Sandinistas have to go far enough not to alienate supporters in the
international socialist movement and in the United States. ''That's about where
we are as well,'' said a key Administration official.



Sandanista Power Assessed

Nor do the officials and outside experts expect this deadlock to be broken on
the battlefield. According to intelligence reports, the Sandinistas do not have
the military power to defeat their enemy, known as the Contras, especially with
the Nicaraguan rebels having sanctuary in Honduras, nor are the rebels likely to
make much headway in conquering and holding Nicaraguan territory.

The same kind of balance exists in El Salvador. Just as the Sandinistas are
willing for their opponents to participate politically only on Sandinista terms,
so President Jose Napoleon Duarte of El Salvador is reportedly not about to
share his power except on his terms.

In both cases, those who hold power are willing for the adversary to participate
in elections, but most of the adversaries are unwilling to risk their lives and
prospects in that kind of test.

Nor do Reagan Administration officials anticipate that Salvadoran troops can
prevail over the guerrillas as long as the guerrillas get support and sanctuary
from Nicaragua. And Salvadoran forces are said to be strong enough and well
enough supplied to prevent a guerrilla victory, as long as the Salvadoran
Government is stable.

There are also uncertainties inside and outside the Federal Government as to
whether Mr. Reagan might use American forces in combat.


Mideast-Persian Gulf

Here, too, according to the officials and experts, the stalemates can be broken
only if governments change, and not by compromises or military battles.

Gone are such powerful leaders as Menachem Begin and Anwar el- Sadat, who could
cut through internal political logjams. King Hussein of Jordan, President Hosni
Mubarak of Egypt and Israel's new coalition Government are not considered nearly
strong enough to overcome these obstacles.

And the main negotiating obstacles now are tougher than the Sinai, a chunk of
territory between Israel and Egypt that was strategically possible to isolate.
The problems now are the West Bank and the Golan Heights between Israel and
Syria, where there are immediate and intimate security consequences to any
compromise.

Administration officials do not betray any sense of urgency about resolving
these questions. Some said Mr. Reagan would insist on pressing his peace plan
for associating the West Bank with Jordan, but no one is sure. The general sense
within the Administration remains that Israel's military superiority is so well
established that the Arabs will not start another war in the next few years -
especially without Egypt.

Officials and diplomats from the area also predict more deadlocks between Iran
and Iraq. Both sides seemed to have adjusted to the current leisurely pace of
fighting, and the essential balance has not been materially affected by new arms
shipments to Iraq by the Soviet Union and the West.

The only chance for ending the struggle, as the experts here see it, will come
when Iran's leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomenei, passes from the scene. At that
point, the hope and expectation here is that the new Iranian rulers, along with
the armed forces, will simply withdraw from the fighting, even without a peace
treaty.

Some State Department officials still show flickers of optimism about a
diplomatic settlement in South-west Africa, also known as Namibia, between South
Africa, the guerrillas and Angola.

There is also talk that Cuba and Vietnam, facing severe economic problems, might
be willing to make new concessions. But in these cases as in the others,
officials are offering few signs that the White House is prepared to make new
major concessions of its own.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of President Reagan, James R. Schlesinger and George P. Shultz

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DISCLOSING SECRETS TO THE PRESS: U.S. CALLS IT ESPIONAGE

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 7


The arrest of a Navy employee accused of selling classified photographs to a
British military magazine raises the question of whether the espionage laws can
be used to prosecute people who make disclosures to the press.  The charge filed
last Monday against Samuel Loring Morison, a civilian intelligence analyst said
to have sold American satellite photographs of a Soviet aircraft carrier under
construction, marks only the second time that the Federal espionage laws have
been used to prosecute an official or former official for disclosing classified
information to a publication, legal experts said.

The first, which was dismissed because of prosecutorial misconduct, was the
Nixon Administration's indictment of Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo, who were
accused of unauthorized disclosure of the Pentagon Papers, a Defense Department
study of the Vietnam War. The New York Times and other newspapers published the
documents in 1971.

Some Concern Is Seen

The Ellsberg prosecution alarmed press organizations and civil libertarians who
feared that such uses of the espionage laws could inhibit informed public debate
on national defense issues. Legal experts disagreed this week about whether the
prosecution of Mr. Morison, who also works as a part- time journalist, posed
such a threat.

Dean Benno C. Schmidt Jr. of the Columbia Law School said he would be concerned
if the courts adopted the Justice Department's broad reading of the sections of
the law Mr. Morison is charged with violating. They state that it is a crime to
disclose information ''relating to the national defense'' that could be used to
harm the United States.

''You will have two statutes that are lying around like loaded guns ready to be
pointed at all the participants in the process of disseminating information
about defense issues, including reporters and sources,'' Mr. Schmidt said. The
Justice Department's interpretation of who is ''not entitled to receive''
classified information would seem to make no distinction between an American
newspaper, a British magazine or a Soviet spy.

The use of such a broadly worded law to punish acts leading to publication would
be troublesome, Mr. Schmidt said, even if the Government could establish that
the national security had been harmed.

Threat to Nation a Key

On the other hand, Jack Landau, head of the Reporters Committee for Freedom of
the Press here, said, ''It does not pose a threat to the press to prosecute
somebody who gives out information that is a direct, immediate and irreparable
threat to the national security.''

Mr. Landau added that in his view the espionage laws require the prosecution in
a case like Mr. Morison's ''to prove that the information is of significant
damage to the United States or helpful to a foreign power and that the person
who released it knew that or had reason to know it.''

Mr. Morison, who has not entered a plea in the case and is being held under
$500,000 bail, is the part-time United States editor of Jane's Fighting Ships, a
well-known London military publication. He is charged with selling three
photographs of a Soviet aircraft carrier under construction to Jane's Defense
Weekly, an affiliated publication. The price for the pictures, which the
authorities say he took from a colleague's desk, was not disclosed.

No Intentional Harm Alleged

Jane's published the photographs in August. They were reprinted in various
American newspapers, including The Washington Post and the National Edition of
The New York Times.

The Government has not alleged that Mr. Morison, grandson of Samuel Eliot
Morison, the nation's foremost naval historian, was a foreign spy or that he
intentionally harmed the national security. Nor has it specified any damage
resulting from his actions.

But Pentagon officials were said to be angry because publication of the
photographs revealed the advanced capabilities of United States reconnaissance
satellites.

According to many experts on military issues, however, the satellites'
capabilities are no secret. Similar aerial photographs of airfields in Nicaragua
and Grenada have been repeatedly published by the Defense Department. William E.
Colby, a former Director of Central Intelligence, has said publicly that the
satellites can read the license plates on a Soviet car.

Justice Department officials would not comment when asked what potential enemies
could have learned from publication of the ship photographs that they did not
already know.

Disclosures Are Commonplace

''The agency he worked for classified these documents as top secret,'' said
William Carter, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, ''and the
unauthorized dissemination of these documents is a violation of Federal law.''

Millions of documents about military activities that do not involve truly
sensitive information are routinely classified as secret by the Government.
Unauthorized disclosures of classified information by Government employees to
reporters are commonplace. So is publication of such information, although
almost all news organizations say they have no intention of harming national
security.

Congress has repeatedly rejected proposals to pass an official secrets act
explicitly making disclosure of classified information a crime. But under the
Justice Department's interpretation, an espionage law enacted in 1917 would have
much the same effect. Mr. Morison is charged with violating the broadly worded
sections 793(d) and (e) of the Criminal Code, which derive from the 1917 law.

Taken together, these two sections make it a crime for anyone ''willfully'' to
disclose to ''any person not entitled to receive it'' any documents or
photographs ''relating to the national defense,'' or any other ''information
relating to the national defense which information the possessor has reason to
believe could be used to the injury of the United States, or to the advantage of
any foreign nation.'' The maximum penalty is 10 years in prison and a $10,000
fine.

A.C.L.U. Takes Narrow View

An Administration study group, in a report advocating a crackdown on
unauthorized disclosures of classified information, said in 1982 that sections
793(d) and (e) ''would be violated by the unauthorized disclosure to a member of
the media of classified documents'' involving the national defense. Intent to
injure the United States or benefit a foreign power need not be proved, it said,
as long as ''documents or other tangible materials'' are involved.

The report added, ''These laws could also be used to prosecute a journalist who
knowingly receives and publishes classified documents or information.''

Morton Halperin, head of the Center for National Security Studies of the
American Civil Liberties Union here, said that despite their broad language,
sections 793(d) and (e) were meant by Congress to apply only to ''secret
transfers of classified information to foreign powers.'' He said they would
violate the First Amendment if applied to a case like Mr. Morison's.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF LOUISVILLE DEBATE BETWEEN REAGAN AND MONDALE

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 11094 words


Participants in the Debate

The following people participated in last night's Presidential debate in
Louisville:

CANDIDATES: President Reagan, Republican, and Walter F. Mondale, Democrat.

MODERATOR: Barbara Walters, correspondent, ABC News.

PANELISTS: Diane Sawyer, correspondent, CBS News; Fred Barnes, Washington
correspondent, The Baltimore Sun, and James G. Wieghart, political
correspondent, Scripps-Howard Newspapers.



Following is a transcript of the televised debate between President Reagan and
Walter F. Mondale sponsored by the League of Women Voters in Louisville last
night, as recorded by The New York Times through the facilities of CBS News:



DOROTHY RIDINGS: Good evening from the Kentucky Center for the Arts in
Louisville, Ky. I'm Dorothy Ridings, president of the League of Women Voters,
the sponsor of tonight's first Presidential debate between Republican Ronald
Reagan and Democrat Walter Mondale.

Tonight's debate marks the third consecutive Presidential election in which the
league is presenting the candidates for the nation's highest office in
face-to-face debate.

Our panelists are James Wieghart, national political correspondent for
Scripps-Howard News Service; Diane Sawyer, correspondent for the CBS program
''60 Minutes,'' and Fred Barnes, national political correspondent for The
Baltimore Sun.

Barbara Walters of ABC News, who is appearing in her fourth Presidential debate
is our moderator. Barbara:

MODERATOR: A few words as we begin tonight's debate, about the format. The
position of the candidates, that is, who answers questions first, and who gives
the last statement was determined by a toss of the coin between the two
candidates. Mr. Mondale won. And that means that he chose to give the final
closing statement. It means, too, that the President will answer the first
question first. I hope that's clear. If it isn't, it will become clear as the
debate goes on.

Further, the candidates will be addressed as they each wanted and will therefore
be called Mr. President and Mr. Mondale. Since there will also be a second
debate between the two Presidential candidates tonight will focus primarily on
the economy and other domestic issues.

The debate itself is built around questions from the panel. In each of its
segments a reporter will ask the candidates the same general question. Then -
and this is important - each candidate will have the chance to rebut what the
other has said. In the final segment of the debate will be the closing segment
and the candidates will each have four minutes for their closing statement. And
as I have said, Mr. Mondale will be the last person on the program to speak.

And now I would like to add a personal note, if I may. As Dorothy Riding's
pointed out, I have been involved now in four Presidential debates, either as a
moderator or as a panelist. In the past there was no problem in selecting
panelists. Tonight, however, there were to have been four panelists
participating in this debate. The candidates were given a list of almost 100
qualified journalists from all the media and could agree on only these three
fine journalists.

As moderator and on behalf of my fellow journalists I very much regret as does
the League of Women Voters that this situation has occurred. And now let us
begin the debate with the first question from James Wieghart. Mr. Wieghart.




Deficits and the Budget


Q: Mr. President, in 1980, you promised the American people, in your campaign, a
balanced budget by 1983. We've now had more and bigger deficits in the four
years you've been in office. Mr. President, do you have a secret plan to balance
the budget some time in the second term, and if so, would you lay out that plan
for us tonight?

REAGAN: I have a plan. Not a secret plan. As a matter of fact, it is the
economic recovery program that we presented when I took office in 1981. It is
true that earlier, working with some very prominent economists, I had come up,
during the campaign, with an economic program that I thought could rectify the
great problems confronting us: the double-digit inflation, the high tax rates
that I think were hurting the economy, the stagflation that we were undergoing.
Before even the Election Day, something that none of those economists had even
predicted had happened, that the economy was so worsened that I was openly
saying that what we had thought the basis of our plan could have brought a
balanced budget; that was no longer possible.

So the plan that we have had and that we're following, is a plan that is based
on growth in the economy, recovery without inflation, and reducing the share of
the, that the Government is taking from the gross national product, which has
become a drag on the economy. Already we have a recovery that has been going on
for about 21 months, to the point that we can now call it an expansion. Under
that, this year, we have seen a $21 billion reduction in the deficit from last
year, based mainly on the increased revenues the government is getting without
raising tax rates.

Value of Tax Cut Seen

Our tax cut, we think, was very instrumental in bringing about this economic
recovery. We have reduced inflation to about a third of what it was. The
interest rates have come down about 9 or 10 points, and we think must come down
further. In the last 21 months, more than six million people have gotten jobs.
There have been created new jobs for those people to where there are now 105
million civilians working where there were only 99 million before, 107 if you
count the military.

So we believe that as we continue to reduce the level of Government spending,
the increase, rate of increase in Government spending, which has come down from
17 to 6 percent, and at the same time as the growth in the economy increases the
revenues the Government gets without raising taxes, those two lines will meet.
And when they meet, that is a balanced budget.

Climbing Deficit ProjectedQ. Mr. President, the Congressional Budget Office has
some bad news. The lines aren't about to meet according to their projection;
they project that the budget deficit will continue to climb. In the year 1989
they project a budget deficit of $273 billion. In view of that and in view of
the economic recovery we are now enjoying, would it make sense to propose a tax
increase or take some other fiscal measures to reduce that deficit now when
times are relatively good?

REAGAN: The deficit is a result, it is a result of excessive Government
spending. I do not, and very frankly, take seriously the Congressional Budget
Office projections because they have been wrong on virtually all of them,
including the fact that our recovery wasn't going to take place to begin with.
But it has taken place. But as I said we have the rate of increase in Government
spending down to 6 percent. If the rate of increase in Government spending can
be held to 5 percent - we're not far from there - by 1989 that would have
reduced the budget deficits down to a $30 billion or $40 billion level. At the
same time if we can have a 4 percent recovery continue through that same period
of time, that will mean without an increase in tax rates, that will mean $400
billion more in Government revenues. And so I think that the lines can meet.
Actually, in constant dollars, in the domestic side of the budget there has been
no spending increase in the four years that we have been here.

Q: Mr. Mondale, the Carter-Mondale Administration didn't come close to balancing
the budget in its four years in office either, despite the fact that President
Carter did promise a balanced budget during his term. You have proposed a plan
combining tax increases and budgetary cuts and other changes in the
administration of the Government that would reduce the projected budget deficit
by two-thirds to approximately $87 billion in 1989. That still is an enormous
deficit that we'll be running for these four years. What other steps do you
think should be taken to reduce this deficit and position the country for
economic growth?

MONDALE: One of the key tests of leadership is whether one sees clearly the
nature of the problem confronted by our nation. And perhaps the dominant
domestic issue of our times is what do we do about these enormous deficits.

Respect for PresidentI respect the President. I respect the Presidency and I
think he knows that.

But the fact of it is every estimate by this Administration about the size of
the deficit has been off by billions and billions of dollars. As a matter of
fact, over four years, they've missed the mark by nearly $600 billion. We were
told we would have a balanced budget in 1983. It was $200 billion deficit
instead. And now we have a major question facing the American people as to
whether we'll deal with this deficit and get it down for the sake of a healthy
recovery. Virtually every economic analysis that I've heard of, including the
distinguished Congressional Budget Office, which is respected by, I think,
almost everyone, says that even with historically high levels of economic
growth, we will suffer a $263 billion deficit. In other words, it doesn't
converge, as the President suggests. It gets larger, even with growth.

Foreign Trade ProblemsWhat that means is that we will continue to have
devastating problems with foreign trade. This is the worst trade year in
American history, by far. Our rural and farm friends will have continued
devastation. Real interest rates, the real cost of interest, will remain very
very high. And many economists are predicting that we're moving into a period of
very slow growth because the economy is tapering off and may be a recession.

I get it down to a level below 2 percent of gross national product with a policy
that's fair. I've stood up and told the American people that I think it's a real
problem, that it can destroy long-term economic growth, and I've told you what I
think should be done.

I think this is a test of leadership and I think the American people know the
difference.

Q: Mr. Mondale, one other way to attack the deficit is further reductions in
spending. The President has submitted a number of proposals to Congress to do
just that, and in many instances the House, controlled by the Democrats, has
opposed them.

Isn't it one aspect of leadership for prominent Democrats such as yourself to
encourage responsible reductions in spending and thereby reduce the deficit?

MONDALE: Absolutely. And I have proposed over $100 billion in cuts in Federal
spending over four years. But I am not going to cut it out of Social Security
and Medicare and student assistance and things that people need.

These people depend upon all of us for the little security that they have. And
I'm not going to do it that way. The rate of defense spending increase can be
slowed; certainly we can find a coffee pot that costs something less than
$7,000.

And there are other ways of squeezing this budget without constantly picking on
our senior citizens and the most vulnerable in American life.

And that's why the Congress, including the Republicans, have not gone along with
the President's recommendations.




MODERATOR: I would like to ask the audience please to refrain from applauding
either side. It just takes away from the time for your candidates. And now it is
time for the rebuttal, Mr. President: one minute of rebuttal.

REAGAN: Yes, I don't believe that Mr. Mondale has a plan for balancing the
budget. He has a plan for raising taxes. As a matter of fact, the biggest single
tax increase in the nation's history took place in 1977, and for the five years
previous to our taking office, taxes doubled in the United States and the
budget's increased $318 billion, so there is no ratio between taxing and
balancing a budget. Whether you borrow the money or whether you simply tax it
away from the people, you're taking the same amount of money out of the private
sector unless and until you bring down Government's share of what it is taking.

With regard to Social Security I hope there'll be more time than just this win
it - minute - to mention that, but I will say this: A President should never say
never. But I'm going to violate that rule and say ''never.'' I will never stand
for a reduction of the Social Security benefits to the people that are now
getting them.



MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale.

MONDALE: That's exactly the commitment that was made to the American people in
1980. He would never reduce benefits. And of course what happens right after the
election is they proposed to cut Social Security benefits by 25 percent,
reducing the adjustment for inflation, cutting out minimum benefits for the
poorest on Social Security, removing educational benefits for dependents whose
widows were trying, with widows trying to get them through college. Everybody
remembers that. People know what happened. There's a difference. I have fought
for Social Security and Medicare and for things to help people who are
vulnerable all my life, and I will do it as President of the United States.

MODERATOR: Thank you very much.


Leadership Qualities




MODERATOR: Thank you very much. We will now begin with segment No. 2 with my
colleague, Diane Sawyer. Miss Sawyer.

Q. Mr. President, Mr. Mondale. The public opinion polls do suggest that the
American people are most concerned about the personal leadership characteristics
of the two candidates, and each of you has questioned the other's leadership
ability. Mr. President, you have said that Mr. Mondale's leadership would take
the country down the path of defeatism and despair and Vice President Bush has
called him whining and hoping for bad news. And Mr. Mondale, you have said that
President Reagan offers showmanship, not leadership, that he has not mastered
what he must know to command his Government. I'd like to ask each of you to
substantiate your claims. Mr. Mondale first. Give us specifics to support your
claim that President Reagan is a showman, not a leader, has not mastered what he
must know to be President after four years, and then second, tell us what
personal leadership characteristics you have that he does not.

MONDALE: Well first of all, I think the first answer this evening suggests
exactly what I'm saying. There is no question that we face this massive deficit.
And almost everybody agrees unless we get it down the chances for long-term
healthy growth are nil. And it's also unfair to dump these tremendous bills on
our children. The President says it will disappear overnight because of some
reason; no one else believes that's the case. I do and I'm standing up to the
issue with an answer that's fair. I think that's what leadership is all about.

There's a difference between being a quarterback and a cheerleader and when
there's a real problem, a President must confront it. What I was referring to,
of course, in the comment that you referred to, was the situation in Lebanon.
Now, for three occasions, one after another, our Embassies were assaulted in the
same way by a truck with demolition. The first time, and I did not criticize the
President because these things can happen once, and sometimes twice, the second
time the barracks in Lebanon were assaulted as we all remember. There was two or
three commission reports, recommendations by the C.I.A., the State Department
and the others, and the third time there was even a warning from the terrorists
themselves.

Now I believe that a President must command that White House and those who work
for him. It's the toughest job on earth. And you must master the facts and
insist that things must be done, are done. I believe the way in which I will
approach the Presidency is what's needed. Because all my life that has been the
way in which I have sought to lead. And that's why in this campaign I am telling
you exactly what I want to do; I am answering your questions; I am trying to
provide leadership now before the election so that the American people can
participate in that decision.



Sending a Message

Q. You have said, Mr. Mondale, that the polls have given you lower ratings on
leadership than President Reagan because your message has failed to get through.
Given that you have been in public office for so many years, what accounts for
the failure of your message to get through?

MONDALE: Well, I think we're getting better all the time, and I think tonight,
as we contrast for the first time our different approach to government, to
values, to the leadership in this country, I think as this debate goes forward,
the American people will have, for the first time, a chance to weigh the two of
us against each other. And I think as a process, as a part of that process, what
I am trying to say will come across. And that is that we must lead, we must
command, we must direct, and a President must see it like it is. He must stand
for the values of decency that the American people stand for, and he must use
the power of the White House to try to control these nuclear weapons and lead
this world toward a safer world.


Q: Mr. President, the issue is leadership in personal terms. First, do you
think, as Vice President Bush said, that Mr. Mondale's campaign is one of
whining and hoping for bad news. And, second, what leadership characteristics do
you possess that Mr. Mondale does not?

REAGAN: Well, whether he does or not, let me suggest my own idea about the
leadership factor, and since you've asked it. And incidentally, I might say that
with regard to the 25 percent cuts of Social Security before I get to the answer
of your question the only 25 percent cut that I know of was accompanying that
huge 1977 tax increase was a cut of 25 percent in the benefits for every
American who was born after 1916.

Now, leadership. First of all, I think you must have some principles you believe
in. In mine, I happen to believe in the people and believe that the people are
supposed to be dominant in our society. That they, not government, are to have
control of their own affairs to the greatest extent possible with an orderly
society.

Now, having that, I think also that in leadership, well, I believe that you find
the people - positions such as I'm in - who have the talent and ability to do
the things that are needed in the various departments of government.

I don't believe that a leader should be spending his time in the Oval Office
deciding who's going to play tennis on the White House court. And you let those
people go with the guidelines of overall policy, and not looking over their
shoulder and nitpicking the manner in which they go at the job. You are
ultimately responsible, however, for that job.

But I also believe something else about that. I believe that - and when I became
Governor of California I started this and I continue it in this office - that
any issue that comes before me I have instructed Cabinet members and staff they
are not to bring up any of the political ramifications that might surround the
issue. I don't want to hear them. I want to hear only arguments as to whether it
is good or bad for the people. Is it morally right.

And on that basis, and that basis alone, we make a decision on every issue.

Now, with regard to my feeling about why I thought that his record bespoke his
possible taking us back to the same things that we knew under the previous
Administration, his record is that he spoke in praise of deficits several times.
Said they weren't to be abhorred. That as a matter of fact he at one time said
he wished the deficit could be doubled because they stimulate the economy and
help reduce unemployment.

Q. As a follow-up, let me draw in another specific if I could, a specific that
the Democrats have claimed about your campaign; that it is essentially based on
imagery. And one specific that they allege is that, for instance, that recently
you showed up at the opening ceremony of a Buffalo old age housing project when
in fact your policy was to cut Federal housing subsidies for the elderly, yet
you were there to have your picture taken with them.

REAGAN: Our policy was not to cut subsidies. We have believed in partnership and
that was an example of a partnership between not only local government and the
Federal Government but also between the private sector that built that
particular structure. And this is what we've been trying to do is involve the
Federal Government in such partnerships. We are today subsidizing housing for
more than 10 million people, and we're going to continue along that line. We
have no thought of throwing people out into the snow, whether because of age or
need. We have preserved the safety net for the people with true need in this
country and it has been pure demagoguery that we have in some way shut off all
the charitable programs or many of them for the people who have real need. The
safety net is there and we're taking care of more people than has ever been
taken care of before by any administration in this country.



MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale - an opportunity for you to rebut.

MONDALE: Well, I guess I'm reminded a little bit of what Will Rogers once said
about Hoover. He said it's not what he doesn't know that bothers me, it's what
he knows for sure just ain't so. The fact of it is, the fact of it is the
President's budget sought to cut Social Security by 25 percent. It's not an
opinion; it's a fact, and when the President was asked the other day, 'What do
you want to cut in the budget?' he said, 'Cut those things I asked for but
didn't get.' That's Social Security and Medicare.

The second fact is that the housing unit for senior citizens that the President
dedicated in Buffalo was only made possible through a Federal assistance program
for senior citizens that the President's budget sought to terminate. So if he'd
had his way, there wouldn't have been any housing project there at all. This
Administration has taken a meat cleaver out in terms of Federal-assisted
housing, and the record is there. We have to see the facts before we can draw
conclusions.



REAGAN: Well, let me just respond with regard to Social Security.

When we took office we discovered that the program that the Carter- Mondale
Administration had said would solve the fiscal problems of Social Security for
the next 50 years, wouldn't solve them for 5. Social Security was due to go
bankrupt before 1983. Any proposals that I made at that time were at the request
of the chairman, a Democrat, of one of the leading committees, who said we have
to do something before the program goes broke and the checks bounce.

And so we made a proposal. And then in 1982 they used that proposal in a
demagogic fashion for the 1982 campaign. And three days after the election in
1982 they came to us and said, Social Security, we know, is broke. Indeed, we
had to borrow $17 billion to pay the checks.

And then I asked for a bipartisan commission, which I'd asked for from the
beginning, to sit down and work out a solution, and so the whole matter of what
to do with Social Security has been resolved by bipartisan legislation and it is
on a sound basis now for as far as you can see into the next century.


Impact of Religion



MODERATOR: We begin segment No. 3 with Fred Barnes.

Q. Mr. President, would you describe your religious beliefs, noting particularly
whether you consider yourself a born-again Christian and explain how these
beliefs affect your Presidential decisions?

REAGAN: Well, I was raised to have a faith and a belief and have been a member
of a church since I was a small boy. In our particular church we didn't use that
term born- again so I don't know whether I would fit that - that particular
term.

But I have, thanks to my mother, God rest her soul, the firmest possible belief
and faith in God. And I don't believe - I believe, I should say, as Lincoln once
said, that I could not - I would be the most stupid man in the world if I
thought I could confront the duties of the office I hold if I could not turn to
someone who was stronger and greater than all others; and I do resort to prayer.

At the same time, however, I have not believed that prayer could be introduced
into an election or be a part of a political campaign, or religion a part of
that campaign. As a matter of fact I think religion became a part of this
campaign when Mr. Mondale's running mate said I wasn't a good Christian. So, it
does play a part in my life. I have no hesitancy in saying so. And as I say, I
don't believe that I could carry on unless I had a belief in a higher authority
and a belief that prayers are answered

Q. Given those beliefs, Mr. President, why don't you attend services regularly,
either by going to church or by inviting a minister to the White House, as
President Nixon used to do, or someone to Camp David, as President Carter used
to do.

REAGAN: The answer to your question is very simple - about why I don't go to
church. I start - I have gone to church regularly all my life. And I started to
here in Washington. And now, in the position I hold and in the world in which we
live, where embassies do get blown up in Beirut, we're supposed to talk about
that in the - on the debate the 21st, I understand.

But I pose a threat to several hundred people if I go to church. I know the
threats that are made against me. We all know the possibility of terrorism. We
have seen the barricades that have had to built around the White House.

And therefore, I don't feel - and my minister knows this and supports me in this
position. I don't feel that I have a right to go to church, knowing that my
being there could cause something of the kind that we have seen in other places;
in Beirut, for example.

And I miss going to church but I think the Lord understands.



MODERATOR: May I ask the audience please to refrain from applause. Can we have
your second question?

Q. Mr. Mondale, would you describe your religious beliefs and mention whether
you consider yourself a born-again Christian and explain how those beliefs would
affect your decisions as President.

MONDALE: First of all, I accept President Reagan's affirmation of faith. I'm
sure that we all accept and admire his commitment to his faith and we are
strengthened all of us by that fact.

I am a son of a Methodist minister, my wife is the daughter of a Presbyterian
minister, and I don't know if I've been born again, but I know I was born into a
Christian family, and I believe I've sung at more weddings and more funerals
than anybody ever to seek the Presidency. Whether that helps or not I don't
know. I have a deep religious faith, our family does, it is fundamental, it's
probably the reason I'm in politics. I think our faith tells us, instructs us
about the moral life that we should lead, and I think we're all together on
that.

Political Use of Religion

What bothers me is this growing tendency to try to use one's own personal
interpretation of faith politically, to question others' faith, and to try to
use instrumentalities of government to impose those views on others. All history
tells us that that's a mistake.

When the Republican platform says that from here on out we're going to have a
religious test for judges before they're selected for the Federal court and then
Jerry Falwell announces that that means they get at least two Justices of the
Supreme Court, I think that's an abuse of faith in our country. This nation is
the most religious nation on earth. More people go to church and synagogues than
any other nation on earth, and it's because we kept the politicians and the
state out of the personal exercise of our faith. That's why faith in the United
States is pure and unpolluted by the intervention of politicians, and I think if
we want to continue as I do to have a religious nation, let's keep that line and
never cross it.



MODERATOR: Thank you. Mr. Barnes, a question? We have time for rebuttal now.

Q. I think I have a follow-up.

MODERATOR: Yes, I asked you if you did. I'm sorry I thought you waived it.

Q. Yes. Mr. Mondale, you've complained just now about Jerry Falwell, and you've
complained other times about other fundamentalists in politics. Correct me if
I'm wrong, but I don't recall your ever complaining about ministers who are
involved in the civil rights movement, in the anti- Vietnam War demonstrations
or about black preachers who've been so involved in American politics. Is it
only conservative ministers that you object to?

MONDALE: No. What I object to - what I object to - what I object to is someone
seeking to use his faith to question the faith of another or to use that faith
and seek to use the power of Government to impose it on others. A minister who
is in civil rights or in the conservative movement because he believes his faith
instructs him to do that, I admire. The fact that the faith speaks to us and
that we are moral people hopefully I accept and rejoice in. It's when you try to
use that to undermine the integrity of private political - or private religious
faith and the use of the state is where for the most personal decisions in
American life - that's where I draw the line.



MODERATOR: Thank you. Now, Mr. President. Rebuttal.

REAGAN: Yes, it's very difficult to rebut, because I find myself in so much
agreement with Mr. Mondale. I, too, want that wall that is in the Constitution,
separation of church and state, to remain there. The only attacks I have made
are on people who apparently would break away at that wall from the Government
side using the Government, using the power of the courts and so forth, to hinder
that part of the Constitution that says the Government shall not only not
establish a religion, it shall not inhibit the practice of religion, and they
have been using these things to have Government, through court orders, inhibit
the practice of religion.

A child wants to say grace in a school cafeteria, and a court rules that they
can't do it. And because it's school property.

These are the types of things that I think have been happening in a kind of a
secular way that have been erroding that separation, and I am opposed to that.
With regard to a platform in the Supreme Court, I can only say one thing about
that. I don't - I have appointed one member of the Supreme Court, Sandra Day
O'Connor, I'll stand on my record on that, and if I have the opportunity to
appoint any more. I'll do it in the same manner that I did in selecting her.




MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale, your rebuttal, please.

MONDALE: The platform to which the President refers in fact calls for a
religious test in the selection of judges. And Jerry Falwell says that means we
get two or three judges. And it would involve a religious test for the first
time in American life.

Let's take the example that the President cites. I believe in prayer. My family
prays. We've never had any difficulty finding time to pray. But do we want a
constitutional amendment adopted of the kind proposed by the President that gets
the local politicians into the business of selecting prayers that our children
must either recite in school or be embarrassed and ask to excuse themselves? Who
would write the prayer? What would it say? How would it be resolved when those
disputes occurred?

It seems to me that a moment's reflection tells you why the United States Senate
turned that amendment down. Because it will undermine the practice of honest
faith in our country by politicizing it. We don't want that.

MODERATOR: Thank you Mr. Mondale.


Changing Electorate




MODERATOR: Thank you, Mr. Mondale. Time is up for this round; we go into the
second round of our questioning - begin again with Jim Wieghart. Jim.

Q. After that discussion, this may be like going from the sublime to the
ridiculous, but here goes: I have a political question for you, Mr. Mondale.
Polls indicate a massive change in the electorate, away from the coalition that
has long made the Democratic Party a majority. Blue- collar workers, young
professionals, their children and much of the middle class now regard themselves
as independents or Republican instead of Democrats. And the gap, the edge the
Democrats had in party registration, seems to be narrowing.

I'd like to ask you, Mr. Mondale, what is causing this? Is the Democratic Party
out of synch with the majority of Americans? And will it soon be replaced as the
majority party by the Republicans? What do you think needs to be done about as a
Democrat?

MONDALE: My answer is that this campaign isn't over yet. And when people vote, I
think you're going to see a very strong verdict by the American people that they
favor the approach that I'm talking about.

The American people want arms control; they don't want this arms race. And they
don't want this deadly new effort to bring weapons into the heavens. And they
want an American foreign policy that leads toward a safer world.

The American people see this debt, and they know it's got to come down. And if
it won't come down, the economy's going to slow down, maybe go into a recession.
They see this tremendous influx and swamping of cheap foreign imports in this
country that has cost over three million jobs, given farmers the worst year in
American history.

And they know this debt must come down, as well, because it's unfair to our
children.



Protecting the Environment

The American people want this environment protected. They know that these toxic
waste dumps should have been cleaned up a long time ago. And they know that
people's lives and health are being risked because we've had an Administration
that has been totally insensitive to the law and the demands for the protection
of the environment.

The American people want their children educated; they want to get our edge back
in science, and they want a policy, headed by the President, that helps close
this gap that's widening between the United States and Europe and Japan.

The American people want to keep opening doors. They want those civil rights
laws enforced; they want the equal rights amendment ratified; they want equal
pay for comparable effort for women. And they want it because they've understood
from the beginning that when we open doors, we're all stronger. Just as we were
at the Olympics.

I think as you make the case, the American people will increasingly come to our
cause.

Q. Mr. Mondale, isn't it possible that the American people have heard your
message and they are listening but they are rejecting it?

MONDALE: Well, tonight we had the first debate over the deficit. The President
says it will disappear automatically. I've said it's going to take some work. I
think the American people will draw their own conclusions. Secondly, I've said
that I will not support the cuts in Social Security and Medicare and the rest
that the President's proposed. The President answers that it didn't happen or if
it did, it was resolved later in a commission. As the record develops I think
it's going to become increasingly clear that what I am saying and where I want
to take this country is exactly where the country wants to go, and the
comparison of approaches is such that I think will lead to further strength.


Q. Mr. President, you and your party are benefiting from what appears to be an
erosion of the old Democratic coalition, but you have not laid out a specific
agenda to take this shift beyond Nov. 6. What is your program for America for
the next decade, with some specificity?

REAGAN: Well, again, I am running on the record. I think sometimes Mr. Mondale's
running away from his, but I'm running on the record of what we have asked for,
will continue to try and get things that we didn't get in the program that has
already brought the rate of spending of Government down from 17 percent to 6.1
percent, a program of returning authority and autonomy to the local and state
governments that has been unjustly seized by the Federal Government and you
might find those words in the Democratic platform of some years ago. I know
because I was a Democrat at that time. And I left the party eventually because I
could no longer follow the turn in the Democratic leadership that took us down
an entirely different path, a path of centralizing authority in the Federal
Government, lacking trust in the American people.

I promised when we took office that we would reduce inflation. We have, to
one-third of what it was. I promised that we would reduce taxes. We did, 25
percent across the board. That barely held even with - if it did that much -
with the gigantic tax increase imposed in 1977. But at least it took that burden
away from them. I said that we would create jobs for our people, and we did, six
million in the last 20 or 21 months. I said that we would become respected in
the world once again and that we would refurbish our national defense to the
place that we could deal on the world scene and then seek disarmaments,
reduction of arms, and hopefully an elimination of nuclear weapons. We have done
that.

All of the things that I said we would do, from inflation being down, interest
rates being down, unemployment falling - all of those things we have done. And I
think this is something the American people see. I think they also know that we
have.

We had a commission that came in a year ago with a recommendation on education,
on excellence in education, and today without the Federal Government being
involved other than passing on to them, the school districts, the words from
that commission, we find 35 states with task forces now dealing with their
educational problems, we find that schools are extending the curriculum to now
have forced teaching of mathematics and science and so forth. All of these
things have brought an improvement in the college entrance exams for the first
time in some 20 years. So I think that many Democrats are seeing the same thing
this Democrat saw. The leadership isn't taking us where we want to go.

Q. Mr. President, there's a - much of what you said affects the quality of life
of many Americans - their income, the way they live and so forth. But there's an
aspect to quality of life that lies beyond the private sector which has to do
with our neighborhoods, with our cities, our streets, our parks our environment.
In those areas I have a difficulty seeing what your program is and what you feel
the Federal responsibility is in these areas of the quality of life in the
public sector that affects everybody. And even enormous wealth by one individual
can't create the kind of environment that he might like.

REAGAN: There are tasks that Government legitimately should enforce and tasks
that Government performs well, and you've named some of them. Crime has come
down the last two years for the first time in many, many decades that it has
come down or, since we kept records, two consecutive years, and last year it
came down - the biggest drop in crime that we've had. I think that we've had
something to do with that, just as we have with the drug problem nationwide.

The environment, yes, I feel as strongly as anyone about the preservation of the
environment. When we took office we found that the national parks were so dirty
and contained so many hazards, lack of safety features that we stopped buying
additional parkland until we had rectified this with what was to be a five-year
program, but it's just about finished already - a billion dollars - and now
we're going back to budgeting for additional lands for our parks.

We have added millions of acres to the wilderness lands, to the game refuges. I
think that we're out in front of most, and I see that the red light is blinking
so I can't continue but I got more.




MODERATOR: Well, you'll have a chance when your rebuttal time comes up perhaps,
Mr. President. Mr. Mondale, now it's your turn for rebuttal.

MONDALE: The President says that when the Democratic Party made its turn he left
it. The year that he decided we had lost our way was the year that John F.
Kennedy was running against Richard Nixon. I was chairman of Minnesotans for
Kennedy. Reagan was chairman of a thing called Democrats for Nixon. Now maybe we
made a wrong turn with Kennedy, but I'll be proud of supporting him all of our
life - all of my life. And I'm very happy that John Kennedy was elected, because
John Kennedy looked at the future with courage, saw what needed to be done, and
understood his own Government.

The President just said that his Government is shrinking. It's not. It's now the
largest peacetime Government ever in terms of the take from the total economy
and instead of retreating, instead of being strong where we should be strong, he
wants to make it strong and intervene in the most private and personal questions
in American life. That's where Government should not be.




MODERATOR: Mr. President.

REAGAN: Before I campaigned as a Democrat for a Republican candidate for
President, I had already voted for Dwight Eisenhower to be President of the
United States so my change had come earlier than that. I hadn't gotten around to
re-registering as yet. I found that was rather difficult to do but I finally did
it.

There are some other things that have been said here, back - and you said that I
might be able to dredge them up. Mr. Mondale referred to the farmer's worst
year. The farmers are not the victims of anything this Administration has done.
The farmers were the victims of the double-digit inflation and the 21 1/2
percent interest rates of the Carter-Mondale Administration and the grain
embargo which destroyed our reliability nation-wide as a supplier.

All of these things are presently being rectified and I think that we are going
to salvage the farmers - as a matter of fact, the - there has been less than
one-quarter of 1 percent of foreclosures of the 270,000 loans from government
the farmers have.



Policy on Abortion

MODERATOR: Thank you, Mr. President. We'll now turn to Diane Sawyer for her
round of questions. Diane.

Q. I'd like to turn to an area that I think few people enjoy discussing. But
that we probably should tonight because the positions of the two candidates are
so clearly different and lead to very different policy consequences. And that is
abortion and right to life. I'm exploring for your personal views of abortion.
And specifically how you would want them applied as public policy.

First, Mr. President, do you consider abortion murder or a sin? And second, how
hard would you work, what kind of priority would you give in your second term
legislation to make abortion illegal? And specifically, would you make certain,
as your party platform urges, that Federal justices that you appoint be pro-
life?

REAGAN: I have believed that, in the appointment of judges, that all that was
specified in the party platform was that they have a, they respect the sanctity
of human life. Now that, I would want to see in any judge, and with regard to
any issue having to do with human life.

But with regard to abortion, and I have a feeling that this is, there's been
some reference, without naming it here in remarks of Mr. Mondale, tied to
injecting religion into government.

With me, abortion is not a problem of religion. It's a problem of the
Constitution. I believe that until and unless someone can establish that the
unborn child is not a living human being, then that child is already protected
by the Constitution, which guarantees life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness
to all of us.

And I think that this is - what we should concentrate on, is trying - I know
there was weeks and weeks of testimony before a Senate committee. There were
medical authorities, there were religious, there were clerics there, everyone
talking about this matter, of pro-life. And at the end of all of that, not one
shred of evidence was introduced that the unborn child was not alive. We have
seen premature births that- are now grown up happy people going around.

Also there is a strange dichotomy in this whole position about our court's
ruling that abortion is not the taking of a human life.

In California, some time ago, a man beat a woman so savagely that her unborn
child was born dead with a fractured skull. And the California state legislature
unanimously passed a law that was signed by the then Democratic Governor, signed
a law that said that any man who so abuses a pregnant woman that he causes the
death of her unborn child shall be charged with murder. Now isn't it strange
that that same woman could have taken the life of her unborn child and it was
abortion and not murder but if somebody else does it, that's murder. And it
recognizes, it used the term death of the unborn child.

So this has been my feeling about abortion, that we have a problem now to
determine. And all the evidence so far comes down on the side of the unborn
child being a living human being.


Q. A two-part follow-up. Do I take it from what you've said about the platform,
then, that you don't regard the language and don't regard in your own
appointments' abortion position a test of any kind for justices that it should
be? And also, if abortion is made illegal, how would you want it enforced? Who
would be the policing units that would investigate? And would you want the women
who have abortions to be prosecuted?

REAGAN: The laws regarding that always were state laws. It was only when the
Supreme Court handed down a decision that the Federal Government intervened in
what had always been a state policy. Our laws against murder are state laws. So
I would think this would be the point of enforcement on this.

I, as I say, I feel that we have a problem here to resolve, and no one has
approached it from that matter. It does not happen that the church I belong to
had that as part of its dogma; I know that some churches do.

Now, it is a sin if you're taking a human life. On the same time in our
Judeo-Christian tradition, we recognize the right of taking a human life in
self-defense. And therefore I've always believed that a mother, if medically it
is determined that her life is at risk if she goes through with the pregnancy,
she has a right then to take the life of even her own unborn child in defense of
her own.


Q. Mr. Mondale, to turn to you, do you consider abortion a murder or a sin? And
bridging from what President Reagan said, he has written that if society doesn't
know whether life does - human life - in fact does begin at conception, as long
as there is a doubt, that the unborn child should at least be given the benefit
of the doubt and that there should be protection for that unborn child.

MONDALE: This is one of the most emotional and difficult issues that could
possibly be debated. I think your questions, however, underscore the fact there
is probably no way that Government should, or could, answer this question in
every individual case and in the private lives of the American people.

The Constitutional Amendment proposed by President Reagan would make it a crime
for a woman to have an abortion if she had been raped or suffered from incest.

Is it really the view of the American people, however you feel on the question
of abortion, that Government ought to be reaching into your livingrooms and
making choices like this?

I think it cannot work, won't work and will lead to all kinds of cynical
evasions of the law. Those who can afford to have them will continue to have
them. The disadvantaged will go out in the back alley as they used to do.

I think these questions are inherently personal and moral. And every individual
instance is different. Every American should be aware of the seriousness of the
step but there are some things that Government can do and some things they
cannot do.

Now the example that the President cites has nothing to do with abortion.
Somebody went to a woman and nearly killed her. That's always been a serious
crime and always should be a serious crime. But how does that compare with the
problem of a woman who is raped? Do we really want those decisions made by
judges who've been picked because they will agree to find the person guilty? I
don't think so and I think it's going in exactly the wrong direction.

In America, on basic moral questions we have always let the people decide in
their own personal lives. We haven't felt so insecure that we've reached for the
club of state to have our point of view. It's been a good instinct and we're the
most religious people on earth.

One final point: President Reagan, as Governor of California, signed a bill
which is perhaps the most liberal pro-abortion bill of any state in the Union.


Q. But if I can get you back for a moment on my point which was the question of
when human life begins, a two-part follow-up. First of all, at what point do you
believe that human life begins in the growth of a fetus? And second of all, you
said that government shouldn't be involved in the decision, yet there are those
who would say that government is involved and the consequence of the involvement
was 1.5 million abortions in 1980. And how do you feel about that?

MONDALE: The basic decision of the Supreme Court is that each person has to make
this judgment in her own life, and that's the way it's been done. And it's a
personal and private moral judgment. I don't know the answer to when life
begins.

And it's not that simple either. You've got another life involved. And if it's
rape, how do you draw moral judgments on that? If it's incest, how do you draw
moral judgments on that? Does every woman in America have to present herself
before some judge picked by Jerry Falwell to clear her personal judgment? It
won't work.



MODERATOR: I'm sorry to do this but I really must talk to the audience. You're
all invited guests. I know I'm wasting time in talking to you but it really is
very unfair of you to applaud sometimes louder, less loud, and I ask you as
people who were invited here and polite people to refrain. We have our time now
for rebuttal. Mr. President.

REAGAN: Yes. But with regard to this being a personal choice, isn't that what a
murderer is insisting on? His or her right to kill someone because of whatever
fault they think justifies that. Now, I'm not capable and I don't think you are,
any of us, to make this determination that must be made with regard to human
life. I am simply saying that I believe that that's where the effort should be
directed to make that determination. I don't think that any of us should be
called upon here to stand and make a decision as to what other things might come
under the self-defense tradition. That, too, would have to be worked out then
when you once recognize that we're talking about a life. But in this great
society of ours wouldn't it make a lot more sense, in this gentle and kind
society, if we had a program that made it possible for when incidents come along
which someone feels they must do away with that unborn child, that instead we
make it available to the adoption, there are a million-and-a-half people out
there standing in line waiting to adopt children who can't have them any other
way.



MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale?

MONDALE: I agree with that, and that's why I was a principal sponsor of a
liberal adoption law so that more of these children could come to term so that
the young mothers were educated, so we found an option, an alternative. I'm all
for that. But the question is whether this other option proposed by the
President should be pursued, and I don't agree with it. Since I've got about 20
seconds, let me just say one thing.

The question of agriculture came up a minute ago, and that farm income is off 50
percent in the last three years, and every farmer knows it, and the effect of
these economic policies is like a massive grain embargo which has caused farm
exports to drop 20 percent. It's been a big failure. I opposed the grain embargo
in my Administration; I'm opposed to these policies as well.


Setting Tax Rates



MODERATOR: I'm sitting here like the great school teacher letting you both get
away with things. Because one did it, the other one did it. May I ask in the
future that the rebuttals stick to what the rebuttal is and also, foreign policy
will be the next debate. Stop dragging it in by its ear into this one. Now
having admonished you, I would like to say to the panel, you are allowed one
question and one follow-up. Would you try as best you could not to ask two and
three. I know it's something we all want to do, two or three questions as part
one, and two and three as part two. Having said that, Fred, it's yours.

Q. Thank you. Mr. Mondale, let me ask you about middle class Americans and the
taxes they pay. I'm talking about - not about the rich or the poor. I know your
views on their taxes. But about families earning $25,000 to $45,000 a year. Do
you think that those families are overtaxed or undertaxed by the Federal
Government.

MONDALE: In my opinion as we deal with this deficit, people from about $70,000 a
year on down have to be dealt with very, very carefully because they are the
ones who didn't get any relief the first time around. Under the 1981 tax bill
people making $200,000 a year got $60,000 in tax relief over three years while
people making $30,000 a year, all taxes considered, got no relief at all or
their taxes actually went up. That's why my proposal protects everybody from
$25,000 a year or less against any tax increases and treats those $70,000 and
under in a way that is more beneficial than the way the President proposes with
a sales tax or a flat tax.

Bush's Tax Returns

What does this mean in real life? Well, the other day Vice President Bush
disclosed his tax returns to the American people. He's one of the wealthiest
Americans and he's our Vice President. In 1981 I think he paid about 40 percent
in taxes. In 1983 as a result of these tax preferences he paid a little over 12
percent, 12.8 percent in taxes. That meant that he paid a lower percent in taxes
than the janitor who cleaned up his office or the chauffeur who drives him to
work.

I believe we need some fairness, and that's why I propose what I think is a fair
and responsible proposal that helps protect these people who've already gotten
no relief or actually got a tax increase.


Q. It sounds as if you were saying you think a group of taxpayers making $25,000
to $45,000 a year is already overtaxed, yet your tax proposal would increase
their taxes. I think your agent said those earning about $25 to $35,000, their
tax rate would go up and their tax bill would go up $100, and from $35,000 to
$45,000 more than that, several hundred dollars. Would n't that stifle their
incentive to work and invest and so on, and also hurt the recovery?

MONDALE: The first thing is everybody $25,000 or under would have no tax
increase. Mr. Reagan after the election is going to have to propose a tax
increase. And you will have to compare what he proposes, and his Secretary of
the Treasury said he's studying a sales tax or a value-added tax; they're the
same thing to hit middle and moderate income Americans and leave wealthy
Americans largely untouched. Up until about $70,000, as you go up the ladder, my
proposals will be far more beneficial. As soon as we get the economy on a sound
ground, as well, I would like to see the total repeal of indexing. I don't think
we can do that for a few years but at some point we want to do that as well.

Q. Mr. President, let me try this on you. Do you think middle-income Americans
are overtaxed or undertaxed?

REAGAN: You know, I wasn't going to say this at all, but I can't help it: There
you go again. I don't have a plan to tax or increase taxes; I'm not going to
increase taxes. I can understand why you are, Mr. Mondale, because as a Senator
you voted 16 times to increase taxes. Now, I believe that our problem has not
been that anybody in our country is undertaxed, it's that Government is overfed.
And I think that most of our people - this is why we had a 25 percent tax cut
across the board which maintained the same progressivity of our tax structure in
the - the brackets on up.

And as a matter of fact, it just so happens that in the quirks of administering
these taxes, those above $50,000 actually did not get quite as big a tax cut
percentage-wise, as did those from $50,000 down. From $50,000 down those people
paid two- thirds of the taxes and those people got two-thirds of the tax cut.

Now the Social Security tax of '77 - this, indeed, was a tax that hit people in
the lower brackets the hardest. It had two features: it had several tax
increases phased in over a period of time; there are two more yet to come
between now and 1989. At the same time, every year it increased the amount of
money - virtually every year, there may have been one or two that we're skipping
there - that was subject to that tax. Today it is up to about $38,000 of
earnings that is subject to the payroll tax for Social Security. And that tax,
there are no deductions, so a person making anywhere from $10, $15, $20, they're
paying that tax on the full gross earnings that they have after they have
already paid an income tax on that same amount of money.

Now I don't think that to try and say that we were taxing the rich and not the
other way around, it just doesn't work out that way. The system is still where
it was with regard to the progressivity, as I've said, and that has not been
changed. But if you take it in numbers of dollars, instead of percentage, yes
you can say, well that person got 10 times as much as this other person. Yes,
but he paid 10 times as much also. But if you take it in percentages then you
find out that it is fair and equitable across the board.

Q. I thought I caught, Mr. President, a glimmer of a stronger statement there in
your answer than you've made before. I think the operative position you had
before was that you would only raise taxes in a second term as a last resort,
and I thought you said flatly that ''I'm not going to raise taxes.'' Is that
what you meant to say, that you will not - that you will flatly not raise taxes
in your second term as President?

REAGAN: Yes, I had used - last resort would always be with me. If you got the
Government down to the lowest level that you yourself could say it could not go
any lower and still perform the services for the people. And if the recovery was
so complete that you knew you were getting the ultimate amount of revenues that
you could get through that growth, and there was still some slight difference
there between those two lines, then I had said once that yes, you would have to
then look to see if taxes should not be adjusted. I don't foresee those things
happening. So I say with great confidence, I'm not going to - I'm not going to
go for a tax.

With regard to assailing Mr. Bush about his tax problems and the difference from
the tax he once paid and then the later tax he paid, I think if you looked at
the deductions, there were great legal expenses in there. It had to do possibly
with the sale of his home and they had to do with his setting up of a blind
trust. All of those are legally deductions - the deductible in computing your
tax. And it was a one-year thing with him.



MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale, here we go again; this time for rebuttal.

MONDALE: Well, first of all, I gave him the benefit of the doubt on the House
deal. I'm just talking about the 12.8 percent that he paid - and that's what's
happening all over this country with wealthy Americans. They've got so many
loopholes, they don't have to pay much in taxes.

Now, Mr. President, you said: ''There you go again.'' Right. Remember the last
time you said that?

REAGAN: Um hmm.

MONDALE: You said it when President Carter said that you were going cut
Medicare. And you said: ''Oh, no, there you go again, Mr. President.'' And what
did you do right after the election? You went out and tried to cut $20 billion
out of Medicare.

And so when you say, ''There you go again,'' people remember this, you know. And
people will remember that you signed the biggest tax increase in the history of
California, and the biggest tax increase in the history of the United States.

And what are you going to do? You've got $260 billion deficit. You can't wash it
away. You won't slow defense spending; you refuse to do that.

MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale, I'm afraid your time is up.

MONDALE: Sorry.

MODERATOR: Mr. President.

REAGAN: Yes. With regard to Medicare, no. But it's time for us to say that
Medicare is in pretty much the same condition that Social Security was, and
something is going to have to be done in the next several years to make it
fiscally sound.

And, no, I never proposed any $20 billion should come out of Medicare. I have
proposed that the program - we must treat with that particular problem.

And maybe part of that problem is because during the four years of the
Carter-Mondale Administration, medical costs in this country went up 87 percent.


Relief for the Poor



MODERATOR: We can't keep going back for other rebuttals. There'll be time later.
We now go to our final round. The way things stand now we have time for only two
sets of questions and by lot it will Jim and Diane and we'll start with Jim.

Q. Mr. President, the economic recovery is real but uneven. The Census Bureau
just a month ago reported that there are more people living under poverty now -
a million more people - than when you took office. There have been a number of
studies, including studies by the Urban Institute and other non-political
organizations, that say that the impact of the tax and budget cuts in your
economic policies have impacted severely on certain classes of Americans -
working mothers, head of households, minority groups, elderly poor. In fact,
they're saying the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer under
your policies. What relief can you offer to the working poor, to the minorities
and to the women heads of households who have borne the brunt of these economic
programs. What can you offer them in the future in your next term?

REAGAN: Some of those facts and figures just don't stand up. Yes, there has been
an increase in poverty but it is a lower rate of increase than it was in the
preceding years before we got here. It has begun to decline, but it is still
going up. On the other hand, women heads of household, single women, heads of
household, have for the first time - there's been a turn down in the rate of
poverty for them. We have found also in our studies that in this increase in
poverty it all had to do with their private earnings. It had nothing to do with
the transfer payments from government, by way of many programs. We are spending
now 37 percent more on food for the hungry in all the various types of programs
than was spent in 1980. We're spending a third more on all the programs of human
service. We have more people receiving food stamps than were ever receiving them
before - 2,300,000 more are receiving them even though we took 850,000 off the
food stamp rolls because they were making an income that was above anything that
warranted their fellow citizens having to support them. We found people making
185 percent of the poverty level were getting Government benefits. We have set a
line at 130 percent so that we can direct that aid down to the truly needy.

Sometime ago Mr. Mondale said something about education and college students and
help of that kind - half, one out of two of full-time college students in the
United States are receiving some form of Federal aid, but there again we found
people that there were - under the previous Administration - families that had
no limit to income were still eligible for low-interest college loans. We didn't
think that was right. And so we have set a standard that those loans and those
grants are directed to the people who otherwise could not go to college, their
family incomes were so low.

So there are a host of other figures that reveal that the grant programs are
greater than they have ever been, taking care of more people than they ever have
- 7.7 million elderly citizens who were living in the lowest 20 percent of
earnings, 7.7 million have moved up into another bracket since our
Administration took over, leaving only 5 million of the elderly in that bracket
when there had been more than 13 million.

Q. Mr. President, in a visit to Texas, in Brownsville, I believe it was, in the
Rio Grande Valley, you did observe that the economic recovery was uneven. In
that particular area of Texas unemployment was over 14 percent whereas statewide
it was the lowest in the country, I believe 5.6 percent. And you made the
comment that, however, that man does not live by bread alone. What did you mean
by that comment and, if I interpret it correctly, it would be a comment more
addressed to the affluent who, who obviously can look beyond just the bread they
need to sustain them with their wherewithal.

REAGAN: That had nothing to do with the other thing of talking about their needs
or anything. I remember distinctly I was segueing into another subject. I was
talking about the things that have been accomplished and that was referring to
the revival of patriotism and optimism, the new spirit that we're finding all
over America. And it is a wonderful thing to see when you get out there among
the people. So that was the only place that that was used.

I did avoid, I'm afraid, in my previous answer also, the idea of uneven, yes,
there is no way that the recovery is, even across the country, just as in the
depths of the recession there were some parts of the country that were worse off
but some that didn't even feel the pain of the recession.

We're not going to rest, and not going to be happy, until every person in this
country who wants a job can have one, until the recovery is complete across the
country.

Q. Mr. Mondale, as you can gather from the question of the President the
celebrated war on poverty obviously didn't end the problem of poverty, although
it may have dented it. The

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Walter F. Mondale and President Reagan during debate.; Photo
of The Kentucky Center for the Arts where debate took place.; Photo of members
of the audience arriving.; Photo of the Mondales and the Reagans joining onstage
after debate.

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 8, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE CANDIDATES DEBATE;
TRANSCRIPT OF LOUISVILLE DEBATE BETWEEN REAGAN AND MONDALE

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 14469 words


Participants in the Debate The following people participated in last night's
Presidential debate in Louisville:

CANDIDATES: President Reagan, Republican, and Walter F. Mondale, Democrat.

MODERATOR: Barbara Walters, correspondent, ABC News.

PANELISTS: Diane Sawyer, correspondent, CBS News; Fred Barnes, Washington
correspondent, The Baltimore Sun, and James G. Wieghart, political
correspondent, Scripps-Howard Newspapers. Following is a transcript of the
televised debate between President Reagan and Walter F. Mondale sponsored by the
League of Women Voters in Louisville last night, as recorded by The New York
Times through the facilities of CBS News:

DOROTHY RIDINGS: Good evening from the Kentucky Center for the Arts in
Louisville, Ky. I'm Dorothy Ridings, president of the League of Women Voters,
the sponsor of tonight's first Presidential debate between Republican Ronald
Reagan and Democrat Walter Mondale. Tonight's debate marks the third consecutive
Presidential election in which the league is presenting the candidates for the
nation's highest office in face-to-face debate. Our panelists are James
Wieghart, national political correspondent for Scripps-Howard News Service;
Diane Sawyer, correspondent for the CBS program ''60 Minutes,'' and Fred Barnes,
national political correspondent for The Baltimore Sun. Barbara Walters of ABC
News, who is appearing in her fourth Presidential debate is our moderator.
Barbara:

MODERATOR: A few words as we begin tonight's debate, about the format. The
position of the candidates, that is, who answers questions first, and who gives
the last statement was determined by a toss of the coin between the two
candidates. Mr. Mondale won. And that means that he chose to give the final
closing statement. It means, too, that the President will answer the first
question first. I hope that's clear. If it isn't, it will become clear as the
debate goes on. Further, the candidates will be addressed as they each wanted
and will therefore be called Mr. President and Mr. Mondale. Since there will
also be a second debate between the two Presidential candidates tonight will
focus primarily on the economy and other domestic issues. The debate itself is
built around questions from the panel. In each of its segments a reporter will
ask the candidates the same general question. Then - and this is important -
each candidate will have the chance to rebut what the other has said. In the
final segment of the debate will be the closing segment and the candidates will
each have four minutes for their closing statement. And as I have said, Mr.
Mondale will be the last person on the program to speak. And now I would like to
add a personal note, if I may. As Dorothy Riding's pointed out, I have been
involved now in four Presidential debates, either as a moderator or as a
panelist. In the past there was no problem in selecting panelists. Tonight,
however, there were to have been four panelists participating in this debate.
The candidates were given a list of almost 100 qualified journalists from all
the media and could agree on only these three fine journalists. As moderator and
on behalf of my fellow journalists I very much regret as does the League of
Women Voters that this situation has occurred. And now let us begin the debate
with the first question from James Wieghart. Mr. Wieghart.

DEFICITS AND THE BUDGET

Q: Mr. President, in 1980, you promised the American people, in your campaign, a
balanced budget by 1983. We've now had more and bigger deficits in the four
years you've been in office. Mr. President, do you have a secret plan to balance
the budget some time in the second term, and if so, would you lay out that plan
for us tonight?

REAGAN: I have a plan. Not a secret plan. As a matter of fact, it is the
economic recovery program that we presented when I took office in 1981. It is
true that earlier, working with some very prominent economists, I had come up,
during the campaign, with an economic program that I thought could rectify the
great problems confronting us: the double-digit inflation, the high tax rates
that I think were hurting the economy, the stagflation that we were undergoing.
Before even the Election Day, something that none of those economists had even
predicted had happened, that the economy was so worsened that I was openly
saying that what we had thought the basis of our plan could have brought a
balanced budget; that was no longer possible. So the plan that we have had and
that we're following, is a plan that is based on growth in the economy, recovery
without inflation, and reducing the share of the, that the Government is taking
from the gross national product, which has become a drag on the economy. Already
we have a recovery that has been going on for about 21 months, to the point that
we can now call it an expansion. Under that, this year, we have seen a $21
billion reduction in the deficit from last year, based mainly on the increased
revenues the government is getting without raising tax rates.

VALUE OF TAX CUT SEEN Our tax cut, we think, was very instrumental in bringing
about this economic recovery. We have reduced inflation to about a third of what
it was. The interest rates have come down about 9 or 10 points, and we think
must come down further. In the last 21 months, more than six million people have
gotten jobs. There have been created new jobs for those people to where there
are now 105 million civilians working where there were only 99 million before,
107 if you count the military. So we believe that as we continue to reduce the
level of Government spending, the increase, rate of increase in Government
spending, which has come down from 17 to 6 percent, and at the same time as the
growth in the economy increases the revenues the Government gets without raising
taxes, those two lines will meet. And when they meet, that is a balanced budget.


CLIMBING DEFICIT PROJECTED

Q. Mr. President, the Congressional Budget Office has some bad news.  The lines
aren't about to meet according to their projection; they project that the budget
deficit will continue to climb. In the year 1989 they project a budget deficit
of $273 billion. In view of that and in view of the economic recovery we are now
enjoying, would it make sense to propose a tax increase or take some other
fiscal measures to reduce that deficit now when times are relatively good?

REAGAN: The deficit is a result, it is a result of excessive Government
spending. I do not, and very frankly, take seriously the Congressional Budget
Office projections because they have been wrong on virtually all of them,
including the fact that our recovery wasn't going to take place to begin with.
But it has taken place. But as I said we have the rate of increase in Government
spending down to 6 percent. If the rate of increase in Government spending can
be held to 5 percent - we're not far from there - by 1989 that would have
reduced the budget deficits down to a $30 billion or $40 billion level. At the
same time if we can have a 4 percent recovery continue through that same period
of time, that will mean without an increase in tax rates, that will mean $400
billion more in Government revenues. And so I think that the lines can meet.
Actually, in constant dollars, in the domestic side of the budget there has been
no spending increase in the four years that we have been here. Q: Mr. Mondale,
the Carter-Mondale Administration didn't come close to balancing the budget in
its four years in office either, despite the fact that President Carter did
promise a balanced budget during his term. You have proposed a plan combining
tax increases and budgetary cuts and other changes in the administration of the
Government that would reduce the projected budget deficit by two-thirds to
approximately $87 billion in 1989. That still is an enormous deficit that we'll
be running for these four years. What other steps do you think should be taken
to reduce this deficit and position the country for economic growth?

MONDALE: One of the key tests of leadership is whether one sees clearly the
nature of the problem confronted by our nation. And perhaps the dominant
domestic issue of our times is what do we do about these enormous deficits.
Respect for PresidentI respect the President. I respect the Presidency and I
think he knows that. But the fact of it is every estimate by this Administration
about the size of the deficit has been off by billions and billions of dollars.
As a matter of fact, over four years, they've missed the mark by nearly $600
billion. We were told we would have a balanced budget in 1983. It was $200
billion deficit instead. And now we have a major question facing the American
people as to whether we'll deal with this deficit and get it down for the sake
of a healthy recovery. Virtually every economic analysis that I've heard of,
including the distinguished Congressional Budget Office, which is respected by,
I think, almost everyone, says that even with historically high levels of
economic growth, we will suffer a $263 billion deficit. In other words, it
doesn't converge, as the President suggests. It gets larger, even with growth.

FOREIGN TRADE PROBLEMS

What that means is that we will continue to have devastating problems with
foreign trade. This is the worst trade year in American history, by far. Our
rural and farm friends will have continued devastation.  Real interest rates,
the real cost of interest, will remain very very high. And many economists are
predicting that we're moving into a period of very slow growth because the
economy is tapering off and may be a recession. I get it down to a level below 2
percent of gross national product with a policy that's fair. I've stood up and
told the American people that I think it's a real problem, that it can destroy
long-term economic growth, and I've told you what I think should be done. I
think this is a test of leadership and I think the American people know the
difference. Q: Mr. Mondale, one other way to attack the deficit is further
reductions in spending. The President has submitted a number of proposals to
Congress to do just that, and in many instances the House, controlled by the
Democrats, has opposed them. Isn't it one aspect of leadership for prominent
Democrats such as yourself to encourage responsible reductions in spending and
thereby reduce the deficit?

MONDALE: Absolutely. And I have proposed over $100 billion in cuts in Federal
spending over four years. But I am not going to cut it out of Social Security
and Medicare and student assistance and things that people need. These people
depend upon all of us for the little security that they have. And I'm not going
to do it that way. The rate of defense spending increase can be slowed;
certainly we can find a coffee pot that costs something less than $7,000. And
there are other ways of squeezing this budget without constantly picking on our
senior citizens and the most vulnerable in American life. And that's why the
Congress, including the Republicans, have not gone along with the President's
recommendations.

MODERATOR: I would like to ask the audience please to refrain from applauding
either side. It just takes away from the time for your candidates. And now it is
time for the rebuttal, Mr. President: one minute of rebuttal.  REAGAN: Yes, I
don't believe that Mr. Mondale has a plan for balancing the budget. He has a
plan for raising taxes. As a matter of fact, the biggest single tax increase in
the nation's history took place in 1977, and for the five years previous to our
taking office, taxes doubled in the United States and the budget's increased
$318 billion, so there is no ratio between taxing and balancing a budget.
Whether you borrow the money or whether you simply tax it away from the people,
you're taking the same amount of money out of the private sector unless and
until you bring down Government's share of what it is taking. With regard to
Social Security I hope there'll be more time than just this win it - minute - to
mention that, but I will say this: A President should never say never. But I'm
going to violate that rule and say ''never.'' I will never stand for a reduction
of the Social Security benefits to the people that are now getting them.

MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale.

MONDALE: That's exactly the commitment that was made to the American people in
1980. He would never reduce benefits. And of course what happens right after the
election is they proposed to cut Social Security benefits by 25 percent,
reducing the adjustment for inflation, cutting out minimum benefits for the
poorest on Social Security, removing educational benefits for dependents whose
widows were trying, with widows trying to get them through college. Everybody
remembers that. People know what happened. There's a difference. I have fought
for Social Security and Medicare and for things to help people who are
vulnerable all my life, and I will do it as President of the United States.

MODERATOR: Thank you very much.

LEADERSHIP QUALITIES MODERATOR: Thank you very much. We will now begin with
segment No.  2 with my colleague, Diane Sawyer. Miss Sawyer. Q. Mr. President,
Mr. Mondale. The public opinion polls do suggest that the American people are
most concerned about the personal leadership characteristics of the two
candidates, and each of you has questioned the other's leadership ability. Mr.
President, you have said that Mr. Mondale's leadership would take the country
down the path of defeatism and despair and Vice President Bush has called him
whining and hoping for bad news. And Mr. Mondale, you have said that President
Reagan offers showmanship, not leadership, that he has not mastered what he must
know to command his Government. I'd like to ask each of you to substantiate your
claims. Mr. Mondale first. Give us specifics to support your claim that
President Reagan is a showman, not a leader, has not mastered what he must know
to be President after four years, and then second, tell us what personal
leadership characteristics you have that he does not.

MONDALE: Well first of all, I think the first answer this evening suggests
exactly what I'm saying. There is no question that we face this massive deficit.
And almost everybody agrees unless we get it down the chances for long-term
healthy growth are nil. And it's also unfair to dump these tremendous bills on
our children.  The President says it will disappear overnight because of some
reason; no one else believes that's the case. I do and I'm standing up to the
issue with an answer that's fair. I think that's what leadership is all about.
There's a difference between being a quarterback and a cheerleader and when
there's a real problem, a President must confront it. What I was referring to,
of course, in the comment that you referred to, was the situation in Lebanon.
Now, for three occasions, one after another, our Embassies were assaulted in the
same way by a truck with demolition. The first time, and I did not criticize the
President because these things can happen once, and sometimes twice, the second
time the barracks in Lebanon were assaulted as we all remember. There was two or
three commission reports, recommendations by the C.I.A., the State Department
and the others, and the third time there was even a warning from the terrorists
themselves. Now I believe that a President must command that White House and
those who work for him. It's the toughest job on earth. And you must master the
facts and insist that things must be done, are done. I believe the way in which
I will approach the Presidency is what's needed. Because all my life that has
been the way in which I have sought to lead. And that's why in this campaign I
am telling you exactly what I want to do; I am answering your questions; I am
trying to provide leadership now before the election so that the American people
can participate in that decision.

Sending a Message

Q. You have said, Mr. Mondale, that the polls have given you lower ratings on
leadership than President Reagan because your message has failed to get through.
Given that you have been in public office for so many years, what accounts for
the failure of your message to get through?

MONDALE: Well, I think we're getting better all the time, and I think tonight,
as we contrast for the first time our different approach to government, to
values, to the leadership in this country, I think as this debate goes forward,
the American people will have, for the first time, a chance to weigh the two of
us against each other. And I think as a process, as a part of that process, what
I am trying to say will come across. And that is that we must lead, we must
command, we must direct, and a President must see it like it is. He must stand
for the values of decency that the American people stand for, and he must use
the power of the White House to try to control these nuclear weapons and lead
this world toward a safer world.  Q: Mr. President, the issue is leadership in
personal terms. First, do you think, as Vice President Bush said, that Mr.
Mondale's campaign is one of whining and hoping for bad news. And, second, what
leadership characteristics do you possess that Mr. Mondale does not?

REAGAN: Well, whether he does or not, let me suggest my own idea about the
leadership factor, and since you've asked it. And incidentally, I might say that
with regard to the 25 percent cuts of Social Security before I get to the answer
of your question the only 25 percent cut that I know of was accompanying that
huge 1977 tax increase was a cut of 25 percent in the benefits for every
American who was born after 1916. Now, leadership. First of all, I think you
must have some principles you believe in. In mine, I happen to believe in the
people and believe that the people are supposed to be dominant in our society.
That they, not government, are to have control of their own affairs to the
greatest extent possible with an orderly society. Now, having that, I think also
that in leadership, well, I believe that you find the people - positions such as
I'm in - who have the talent and ability to do the things that are needed in the
various departments of government. I don't believe that a leader should be
spending his time in the Oval Office deciding who's going to play tennis on the
White House court. And you let those people go with the guidelines of overall
policy, and not looking over their shoulder and nitpicking the manner in which
they go at the job. You are ultimately responsible, however, for that job. But I
also believe something else about that. I believe that - and when I became
Governor of California I started this and I continue it in this office - that
any issue that comes before me I have instructed Cabinet members and staff they
are not to bring up any of the political ramifications that might surround the
issue. I don't want to hear them. I want to hear only arguments as to whether it
is good or bad for the people. Is it morally right. And on that basis, and that
basis alone, we make a decision on every issue. Now, with regard to my feeling
about why I thought that his record bespoke his possible taking us back to the
same things that we knew under the previous Administration, his record is that
he spoke in praise of deficits several times. Said they weren't to be abhorred.
That as a matter of fact he at one time said he wished the deficit could be
doubled because they stimulate the economy and help reduce unemployment.

Q. As a follow-up, let me draw in another specific if I could, a specific that
the Democrats have claimed about your campaign; that it is essentially based on
imagery. And one specific that they allege is that, for instance, that recently
you showed up at the opening ceremony of a Buffalo old age housing project when
in fact your policy was to cut Federal housing subsidies for the elderly, yet
you were there to have your picture taken with them.

REAGAN: Our policy was not to cut subsidies. We have believed in partnership and
that was an example of a partnership between not only local government and the
Federal Government but also between the private sector that built that
particular structure. And this is what we've been trying to do is involve the
Federal Government in such partnerships. We are today subsidizing housing for
more than 10 million people, and we're going to continue along that line. We
have no thought of throwing people out into the snow, whether because of age or
need.  We have preserved the safety net for the people with true need in this
country and it has been pure demagoguery that we have in some way shut off all
the charitable programs or many of them for the people who have real need. The
safety net is there and we're taking care of more people than has ever been
taken care of before by any administration in this country.

MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale - an opportunity for you to rebut.

MONDALE: Well, I guess I'm reminded a little bit of what Will Rogers once said
about Hoover. He said it's not what he doesn't know that bothers me, it's what
he knows for sure just ain't so. The fact of it is, the fact of it is the
President's budget sought to cut Social Security by 25 percent. It's not an
opinion; it's a fact, and when the President was asked the other day, 'What do
you want to cut in the budget?' he said, 'Cut those things I asked for but
didn't get.' That's Social Security and Medicare. The second fact is that the
housing unit for senior citizens that the President dedicated in Buffalo was
only made possible through a Federal assistance program for senior citizens that
the President's budget sought to terminate. So if he'd had his way, there
wouldn't have been any housing project there at all. This Administration has
taken a meat cleaver out in terms of Federal-assisted housing, and the record is
there. We have to see the facts before we can draw conclusions.

REAGAN: Well, let me just respond with regard to Social Security. When we took
office we discovered that the program that the Carter- Mondale Administration
had said would solve the fiscal problems of Social Security for the next 50
years, wouldn't solve them for 5.  Social Security was due to go bankrupt before
1983. Any proposals that I made at that time were at the request of the
chairman, a Democrat, of one of the leading committees, who said we have to do
something before the program goes broke and the checks bounce. And so we made a
proposal. And then in 1982 they used that proposal in a demagogic fashion for
the 1982 campaign. And three days after the election in 1982 they came to us and
said, Social Security, we know, is broke. Indeed, we had to borrow $17 billion
to pay the checks. And then I asked for a bipartisan commission, which I'd asked
for from the beginning, to sit down and work out a solution, and so the whole
matter of what to do with Social Security has been resolved by bipartisan
legislation and it is on a sound basis now for as far as you can see into the
next century.

IMPACT OF RELIGION

MODERATOR: We begin segment No. 3 with Fred Barnes. Q. Mr. President, would you
describe your religious beliefs, noting particularly whether you consider
yourself a born-again Christian and explain how these beliefs affect your
Presidential decisions?

REAGAN: Well, I was raised to have a faith and a belief and have been a member
of a church since I was a small boy. In our particular church we didn't use that
term born- again so I don't know whether I would fit that - that particular
term. But I have, thanks to my mother, God rest her soul, the firmest possible
belief and faith in God. And I don't believe - I believe, I should say, as
Lincoln once said, that I could not - I would be the most stupid man in the
world if I thought I could confront the duties of the office I hold if I could
not turn to someone who was stronger and greater than all others; and I do
resort to prayer. At the same time, however, I have not believed that prayer
could be introduced into an election or be a part of a political campaign, or
religion a part of that campaign. As a matter of fact I think religion became a
part of this campaign when Mr. Mondale's running mate said I wasn't a good
Christian. So, it does play a part in my life. I have no hesitancy in saying so.
And as I say, I don't believe that I could carry on unless I had a belief in a
higher authority and a belief that prayers are answered Q. Given those beliefs,
Mr. President, why don't you attend services regularly, either by going to
church or by inviting a minister to the White House, as President Nixon used to
do, or someone to Camp David, as President Carter used to do.

REAGAN: The answer to your question is very simple - about why I don't go to
church. I start - I have gone to church regularly all my life. And I started to
here in Washington. And now, in the position I hold and in the world in which we
live, where embassies do get blown up in Beirut, we're supposed to talk about
that in the - on the debate the 21st, I understand. But I pose a threat to
several hundred people if I go to church. I know the threats that are made
against me. We all know the possibility of terrorism. We have seen the
barricades that have had to built around the White House. And therefore, I don't
feel - and my minister knows this and supports me in this position. I don't feel
that I have a right to go to church, knowing that my being there could cause
something of the kind that we have seen in other places; in Beirut, for example.
And I miss going to church but I think the Lord understands.

MODERATOR: May I ask the audience please to refrain from applause.  Can we have
your second question?

Q. Mr. Mondale, would you describe your religious beliefs and mention whether
you consider yourself a born-again Christian and explain how those beliefs would
affect your decisions as President.

MONDALE: First of all, I accept President Reagan's affirmation of faith. I'm
sure that we all accept and admire his commitment to his faith and we are
strengthened all of us by that fact. I am a son of a Methodist minister, my wife
is the daughter of a Presbyterian minister, and I don't know if I've been born
again, but I know I was born into a Christian family, and I believe I've sung at
more weddings and more funerals than anybody ever to seek the Presidency.
Whether that helps or not I don't know. I have a deep religious faith, our
family does, it is fundamental, it's probably the reason I'm in politics. I
think our faith tells us, instructs us about the moral life that we should lead,
and I think we're all together on that.

POLITICAL USE OF RELIGION

What bothers me is this growing tendency to try to use one's own personal
interpretation of faith politically, to question others' faith, and to try to
use instrumentalities of government to impose those views on others. All history
tells us that that's a mistake. When the Republican platform says that from here
on out we're going to have a religious test for judges before they're selected
for the Federal court and then Jerry Falwell announces that that means they get
at least two Justices of the Supreme Court, I think that's an abuse of faith in
our country. This nation is the most religious nation on earth. More people go
to church and synagogues than any other nation on earth, and it's because we
kept the politicians and the state out of the personal exercise of our faith.
That's why faith in the United States is pure and unpolluted by the intervention
of politicians, and I think if we want to continue as I do to have a religious
nation, let's keep that line and never cross it.

MODERATOR: Thank you. Mr. Barnes, a question? We have time for rebuttal now.

Q. I think I have a follow-up.

MODERATOR: Yes, I asked you if you did. I'm sorry I thought you waived it.

Q. Yes. Mr. Mondale, you've complained just now about Jerry Falwell, and you've
complained other times about other fundamentalists in politics. Correct me if
I'm wrong, but I don't recall your ever complaining about ministers who are
involved in the civil rights movement, in the anti- Vietnam War demonstrations
or about black preachers who've been so involved in American politics. Is it
only conservative ministers that you object to?

MONDALE: No. What I object to - what I object to - what I object to is someone
seeking to use his faith to question the faith of another or to use that faith
and seek to use the power of Government to impose it on others. A minister who
is in civil rights or in the conservative movement because he believes his faith
instructs him to do that, I admire. The fact that the faith speaks to us and
that we are moral people hopefully I accept and rejoice in. It's when you try to
use that to undermine the integrity of private political - or private religious
faith and the use of the state is where for the most personal decisions in
American life - that's where I draw the line.

MODERATOR: Thank you. Now, Mr. President. Rebuttal.

REAGAN: Yes, it's very difficult to rebut, because I find myself in so much
agreement with Mr. Mondale. I, too, want that wall that is in the Constitution,
separation of church and state, to remain there. The only attacks I have made
are on people who apparently would break away at that wall from the Government
side using the Government, using the power of the courts and so forth, to hinder
that part of the Constitution that says the Government shall not only not
establish a religion, it shall not inhibit the practice of religion, and they
have been using these things to have Government, through court orders, inhibit
the practice of religion. A child wants to say grace in a school cafeteria, and
a court rules that they can't do it. And because it's school property. These are
the types of things that I think have been happening in a kind of a secular way
that have been erroding that separation, and I am opposed to that. With regard
to a platform in the Supreme Court, I can only say one thing about that. I don't
- I have appointed one member of the Supreme Court, Sandra Day O'Connor, I'll
stand on my record on that, and if I have the opportunity to appoint any more.
I'll do it in the same manner that I did in selecting her.  MODERATOR: Mr.
Mondale, your rebuttal, please.

MONDALE: The platform to which the President refers in fact calls for a
religious test in the selection of judges. And Jerry Falwell says that means we
get two or three judges. And it would involve a religious test for the first
time in American life. Let's take the example that the President cites. I
believe in prayer. My family prays. We've never had any difficulty finding time
to pray. But do we want a constitutional amendment adopted of the kind proposed
by the President that gets the local politicians into the business of selecting
prayers that our children must either recite in school or be embarrassed and ask
to excuse themselves? Who would write the prayer? What would it say? How would
it be resolved when those disputes occurred? It seems to me that a moment's
reflection tells you why the United States Senate turned that amendment down.
Because it will undermine the practice of honest faith in our country by
politicizing it. We don't want that.

MODERATOR: Thank you Mr. Mondale.

CHANGING ELECTORATE MODERATOR:

Thank you, Mr. Mondale. Time is up for this round; we go into the second round
of our questioning - begin again with Jim Wieghart. Jim. Q. After that
discussion, this may be like going from the sublime to the ridiculous, but here
goes: I have a political question for you, Mr. Mondale. Polls indicate a massive
change in the electorate, away from the coalition that has long made the
Democratic Party a majority.  Blue- collar workers, young professionals, their
children and much of the middle class now regard themselves as independents or
Republican instead of Democrats. And the gap, the edge the Democrats had in
party registration, seems to be narrowing. I'd like to ask you, Mr. Mondale,
what is causing this? Is the Democratic Party out of synch with the majority of
Americans? And will it soon be replaced as the majority party by the
Republicans? What do you think needs to be done about as a Democrat?

MONDALE: My answer is that this campaign isn't over yet. And when people vote, I
think you're going to see a very strong verdict by the American people that they
favor the approach that I'm talking about. The American people want arms
control; they don't want this arms race. And they don't want this deadly new
effort to bring weapons into the heavens. And they want an American foreign
policy that leads toward a safer world. The American people see this debt, and
they know it's got to come down. And if it won't come down, the economy's going
to slow down, maybe go into a recession. They see this tremendous influx and
swamping of cheap foreign imports in this country that has cost over three
million jobs, given farmers the worst year in American history. And they know
this debt must come down, as well, because it's unfair to our children.

PROTECTING THE ENVIRONMENT

The American people want this environment protected. They know that these toxic
waste dumps should have been cleaned up a long time ago.  And they know that
people's lives and health are being risked because we've had an Administration
that has been totally insensitive to the law and the demands for the protection
of the environment. The American people want their children educated; they want
to get our edge back in science, and they want a policy, headed by the
President, that helps close this gap that's widening between the United States
and Europe and Japan. The American people want to keep opening doors. They want
those civil rights laws enforced; they want the equal rights amendment ratified;
they want equal pay for comparable effort for women. And they want it because
they've understood from the beginning that when we open doors, we're all
stronger. Just as we were at the Olympics. I think as you make the case, the
American people will increasingly come to our cause. Q. Mr. Mondale, isn't it
possible that the American people have heard your message and they are listening
but they are rejecting it?

MONDALE: Well, tonight we had the first debate over the deficit. The President
says it will disappear automatically. I've said it's going to take some work. I
think the American people will draw their own conclusions. Secondly, I've said
that I will not support the cuts in Social Security and Medicare and the rest
that the President's proposed. The President answers that it didn't happen or if
it did, it was resolved later in a commission. As the record develops I think
it's going to become increasingly clear that what I am saying and where I want
to take this country is exactly where the country wants to go, and the
comparison of approaches is such that I think will lead to further strength.

Q. Mr. President, you and your party are benefiting from what appears to be an
erosion of the old Democratic coalition, but you have not laid out a specific
agenda to take this shift beyond Nov. 6. What is your program for America for
the next decade, with some specificity?  REAGAN: Well, again, I am running on
the record. I think sometimes Mr. Mondale's running away from his, but I'm
running on the record of what we have asked for, will continue to try and get
things that we didn't get in the program that has already brought the rate of
spending of Government down from 17 percent to 6.1 percent, a program of
returning authority and autonomy to the local and state governments that has
been unjustly seized by the Federal Government and you might find those words in
the Democratic platform of some years ago. I know because I was a Democrat at
that time. And I left the party eventually because I could no longer follow the
turn in the Democratic leadership that took us down an entirely different path,
a path of centralizing authority in the Federal Government, lacking trust in the
American people. I promised when we took office that we would reduce inflation.
We have, to one-third of what it was. I promised that we would reduce taxes. We
did, 25 percent across the board. That barely held even with - if it did that
much - with the gigantic tax increase imposed in 1977. But at least it took that
burden away from them. I said that we would create jobs for our people, and we
did, six million in the last 20 or 21 months. I said that we would become
respected in the world once again and that we would refurbish our national
defense to the place that we could deal on the world scene and then seek
disarmaments, reduction of arms, and hopefully an elimination of nuclear
weapons. We have done that. All of the things that I said we would do, from
inflation being down, interest rates being down, unemployment falling - all of
those things we have done. And I think this is something the American people
see. I think they also know that we have. We had a commission that came in a
year ago with a recommendation on education, on excellence in education, and
today without the Federal Government being involved other than passing on to
them, the school districts, the words from that commission, we find 35 states
with task forces now dealing with their educational problems, we find that
schools are extending the curriculum to now have forced teaching of mathematics
and science and so forth. All of these things have brought an improvement in the
college entrance exams for the first time in some 20 years. So I think that many
Democrats are seeing the same thing this Democrat saw. The leadership isn't
taking us where we want to go.

Q. Mr. President, there's a - much of what you said affects the quality of life
of many Americans - their income, the way they live and so forth. But there's an
aspect to quality of life that lies beyond the private sector which has to do
with our neighborhoods, with our cities, our streets, our parks our environment.
In those areas I have a difficulty seeing what your program is and what you feel
the Federal responsibility is in these areas of the quality of life in the
public sector that affects everybody. And even enormous wealth by one individual
can't create the kind of environment that he might like.

REAGAN: There are tasks that Government legitimately should enforce and tasks
that Government performs well, and you've named some of them. Crime has come
down the last two years for the first time in many, many decades that it has
come down or, since we kept records, two consecutive years, and last year it
came down - the biggest drop in crime that we've had. I think that we've had
something to do with that, just as we have with the drug problem nationwide. The
environment, yes, I feel as strongly as anyone about the preservation of the
environment. When we took office we found that the national parks were so dirty
and contained so many hazards, lack of safety features that we stopped buying
additional parkland until we had rectified this with what was to be a five-year
program, but it's just about finished already - a billion dollars - and now
we're going back to budgeting for additional lands for our parks. We have added
millions of acres to the wilderness lands, to the game refuges. I think that
we're out in front of most, and I see that the red light is blinking so I can't
continue but I got more.

MODERATOR: Well, you'll have a chance when your rebuttal time comes up perhaps,
Mr. President. Mr. Mondale, now it's your turn for rebuttal.

MONDALE: The President says that when the Democratic Party made its turn he left
it. The year that he decided we had lost our way was the year that John F.
Kennedy was running against Richard Nixon. I was chairman of Minnesotans for
Kennedy. Reagan was chairman of a thing called Democrats for Nixon. Now maybe we
made a wrong turn with Kennedy, but I'll be proud of supporting him all of our
life - all of my life. And I'm very happy that John Kennedy was elected, because
John Kennedy looked at the future with courage, saw what needed to be done, and
understood his own Government. The President just said that his Government is
shrinking. It's not. It's now the largest peacetime Government ever in terms of
the take from the total economy and instead of retreating, instead of being
strong where we should be strong, he wants to make it strong and intervene in
the most private and personal questions in American life.  That's where
Government should not be.

MODERATOR: Mr. President.

REAGAN: Before I campaigned as a Democrat for a Republican candidate for
President, I had already voted for Dwight Eisenhower to be President of the
United States so my change had come earlier than that. I hadn't gotten around to
re-registering as yet. I found that was rather difficult to do but I finally did
it. There are some other things that have been said here, back - and you said
that I might be able to dredge them up. Mr. Mondale referred to the farmer's
worst year. The farmers are not the victims of anything this Administration has
done. The farmers were the victims of the double-digit inflation and the 21 1/2
percent interest rates of the Carter-Mondale Administration and the grain
embargo which destroyed our reliability nation-wide as a supplier. All of these
things are presently being rectified and I think that we are going to salvage
the farmers - as a matter of fact, the - there has been less than one-quarter of
1 percent of foreclosures of the 270,000 loans from government the farmers have.


POLICY ON ABORTION

MODERATOR: Thank you, Mr. President. We'll now turn to Diane Sawyer for her
round of questions. Diane.

Q. I'd like to turn to an area that I think few people enjoy discussing. But
that we probably should tonight because the positions of the two candidates are
so clearly different and lead to very different policy consequences. And that is
abortion and right to life.  I'm exploring for your personal views of abortion.
And specifically how you would want them applied as public policy. First, Mr.
President, do you consider abortion murder or a sin? And second, how hard would
you work, what kind of priority would you give in your second term legislation
to make abortion illegal? And specifically, would you make certain, as your
party platform urges, that Federal justices that you appoint be pro- life?

REAGAN: I have believed that, in the appointment of judges, that all that was
specified in the party platform was that they have a, they respect the sanctity
of human life. Now that, I would want to see in any judge, and with regard to
any issue having to do with human life. But with regard to abortion, and I have
a feeling that this is, there's been some reference, without naming it here in
remarks of Mr.  Mondale, tied to injecting religion into government. With me,
abortion is not a problem of religion. It's a problem of the Constitution. I
believe that until and unless someone can establish that the unborn child is not
a living human being, then that child is already protected by the Constitution,
which guarantees life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness to all of us. And I
think that this is - what we should concentrate on, is trying - I know there was
weeks and weeks of testimony before a Senate committee. There were medical
authorities, there were religious, there were clerics there, everyone talking
about this matter, of pro-life.  And at the end of all of that, not one shred of
evidence was introduced that the unborn child was not alive. We have seen
premature births that- are now grown up happy people going around. Also there is
a strange dichotomy in this whole position about our court's ruling that
abortion is not the taking of a human life. In California, some time ago, a man
beat a woman so savagely that her unborn child was born dead with a fractured
skull. And the California state legislature unanimously passed a law that was
signed by the then Democratic Governor, signed a law that said that any man who
so abuses a pregnant woman that he causes the death of her unborn child shall be
charged with murder. Now isn't it strange that that same woman could have taken
the life of her unborn child and it was abortion and not murder but if somebody
else does it, that's murder. And it recognizes, it used the term death of the
unborn child. So this has been my feeling about abortion, that we have a problem
now to determine. And all the evidence so far comes down on the side of the
unborn child being a living human being.

Q. A two-part follow-up. Do I take it from what you've said about the platform,
then, that you don't regard the language and don't regard in your own
appointments' abortion position a test of any kind for justices that it should
be? And also, if abortion is made illegal, how would you want it enforced? Who
would be the policing units that would investigate? And would you want the women
who have abortions to be prosecuted?

REAGAN: The laws regarding that always were state laws. It was only when the
Supreme Court handed down a decision that the Federal Government intervened in
what had always been a state policy. Our laws against murder are state laws. So
I would think this would be the point of enforcement on this. I, as I say, I
feel that we have a problem here to resolve, and no one has approached it from
that matter. It does not happen that the church I belong to had that as part of
its dogma; I know that some churches do. Now, it is a sin if you're taking a
human life. On the same time in our Judeo-Christian tradition, we recognize the
right of taking a human life in self-defense. And therefore I've always believed
that a mother, if medically it is determined that her life is at risk if she
goes through with the pregnancy, she has a right then to take the life of even
her own unborn child in defense of her own.

Q. Mr. Mondale, to turn to you, do you consider abortion a murder or a sin? And
bridging from what President Reagan said, he has written that if society doesn't
know whether life does - human life - in fact does begin at conception, as long
as there is a doubt, that the unborn child should at least be given the benefit
of the doubt and that there should be protection for that unborn child.

MONDALE: This is one of the most emotional and difficult issues that could
possibly be debated. I think your questions, however, underscore the fact there
is probably no way that Government should, or could, answer this question in
every individual case and in the private lives of the American people. The
Constitutional Amendment proposed by President Reagan would make it a crime for
a woman to have an abortion if she had been raped or suffered from incest. Is it
really the view of the American people, however you feel on the question of
abortion, that Government ought to be reaching into your livingrooms and making
choices like this? I think it cannot work, won't work and will lead to all kinds
of cynical evasions of the law. Those who can afford to have them will continue
to have them. The disadvantaged will go out in the back alley as they used to
do. I think these questions are inherently personal and moral. And every
individual instance is different. Every American should be aware of the
seriousness of the step but there are some things that Government can do and
some things they cannot do. Now the example that the President cites has nothing
to do with abortion. Somebody went to a woman and nearly killed her. That's
always been a serious crime and always should be a serious crime. But how does
that compare with the problem of a woman who is raped? Do we really want those
decisions made by judges who've been picked because they will agree to find the
person guilty? I don't think so and I think it's going in exactly the wrong
direction. In America, on basic moral questions we have always let the people
decide in their own personal lives. We haven't felt so insecure that we've
reached for the club of state to have our point of view. It's been a good
instinct and we're the most religious people on earth. One final point:
President Reagan, as Governor of California, signed a bill which is perhaps the
most liberal pro-abortion bill of any state in the Union. Q. But if I can get
you back for a moment on my point which was the question of when human life
begins, a two-part follow-up. First of all, at what point do you believe that
human life begins in the growth of a fetus? And second of all, you said that
government shouldn't be involved in the decision, yet there are those who would
say that government is involved and the consequence of the involvement was 1.5
million abortions in 1980. And how do you feel about that?

MONDALE: The basic decision of the Supreme Court is that each person has to make
this judgment in her own life, and that's the way it's been done. And it's a
personal and private moral judgment. I don't know the answer to when life
begins. And it's not that simple either. You've got another life involved.  And
if it's rape, how do you draw moral judgments on that? If it's incest, how do
you draw moral judgments on that? Does every woman in America have to present
herself before some judge picked by Jerry Falwell to clear her personal
judgment? It won't work.

MODERATOR: I'm sorry to do this but I really must talk to the audience. You're
all invited guests. I know I'm wasting time in talking to you but it really is
very unfair of you to applaud sometimes louder, less loud, and I ask you as
people who were invited here and polite people to refrain. We have our time now
for rebuttal. Mr. President.

REAGAN: Yes. But with regard to this being a personal choice, isn't that what a
murderer is insisting on? His or her right to kill someone because of whatever
fault they think justifies that. Now, I'm not capable and I don't think you are,
any of us, to make this determination that must be made with regard to human
life. I am simply saying that I believe that that's where the effort should be
directed to make that determination. I don't think that any of us should be
called upon here to stand and make a decision as to what other things might come
under the self-defense tradition. That, too, would have to be worked out then
when you once recognize that we're talking about a life. But in this great
society of ours wouldn't it make a lot more sense, in this gentle and kind
society, if we had a program that made it possible for when incidents come along
which someone feels they must do away with that unborn child, that instead we
make it available to the adoption, there are a million-and-a-half people out
there standing in line waiting to adopt children who can't have them any other
way.

MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale?

MONDALE: I agree with that, and that's why I was a principal sponsor of a
liberal adoption law so that more of these children could come to term so that
the young mothers were educated, so we found an option, an alternative. I'm all
for that. But the question is whether this other option proposed by the
President should be pursued, and I don't agree with it. Since I've got about 20
seconds, let me just say one thing. The question of agriculture came up a minute
ago, and that farm income is off 50 percent in the last three years, and every
farmer knows it, and the effect of these economic policies is like a massive
grain embargo which has caused farm exports to drop 20 percent. It's been a big
failure. I opposed the grain embargo in my Administration; I'm opposed to these
policies as well.

SETTING TAX RATES

MODERATOR: I'm sitting here like the great school teacher letting you both get
away with things. Because one did it, the other one did it. May I ask in the
future that the rebuttals stick to what the rebuttal is and also, foreign policy
will be the next debate. Stop dragging it in by its ear into this one. Now
having admonished you, I would like to say to the panel, you are allowed one
question and one follow-up. Would you try as best you could not to ask two and
three. I know it's something we all want to do, two or three questions as part
one, and two and three as part two. Having said that, Fred, it's yours.

Q. Thank you. Mr. Mondale, let me ask you about middle class Americans and the
taxes they pay. I'm talking about - not about the rich or the poor. I know your
views on their taxes. But about families earning $25,000 to $45,000 a year. Do
you think that those families are overtaxed or undertaxed by the Federal
Government.

MONDALE: In my opinion as we deal with this deficit, people from about $70,000 a
year on down have to be dealt with very, very carefully because they are the
ones who didn't get any relief the first time around. Under the 1981 tax bill
people making $200,000 a year got $60,000 in tax relief over three years while
people making $30,000 a year, all taxes considered, got no relief at all or
their taxes actually went up. That's why my proposal protects everybody from
$25,000 a year or less against any tax increases and treats those $70,000 and
under in a way that is more beneficial than the way the President proposes with
a sales tax or a flat tax.

BUSH'S TAX RETURNS

What does this mean in real life? Well, the other day Vice President Bush
disclosed his tax returns to the American people. He's one of the wealthiest
Americans and he's our Vice President. In 1981 I think he paid about 40 percent
in taxes. In 1983 as a result of these tax preferences he paid a little over 12
percent, 12.8 percent in taxes. That meant that he paid a lower percent in taxes
than the janitor who cleaned up his office or the chauffeur who drives him to
work. I believe we need some fairness, and that's why I propose what I think is
a fair and responsible proposal that helps protect these people who've already
gotten no relief or actually got a tax increase. Q. It sounds as if you were
saying you think a group of taxpayers making $25,000 to $45,000 a year is
already overtaxed, yet your tax proposal would increase their taxes. I think
your agent said those earning about $25 to $35,000, their tax rate would go up
and their tax bill would go up $100, and from $35,000 to $45,000 more than that,
several hundred dollars. Would n't that stifle their incentive to work and
invest and so on, and also hurt the recovery?

MONDALE: The first thing is everybody $25,000 or under would have no tax
increase. Mr. Reagan after the election is going to have to propose a tax
increase. And you will have to compare what he proposes, and his Secretary of
the Treasury said he's studying a sales tax or a value-added tax; they're the
same thing to hit middle and moderate income Americans and leave wealthy
Americans largely untouched. Up until about $70,000, as you go up the ladder, my
proposals will be far more beneficial. As soon as we get the economy on a sound
ground, as well, I would like to see the total repeal of indexing. I don't think
we can do that for a few years but at some point we want to do that as well.

Q. Mr. President, let me try this on you. Do you think middle-income Americans
are overtaxed or undertaxed?

REAGAN: You know, I wasn't going to say this at all, but I can't help it: There
you go again. I don't have a plan to tax or increase taxes; I'm not going to
increase taxes. I can understand why you are, Mr. Mondale, because as a Senator
you voted 16 times to increase taxes. Now, I believe that our problem has not
been that anybody in our country is undertaxed, it's that Government is overfed.
And I think that most of our people - this is why we had a 25 percent tax cut
across the board which maintained the same progressivity of our tax structure in
the - the brackets on up. And as a matter of fact, it just so happens that in
the quirks of administering these taxes, those above $50,000 actually did not
get quite as big a tax cut percentage-wise, as did those from $50,000 down. From
$50,000 down those people paid two- thirds of the taxes and those people got
two-thirds of the tax cut. Now the Social Security tax of '77 - this, indeed,
was a tax that hit people in the lower brackets the hardest. It had two
features: it had several tax increases phased in over a period of time; there
are two more yet to come between now and 1989. At the same time, every year it
increased the amount of money - virtually every year, there may have been one or
two that we're skipping there - that was subject to that tax. Today it is up to
about $38,000 of earnings that is subject to the payroll tax for Social
Security. And that tax, there are no deductions, so a person making anywhere
from $10, $15, $20, they're paying that tax on the full gross earnings that they
have after they have already paid an income tax on that same amount of money.
Now I don't think that to try and say that we were taxing the rich and not the
other way around, it just doesn't work out that way. The system is still where
it was with regard to the progressivity, as I've said, and that has not been
changed. But if you take it in numbers of dollars, instead of percentage, yes
you can say, well that person got 10 times as much as this other person. Yes,
but he paid 10 times as much also. But if you take it in percentages then you
find out that it is fair and equitable across the board.

Q. I thought I caught, Mr. President, a glimmer of a stronger statement there in
your answer than you've made before. I think the operative position you had
before was that you would only raise taxes in a second term as a last resort,
and I thought you said flatly that ''I'm not going to raise taxes.'' Is that
what you meant to say, that you will not - that you will flatly not raise taxes
in your second term as President?

REAGAN: Yes, I had used - last resort would always be with me. If you got the
Government down to the lowest level that you yourself could say it could not go
any lower and still perform the services for the people. And if the recovery was
so complete that you knew you were getting the ultimate amount of revenues that
you could get through that growth, and there was still some slight difference
there between those two lines, then I had said once that yes, you would have to
then look to see if taxes should not be adjusted. I don't foresee those things
happening. So I say with great confidence, I'm not going to - I'm not going to
go for a tax. With regard to assailing Mr. Bush about his tax problems and the
difference from the tax he once paid and then the later tax he paid, I think if
you looked at the deductions, there were great legal expenses in there. It had
to do possibly with the sale of his home and they had to do with his setting up
of a blind trust. All of those are legally deductions - the deductible in
computing your tax. And it was a one-year thing with him.

MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale, here we go again; this time for rebuttal.

MONDALE: Well, first of all, I gave him the benefit of the doubt on the House
deal. I'm just talking about the 12.8 percent that he paid - and that's what's
happening all over this country with wealthy Americans. They've got so many
loopholes, they don't have to pay much in taxes. Now, Mr. President, you said:
''There you go again.'' Right.  Remember the last time you said that?

REAGAN: Um hmm.

MONDALE: You said it when President Carter said that you were going cut
Medicare. And you said: ''Oh, no, there you go again, Mr.  President.'' And what
did you do right after the election? You went out and tried to cut $20 billion
out of Medicare. And so when you say, ''There you go again,'' people remember
this, you know. And people will remember that you signed the biggest tax
increase in the history of California, and the biggest tax increase in the
history of the United States. And what are you going to do? You've got $260
billion deficit. You can't wash it away. You won't slow defense spending; you
refuse to do that.

MODERATOR: Mr. Mondale, I'm afraid your time is up.

MONDALE: Sorry.

MODERATOR: Mr. President.

REAGAN: Yes. With regard to Medicare, no. But it's time for us to say that
Medicare is in pretty much the same condition that Social Security was, and
something is going to have to be done in the next several years to make it
fiscally sound. And, no, I never proposed any $20 billion should come out of
Medicare. I have proposed that the program - we must treat with that particular
problem. And maybe part of that problem is because during the four years of the
Carter-Mondale Administration, medical costs in this country went up 87 percent.


RELIEF FOR THE POOR

MODERATOR: We can't keep going back for other rebuttals. There'll be time later.
We now go to our final round. The way things stand now we have time for only two
sets of questions and by lot it will Jim and Diane and we'll start with Jim.

Q. Mr. President, the economic recovery is real but uneven. The Census Bureau
just a month ago reported that there are more people living under poverty now -
a million more people - than when you took office. There have been a number of
studies, including studies by the Urban Institute and other non-political
organizations, that say that the impact of the tax and budget cuts in your
economic policies have impacted severely on certain classes of Americans -
working mothers, head of households, minority groups, elderly poor. In fact,
they're saying the rich are getting richer and the poor are getting poorer under
your policies. What relief can you offer to the working poor, to the minorities
and to the women heads of households who have borne the brunt of these economic
programs. What can you offer them in the future in your next term?

REAGAN: Some of those facts and figures just don't stand up. Yes, there has been
an increase in poverty but it is a lower rate of increase than it was in the
preceding years before we got here. It has begun to decline, but it is still
going up. On the other hand, women heads of household, single women, heads of
household, have for the first time - there's been a turn down in the rate of
poverty for them.  We have found also in our studies that in this increase in
poverty it all had to do with their private earnings. It had nothing to do with
the transfer payments from government, by way of many programs. We are spending
now 37 percent more on food for the hungry in all the various types of programs
than was spent in 1980. We're spending a third more on all the programs of human
service. We have more people receiving food stamps than were ever receiving them
before - 2,300,000 more are receiving them even though we took 850,000 off the
food stamp rolls because they were making an income that was above anything that
warranted their fellow citizens having to support them. We found people making
185 percent of the poverty level were getting Government benefits. We have set a
line at 130 percent so that we can direct that aid down to the truly needy.
Sometime ago Mr. Mondale said something about education and college students and
help of that kind - half, one out of two of full-time college students in the
United States are receiving some form of Federal aid, but there again we found
people that there were - under the previous Administration - families that had
no limit to income were still eligible for low-interest college loans. We didn't
think that was right. And so we have set a standard that those loans and those
grants are directed to the people who otherwise could not go to college, their
family incomes were so low. So there are a host of other figures that reveal
that the grant programs are greater than they have ever been, taking care of
more people than they ever have - 7.7 million elderly citizens who were living
in the lowest 20 percent of earnings, 7.7 million have moved up into another
bracket since our Administration took over, leaving only 5 million of the
elderly in that bracket when there had been more than 13 million. Q. Mr.
President, in a visit to Texas, in Brownsville, I believe it was, in the Rio
Grande Valley, you did observe that the economic recovery was uneven. In that
particular area of Texas unemployment was over 14 percent whereas statewide it
was the lowest in the country, I believe 5.6 percent. And you made the comment
that, however, that man does not live by bread alone. What did you mean by that
comment and, if I interpret it correctly, it would be a comment more addressed
to the affluent who, who obviously can look beyond just the bread they need to
sustain them with their wherewithal.

REAGAN: That had nothing to do with the other thing of talking about their needs
or anything. I remember distinctly I was segueing into another subject. I was
talking about the things that have been accomplished and that was referring to
the revival of patriotism and optimism, the new spirit that we're finding all
over America. And it is a wonderful thing to see when you get out there among
the people. So that was the only place that that was used. I did avoid, I'm
afraid, in my previous answer also, the idea of uneven, yes, there is no way
that the recovery is, even across the country, just as in the depths of the
recession there were some parts of the country that were worse off but some that
didn't even feel the pain of the recession. We're not going to rest, and not
going to be happy, until every person in this country who wants a job can have
one, until the recovery is complete across the country.

Q.  Mr. Mondale, as you can gather fom the question of the President the
celebrated war on poverty obviously didn't end the problem of poverty, although
it may have dented it.  The poor and the homeless and the disadvantaged are
still with us.  What should the Federal Government's role be to turn back the
growth in the number of people living below the poverty level, which is now 35
million in the United States and to help deal with the structural unemployment
problems that the President was referring to in an uneven recovery?

MONDALE: No. 1, we've got to get the debt down, to get the interest rates down
so the economy will grow and people will be employed.  No.  2, we have to work
with cities and others to help generate economic growth in those communities -
to the Urban Development Action Grant program.  I don't mind those enterprise
zones, let's try them, but not as a suibstitute for the others.  Certainly
education and training is crucial.  If these young Americans don't have the
skills that make them attractive to employees, they're not going to get jobs.

The next thing is to try to get more entrepreneurship in business within the
reach of minorities so that these businesses are located in the communities in
which they're found.  The other thing is we need the business community as well
as government heavily involved in these communities to try to get economic
growth.  There is no question that the poor are worse off.  I think the
President genuinely believes that they're better off.  But the figures show that
about 8 million more people are below the poverty line than four years ago.  How
you can cut school lunches, how you can cut student assistance, how you can cut
housing, how you can cut disability benefits, how you can do all of these things
and then the people receiving them - for example the disabled who have no
alternative, how they're going to do better, I don't know.  Now we need a tight
budget, but there's no question that this Administration has singled out things
that affect the most vulnerable in American life, and they're hurting.

One final point if I might.  There's another part of the lopsided economy that
we're in today, and that is that these heavy deficits have killed exports and
are swamping the nation with cheap imports.  We are now $120 billion of imports,
3 million jobs lost and farmers are having their worst year.  That's another
reason to get the deficit down.

Q.  Mr. Mondale, is it possible that the vast majority of Americans who appear
to be prosperous have lost interest in the kinds of programs you're discussing
to help those less privileged than they are?

MONDALE: I think the American people want to make certain that that dollar is
wisely spent.  I think they stand for civil rights.  I know they're all for
education in science and training, which I strongly support.

They want these young people to have a chance to get jobs and the rest.  I think
the business community wants to get involved.  I think they're asking for new
and creative ways to try to reach it, and with everyone involved.  I think
that's part of it.

I think also that the American people want a balanced program that gives us long
term growth, so that they're not having to take money that's desperate to
themselves and their families and give to someone else.  I'm opposed to that,
too.

MODERATOR: And now it is time for our rebuttal for this period.  Mr. President.

REAGAN: Yes, the connectin that's been made again between the deficit and the
interest rates - there is no connection between them.  There is a connection
between interest rates and inflation.

But I would call to your attention that in 1981, while we were operating still
on the Carter-Mondale budget that we inherited, that the interest rates came
down from 21 1/2 toward the 12 or 13 figure and while they were coming down, the
deficits had started their great increase: they were going up.

Now, if there was a connection, I think that there would be a different parallel
between deficit getting larger and interest rates going down.

The interest rates are based on inflation.  And right now, I have to tell you, I
don't think there is any excuse for the interest rates being as high as they
are, because we have brought inflation down so low.  I think it can only be that
they're anticipating or hope - expecting, not hoping - that maybe we don't have
a control of inflation and it's going to go back up again.

Well, it isn't going to go back up.  We're going to see that it doesn't.

MODERATOR: Mr. President.

And I haven't got time to answer with regard to--

MODERATOR: Thank you, Mr. President.  Mr. Mondale.

MODERATOR: Thank you Mr. President.  Mr. Mondale?

MONDALE: Mr. President, if I heard you correctly, you said that these deficits
don't have anything to do with interest rates.  I will grant you that interest
rates were too high in 1980 and we can have another debate as to why - energy
prices and so on.  There's no way of glossing around that.  But when these huge
deficits went in place in 1981, what's called the real interest rates, the
spread between inflation and what a loan costs you, doubled.  And that's still
the case today, and the result in interest costs that have never been seen
before in terms of real charges and it's attributable to the deficit.

Everybody, every economist every businessman believes that.  Your one Council of
Economic Advisers, Mr. Feldstein in his report, told you that.  Every chairman
of the Finance and Ways and Means committees, Republican leaders in the Senate
and the House, are telling you that.  That deficit is ruining the longterm hopes
for this economy.  It's causing high interest rates, it's ruining us in trade,
it's given us the highest small business failure in 50 years, the economy is
starting downhill, with housing...

MODERATOR: Thank you Mr. Mondale.

VIEW OF OPPONENT

MODERATOR: You're both very obedient, I have to give you credit for that.  We
now start our final round of questions.  We do want to have time for your
rebuttal and we start with Diane: Diane Sawyer.

Q.  Since we are reaching the end of the question period, and since in every
Presidential campaign the candidates tend to complain that the opposition
candidate is not held accountable for what he or she says, let me give you the
chance to do that.  Mr. Mondale, beginning with you, what do challenging
ourselves to get on with the business of dealing with America's problems.

I think in eduation, when he lectured the country about the importance of
discipline, I didn't like it at first but I think it helped a little bit.

But now we need both that kind of discipline and the resources and the
consistent leadership that allows this country to catch up in education and
science and training.

I like President Reagan and - this is not personal - there are deep differences
about our future and that's the basis of my campaign.

Q.  Follow up in a similar vein then What remaining question would you most like
to see your opponent forced to answer?

MONDALE: Without any doubt, I've stood up and told the American people that $263
billion deficit must come down.  And I've done what no candidate for President's
ever done, I told you before the election what I'd do.

Mr. Reagan, as you saw tonight, President Reagan takes the position it will
disappear by magic.  It was once called voodoo economics.  I wish the President
would say, yes, the C.B.O. is right.  Yes we have a $263 billion deficit.  This
is how I'm going to get it done.  Don't talk about gorwth because even though we
need growth, that's not helping, it's going to go in the other direction as
they've estimted.  And give us a plan.

What will you cut?  Whose taxes will you raise?  Will you finally touch that
after Social Security and Medicare and student assistance and the handicapped
again, as you did last time?

If you'd just tell us what you're going to do, then the American people could
compare my plan for the future with your man.  And that's the way it should be.
The American people would be in charge.

Q.  Mr. President, the most outrageous thing your opponent has said in the
debate tonight?

REAGAN: Well, now, I have to start with a smile since his kind words to me.
I'll tell you what I think has been the most outrageous thing in political
dialogue both in this campaign and the one in '82, and that is the continued
discussion and claim that somehow I am the villian who is going to pull the
Social Security checks out from those people who are dependent on them.  And why
I think it is outrageous; first of all, it sin't true.  But why it is outrageous
is becaus for political advantage, every time they do that, they scar million of
senior citizens who are totally dependent on Social Security, have no place to
turn, and they have to live and go to bed at night thinking is it true; is
someone going to take our check away from us and leave us destitute? And I don't
think that that should be a part of political dialogue.  Now, to - I just have a
minute here?.

Q.  You have more time.  You can keep going.

REAGAN: O.K. All right.  Now, Social Security, let's lay it to rest once and for
all.  I told you never would I do such a thing.  But I tell you also now Social
Security has nothing to do with the deficit.  Social Security is totally funded
by the payroll tax levied on employer and employee.  If you reduce the outgo of
Social Security, that money would not go into the general fund to reduce a
deficit.  It would go into the Social Security Trust Fund.  So Social Security
has nothing to do with balancing a budget or erasing or lowering the deficit.

Now, again to get to whether I have - am depending on magic - I think I have
talked in straight economic terms about a program of recovery that was - I was
told wouldn't work and then after it worked, I was told that lowering taxes
would increase infaltion and none of these things happened.  It is working and
we're going to continue on that same line.  As to what we might do and find in
further savings cuts, no, we're not going to starve the hungry.  But we have
2,478 specific recommendations from a commission of more than 2,000 business
people in this country through the Grace Commission, that we're studying right
now and we've already implemented 17 percent of them that are recommendations as
to how to make Government more efficient, more economic.

Q.  And to keep it even.  what remaining question would you most like to see
your opponent forced to answer?

REAGAN: The deficits are so much of a problem for him now, but that in 1976 when
the deficit was $52 billion and everyone was panicking about that, he said, no,
that he thought it ought to be bigger because a bigger deficit would stimulate
the economy and would help do away with unempolyment.  In 1979 he made similar
statement, the same effect, that the deficits - there was nothing wrong with
having deficits.  Remember there was a trillion dollars in debt before we got
here.  That's got to be paid by our children, and grandchildren too, if we don't
do it.  And I'm hoping we can start some payments on it before we get through
here.  That's why I want another four years.

MODERATOR: Well, we have time now, if you'd like to answer the President's
question or whatever rebuttal.

MONDALE: Well, we've just finished almost the whole debate and the American
people don't have the slightest clue about what President Reagan will do about
these deficits.  And yet that's the most important single issue of our time.  I
did support the '76 measure that he told about, because we were in a deep
recession and we need some stimulation.  But I will say, as a Democrat I was a
real piker, Mr.  President.  In 1979 we ran a ministration seems to run that
every morning, and the result is exactly what we see: This economy is starting
to run downhill.  Housing is off, last report on new purchases is the lowest
since 1982, our growth is a little over 3 percent now, many people are
predicting a recession, and the flow of imports into this country is swamping
the American people.  We've got to deal with this problem, and those of us who
want to be your President should tell you now what we're going to do so you can
make a judgment.

MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  We must stop now.  I want to give you time for
your closing statements.  It's indeed time for that from each of you.  We will
begin with President Reagan.

CLOSING STATEMENTS

MODERATOR: I'm sorry.  Mr. Reagan you had your rebuttal and I've just cut you
off because our time was going.  You have a chance now for rebuttal before you
closing statement.  Is that correct?

REAGAN: No, I might as well just go with...

MODERATOR: Do you want to wait?

REAGAN: I'm all confused now.

MODERATOR: Technically, you did.  I have little voices that come in my ear.  You
don't get those same voices, I'm not hearing it from here, I'm hearing it from
here.  You have waived your rebuttal.  You can go with your closing statement.

REAGAN: Well, we'll include it in that.

Four years ago in similar circumstances to this I asked you, the American
people, a question.  I asked, are you better off than you were four years
before.  The answer to that obviously was no, and as a result I was elected to
this office and promised a new beginning.  Now, maybe I'm, expected to ask that
same question again.  I'm not going to because I think that all of you or, not
everyone, those people that have - are in those pockets of poverty and haven't
caught up, they couldn't answer the way I would want them to.  But I think that
most of the people in this country would say yes they are better off than they
were four years ago.

The question I think should be enlarged.  Is America better off than it was four
years ago?  And I believe the answer to that has to also be yes.

I promised a new beginning.  So far it is only a beginning.  If the job were
finished, I might have thought twice about seeking reelection to this job.  But
we now have an economy that for the first time - well, let's put it this way, in
the first half of 1980 gross national product was down a minus 3.7 percent.  The
first half of '84 it's up 8.5 percent.  Productivity in the first half of 1980
was down a minus percent.  Today it is up a plus 4 percent.  Personal earnings
after taxes per capita have gone up almost $3,000 in these four years.  In 1980
or 1979 the person with a fixed income of $8,000 was $500 above the poverty
line, and this maybe explains why there are the numbers still in poverty.  By
1980 that same person was $500 below the poverty line.

We have restored much of our economy with regard to a business investment.  It
is higher than it has been since 1949.  So there seems to be no shortage of
investment capital.  We have, as I said, cut the taxes but we have reduced
inflation and for two years not it has stayed down there not a double digit but
in the range of 4 or below.

We believe that we had also promised that we would make our country more secure.
Yes, we have an increase in the defense budget.  But back then we had planes
that couldn't fly for lack of spare parts or pilots. We had navy vessels that
couldn't leave harbor, because of lack of crew or again, lack of spare parts.
Today we're well on our way to a 600-ship navy.  We have 543 at present.  We
have - our military, the morale is high, I think the people should understand
that two-thirds of the defense budget pays for pay and salary - or pay and
pension.  And then you add to that food and wardrobe and all the other things
and you only have a small portion going for weapons.  But I am determined that
if ever our men are called on they should have the best that we can provide in
the manner of tools and weapons.  There has been reference to expensive spare
parts, hammers costing $500.  Well, we re the nes who found those.

I think we've given the American people back their spirit. I think there is an
optimism in the land and a patriotism and I think that we're in a position once
again to heed the words of Thomas Paine who said: ''We have it in our power to
begin the world over again.''

MODERATOR: Thank you Mr. Reagan.  Mr. Mondale, the closing words are now yours.

MONDALE: I want to thank the League of Women Voters and the city of Louisville
for hosting this evening's debate.  I want to thank President Reagan for
agreeing to debate.  He didn't have to and he did, and wa all appreciate it.

The president's favorite question is, ''Are you better off?'' Well, if you're
wealthy, you're better off.  If you're middle income, you're about where you
were, and if you're of modest income, you're worse off. That's what the
economist tell us.  But is that really the question that should be asked.  Isn't
the real question, ''Will we be better off?  Will our children be better off?
Are we building the future that this nation needs?''

I believe that if we ask those questions that bear ono ur future - to just
congratulate ourselves but challenge us to solve those problems - you'll see
that we need new leadership.

Are we better off with this arms race?  Will we be better off if we start this
star wars escalation into the heavens? Are we better off when we de-emphasize
our values in human rights?  Are we better off when we load our children with
this fantastic debt?  Would fathers and mothers feel proud of themselves if they
loaded their children with debts like this nation is now, over a trillion
dollrs, on the shoulders of our children?  Can we be - say, really say, that we
will be better off when we pull away from sort of that basic American instinct
of decency and fairness?

I would rather lose a campaign about decency than win a campaign about self
interest.  I don't think this nation is composed of people who care only for
themselves.  And when we sought to assault Social Secrity and Medicare, as the
record shows we did, I think that was mean spirited.  When we terminated 400,000
desperate, hopeless, defenseless Americans who were on disability, confused and
unable to defend themselves, and just lid them out on the street as we did for
four years, I don't think that's what America is all about.  America is a fair
society, and it is not right that Vice President Bush pays less in taxes than
the janitor who helps him.  I believe there's fundamental fairness crying out
that needs to be achieved in our tax system.

I believe that we will be better off if we protect this environment.  And
contrary to what the President says I think their record on the environment is
inexcusable and often shameful.  These laws re not being enforced, have not been
enforced and the public health and the air and the water are paying the price.
That's not fair for our future.

I think our future requires the President to lead us in an all-out search to
advance our education, our learning and our science and training, because this
world is more complex and we're being pressed harder all the time.

I believe in opening doors.  We won the Olympics in part because we've had civil
rights laws and the laws that prohibit discrimination against women.  I have
been for those efforts all my life.  The President's record is quite different.

The question is our future.  President Kennedy once said in response to similar
arguments, we are great but we can be greater.  We can be better if we face our
future, rejoice in our strenghts, face our problems and by solving them build a
better society for our children.

Thank you.

MODERATOR: Thank you Mr. Mondale, and thank you Mr. President, and our thanks to
our panel members as well.  And so we bring to a close this first of the League
of Women Voters Presidential debate on Oct. 21 in Kansas City, Mo., and this
Thursday night, Oct. 11, at 9 P.M.  Eastern daylight time, Vice President Bush
will debate Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro in Philadelphia.  And I hope that
you will all watch once again; no matter what the format, these debates are very
important.  We all have an extremely vital decision to make.  Once more
gentlemen, our thanks, once more to you our thanks, and now this is Barbars
Walters wishing you a good evening.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of President Reagan and Walter Mondale at debate.

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND SUIT AGAINST CBS BEGINS TODAY WITH JURY SELECTION

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 3293 words


On May 18, 1981 two days after Mike Wallace interviewed Gen. William C.
Westmoreland for the CBS documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception'' - the producer of the program wrote Mr. Wallace a note of praise.

''The interview was a classic,'' said George Crile, the producer, who had
composed most of the questions Mr. Wallace asked General Westmoreland, the
commander of United States forces in Vietnam from 1964-68.

''Now for the reaction,'' he continued. ''I can't imagine Westie taking this
lying down.''

Nor did the general.

Today, amid extensive press coverage, General Westmoreland's $120 million libel
suit against CBS goes to trial with the start of jury selection in Federal
District Court here.

In the suit, General Westmoreland charges that he was falsely accused on the CBS
program of deceiving President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the
strength of the enemy before its Tet offensive of early 1968, which has often
been viewed as a turning point in the war.

The suit, already involving expenditures by lawyers of more than $5 million, is
regarded by lawyers and legal scholars as one of the most important of its kind
in recent years for a number of reasons:


- The trial will re-examine the conduct of the war in Vietnam.


- According to experts in Constitutional law, it will bring into issue the
extent of press protection under the First Amendment.


- The trial will open to scrutiny the procedures used by CBS in gathering and
disseminating news.


- Numerous former high-ranking Government officials will take the stand and
thousands of pages of Government documents declassified by the subpoena process
years before their scheduled release will be used in argument.

Four years after Mr. Crile gave his superiors at CBS a proposal for a CBS
Reports documentary that would explore ''an elaborate conspiracy'' to understate
the nature and size of the enemy to make it appear that the United States was on
the road to victory in Vietnam, lawyers will troop into the courtroom of Judge
Pierre N. Leval to present a case about both the making of a war and the making
of a television documentary.

Ostensibly, it is a case, replete with conflicting evidence and opinions, about
the gathering, evaluation and presentation of intelligence on enemy forces in
1967; who knew what and when in Saigon and Washington; what was done with the
information, and, in terms of lives lost on the battlefield or decisions taken
at the White House and elsewhere, did it matter?

But, to General Westmoreland, who is 70 years old and retired, it is more
broadly a case about his honor and integrity: not whether he was ''a good
general or a bad general,'' but whether his reputation can be ''robbed'' from
him by the press. To CBS, it is fundamentally a case about the ability of the
press to report and comment on the conduct of high Government officials, without
fear of costly suits or intimidation.

''The issue in this case is whether the biggest media organization in the world
is accountable for what it says and what it does,'' said Dan M. Burt, General
Westmoreland's lawyer. ''It's as simple as that.''

Mr. Burt said, in an interview last week, that it was ''critical'' in American
life to have the Government held up to examination by the press ''and we haven't
argued against that. But, if in fact, the news media run amok, they must be held
accountable.''

David Boies, CBS's lawyer, said last week that the issue was ''whether
Westmoreland's command lied, whether CBS lied and is a court of law the right
forum to debate this question.

''There's no doubt that CBS is held accountable,'' he said in an interview.
''But, in this kind of case, with Westmoreland, isn't the right forum the court
of public opinion?''

Since the 1964 decision by the Supreme Court of the United States in The New
York Times v. Sullivan, a public figure such as General Westmoreland, must first
prove, in a libel case, that he was defamed and that the statements were false.
He must then prove, with convincing clarity, that the party defaming him did so
knowing that the statements were false or made in ''reckless disregard'' of
whether they were true or not - what Judge Leval terms ''Constitutional
malice.''

'Serious Doubt'

According to Prof. Marc A. Franklin of the Stanford Law School, an authority on
libel, the legal standard for ''reckless disregard'' requires the plaintiff to
establish that the journalist had ''serious doubt'' as to the truth of the
libelous statements.

''The standard is not how much research a reasonable journalist might have
done,'' he said, ''but his actual state of mind regarding the statements at the
time they were made.

''A variation on this, which may be central in the Westmoreland case,'' Prof.
Franklin said, ''is the general's contention that, although CBS did a lengthy
investigation, it did not turn up information that justified CBS in making the
charges it did - and that CBS knew this.''

Judge Leval, when he rejected a CBS motion last month to have the case
dismissed, said that a journalist ''may make himself liable if he knowingly or
recklessly misstates evidence to make it seem more convincing or condemnatory
than it is.''

The defendants in General Westmoreland's suit - believed to be the first libel
action by a high Federal official regarding his official conduct to reach trial
- are CBS, Mr. Wallace, Mr. Crile and Samuel A. Adams, a former analyst for the
Central Intelligence Agency who served as a paid consultant for the documentary.


Trial to Last Months


In preparation for the trial, which is expected to last at least several months,
Mr. Boies and Mr. Burt have, in effect, re-researched the 90-minute documentary
that CBS showed on Jan. 23, 1982 to a viewing audience estimated at 9.6 million.

The money both lawyers spent and the hours they worked - estimated to total as
many as 100,000, including the assistance of a dozen other lawyers - and
documents they amassed - 300,000 pages from from Government agencies and other
sources, 12,000 pages of depositions from prospective witnesses questioned in
London, Paris and Munich - may represent the most expensive and wide-ranging
fact-gathering process ever marshaled for a libel suit against a news
organization.

''We,'' said Mr. Boies, ''have gone and re-done the broadcast the way George
Crile would have done it originally if he had had 10 to 20 times what his budget
was and the power of subpeona.'' The documentary, according to CBS, cost
$250,000.

Mr. Boies is a 43-year old partner at the firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore; Mr.
Burt is the 42-year president of the Capital Legal Foundation.

The Washington-based, public-interest law firm headed by Mr. Burt and financed,
in large measure, by foundations with a conservative political orientation, was
established in 1977 ''to promote a fair, free market approach to federal
regulation.'' Mr. Burt has said his firm was providing its services to General
Westmoreland without charge; the general has said that if he wins any monetary
award in the case, he will donate it to charity.

Former Officials to Testify


The trial is expected to include testimony from various generals and colonels
and from such Johnson Administration officials as Robert S. McNamara, Secretary
of Defense; Dean Rusk, Secretary of State; Walt W. Rostow, Special Assistant for
National Security Affairs, and Richard Helms, Director of Central Intelligence.

None of these senior civilian officials, however, appeared on the broadcast. Mr.
Rostow was interviewed on camera by Mr. Wallace; Mr. McNamara spoke to Mr. Crile
off the record; Mr. Helms declined to be interviewed and Mr. Rusk was not
contacted.

Mr. Rostow and Robert W. Komer, who was chief civilian deputy to General
Westmoreland in charge of the so- called pacification effort in Vietnam and was
not contacted for the documentary, are scheduled to be the initial witnesses for
the general, whose side will elicit the first testimony after jury selection.

Among the later witnesses will be General Westmoreland, who fought in three wars
during a 36-year military career that ended with a tour as Army Chief of Staff,
a man who led the troops during an unpopular, unvictorious and divisive war and
who now describes himself as simply ''an old soldier who loves his country.''

Also taking the stand will be Mr. Wallace and Mr. Crile. A pre-eminent
television figure who was the ''chief correspondent'' and narrator for the
documentary, Mr. Wallace, 66, is widely regarded as one of the toughest
interrogators in his profession. Mr. Crile, 39, is considered by many of his
colleagues as a hard-driving, if sometimes abrasive, producer.

View of Television Journalism


Through their testimony and that of others, and through thousands of pages of
CBS internal documents, the trial will provide an unusually intimate picture of
television journalism at one network - from the conception of a program to the
final editing, from what was said in the offices and corridors of CBS to what
was put on the air.

Through the introduction of scores of secret and ''eyes only'' cables and
memoranda, the trial will also offer a rare public dissection of the workings of
wartime intelligence analysts and the pressures on their superiors.

Already, the case has been a boon to scholars. Larry Berman, a University of
California political scientist who wrote ''Planning a Tragedy: The
Americanization of the War in Vietnam,'' and is at work on a book about the
1966-68 period in the war, said the release of documents through the case had
''moved up our access to many primary source materials by 10 years.''

The CBS documentary - which re- examined and amplified a well-publicized dispute
in which facts are mixed with perception - had its origin in a relationship
between Mr. Crile and Mr. Adams, a C.I.A. specialist on Vietnam who contended in
1967 that the size of the enemy was twice the figure of 250,000 to 300,000
generally cited by military and civilian leaders. To Mr. Adams, the frequently
optimistic reports then that United States troops were winning the ''war of
attrition'' were not only unwarranted; they were a dangerous delusion.

Mr. Adams and some of his colleagues in the C.I.A. made their arguments during
the preparation of a special national intelligence estimate of the enemy in the
summer of 1967. But the compromise that was reached between Mr. Adams's
superiors and General Westmoreland's command that fall - resulting in figures
that Mr. Adams later called ''a monument of deceit'' - settled on an enemy
strength figure of 223,000 to 248,000.

Order of Battle


The official military document in which these figures were listed was known as
the order of battle.

The new range of enemy strength included 118,000 regular troops - 54,000 North
Vietnamese and 64,000 Vietcong - as well as 70,000 to 90,000 guerrillas, a
''considerable increase'' attributed to earlier ''underestimation'' rather than
new strength. It also included 35,000 to 40,000 ''administrative service''
personnel.

The new order of battle omitted two previous components of enemy strength -
making comparisons of totals difficult.

One element taken out was the political cadre, now doubled in number to a range
of 75,000 to 85,000.

The other element now excluded, on General Westmoreland's authority, consisted
of the self-defense and secret self-defense units, which had previously been
estimated at about 70,000. They were not publicly quantified now - over Mr.
Adams's objection - but, in their discussions with the C.I.A. in mid-1967, the
military estimated their numbers at 117,000. Moreover, officials in the White
House and elsewhere were reminded that these forces may once have been as
numerous as 150,000 and, despite losses, were ''still large and constitute a
part of the overall Communist effort.''

Some military and C.I.A. officials say these part-time village and hamlet forces
and ''fifth columnists'' were responsible for many American casualties. Others,
like General Westmoreland, say that the forces had little or no offensive
capability and didn't belong in the ''order of battle'' in the first place.

Cables to General Wheeler


But, from cables that General Westmoreland sent in 1967 to Gen. Earle Wheeler,
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and from his statements on the CBS
documentary 15 years later, it is clear that General Westmoreland and his
superiors were greatly concerned that the press would graft a large figure for
the self-defense and secret self- defense forces onto the other new figures.
That concern was shared by the United States Ambassador in Saigon, Ellsworth
Bunker, who was not interviewed for the documentary.

In an ''eyes only'' cable in 1967 to Mr. Rostow, Mr. Bunker, who died last
month, warned of ''the devastating impact if it should leak out (as these things
often do) that despite all our success in grinding down VC/NVA here,''
statistics showed ''that they are really much stronger than ever. Despite all
caveats, this is the inevitable conclusion which most of the press would
reach.''

Mr. Rostow wrote the President on Nov. 21, 1967 that the ''danger is press will
latch on to previous underestimate and revive credibility gap talk.''

When the new order of battle was unveiled a few days later in Washington and
Saigon, with its maximum total of 248,000, military spokesmen said this
represented a decline of some 40,000 enemy forces, noting that it did not count
the political cadre and self-defense and secret self-defense estimates.

Press Emphasized 'Decline'


Although most press reports initially emphasized a ''decline,'' some newspapers
were soon were adding up all the categories. In a detailed, front-page story on
Dec. 19, 1967, The New York Times reported that enemy manpower in Vietnam could
be as high as 483,000 - virtually the same overall figure that Defense
Department officials were then circulating to the White House, C.I.A., State
Department and other agencies.

Yet in 1973, shortly before he resigned from the C.I.A., Mr. Adams testified at
the trial of Daniel Ellsberg, the former Defense Department analyst, that the
military had purposely diminished estimates of enemy strength in Vietnam. He
sounded this theme again in 1975 in testimony before the House Select Committee
on Intelligence, which concluded that Congress and ''perhaps the President,''
had been misled.

General Westmoreland, in a three- page letter responding to a committee member,
''categorically'' denied any effort by military intelligence ''to deliberately
downgrade estimates of Vietcong strengths in order to portray the VC as weaker
than they actually were.''

In 1975, too, Mr. Adams wrote an article on the subject for Harper's magazine,
where Mr. Crile, as an editor there, worked on the article.

Mr. Crile, who became a producer at CBS in 1976, stayed in touch with Mr. Adams,
who was writing a book on the order of battle controversy. And in November 1980,
in a 16-page proposal that contained the word ''conspiracy'' 24 times, Mr. Crile
suggested the documentary to CBS. Mr. Adams - who contributed his research to
the program, attended interviews and was in and out of the editing room - was
paid $25,000 for his services as a consultant for the program.

Shortly after Mr. Adams was interviewed for the program by Mr. Wallace in May
1981, Mr. Crile sent him a note about the interview scheduled days later with
General Westmoreland.

''The Adams interview was not only a terrific interview,'' the note said. ''It
looks beautiful. Now all you have to do is break General Westmoreland and we
have the whole thing aced.''

80 People Interviewed


More than 80 people were interviewed for the documentary, 13 on camera. The last
on-camera interview was on July 24, 1981, a three-hour session with Mr. Rostow.
None of that interview was used for the program.

Mr. Rostow repeatedly told Mr. Wallace that CBS had a mistaken impression of
what President Johnson knew, and relied on, regarding enemy strength, and
suggested that the order of battle controversy might have been an honest
disagreement among people laboring in ''the fog of war.'' But Mr. Crile would
later say that, because Mr. Rostow had no direct knowledge of any deception by
General Westmoreland's command, his remarks were not needed for the program.

The thesis of the heavily-advertised documentary was summarized at the beginning
of the program by Mr. Wallace.

''The fact is that we Americans were misinformed about the nature and the size
of the enemy we were facing,'' he reported, ''and tonight we're going to present
evidence of what we have come to believe was a conscious effort - indeed, a
conspiracy at the highest levels of American military intelligence - to suppress
and alter critical intelligence on the enemy in the year leading up to the Tet
offensive.''

Statements by Retired Officers


In support of that thesis, the documentary included statements or admissions by
a half dozen retired military intelligence officers, by Mr. Adams and George
Allen, another C.I.A. specialist on Vietnamese affairs, who contended that the
military leadership had arbitrarily slashed its enemy strength figures for
essentially political reasons.

Of the nine people other than Mr. Adams and General Westmoreland who appeared on
the program, eight basically supported Mr. Adams's view and one, who appeared
for 21 seconds, supported the general. Some of the officers said that, while
they had no direct orders from General Westmoreland, they personally reduced
figures artificially or had witnessed others doing it because they believed,
from briefings with the general or discussions and messages from his aides, he
would not accept higher numbers.

Except on the issue of how many North Vietnamese troops were infiltrating into
South Vietnam in the fall of 1967 - Mr. Wallace said that officers' reports of
higher figures were ''systematically blocked'' by the command - the supposed
reduction was not said to have affected the official count of the enemy's
regular uniformed forces. They were estimated by virtually all analysts at
118,000.

Described 'New Tactic'


Mr. Wallace described the deletion of the self-defense and secret self-defense
forces as ''a new tactic'' by General Westmoreland to keep enemy strength
figures down and that the general ''suddenly'' wanted them ''treated as if they
didn't exist.''

When General Westmoreland said, on the program, that ''people in Washington were
not sophisticated enough to understand and evaluate this thing, and neither was
the public,'' Mr. Wallace said: ''We underscore what General Westmoreland just
said about his decision. He chose not to inform the Congress, the President, not
even the Joint Chiefs of Staff, of the evidence collected by his intelligence
chief, evidence which indicated a far larger enemy.''

After the program was aired, General Westmoreland denounced it as ''vicious,
scurrilous and premeditated attack on my character and personal integrity.''

He demanded an apology from CBS, which was not forthcoming. A CBS internal study
concluded that there were editing mistakes and other violations of the network's
news standards in the program and that the ''judgmental conclusion of conspiracy
was inappropriate.'' But CBS said it stood by the documentary. Mr. Crile, in a
letter to Mr. Wallace, said that, ''with its eyes wide open,'' CBS got ''the
documentary they commissioned.''

In September, 1982, several months after TV Guide published an article highly
critical of procedures used in the making of the program, General Westmoreland
brought suit.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Westmoreland (page B8); photo of George Crile (page B8);
photo of Mike Wallace (page B8)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DARING 'BOAT PEOPLE' RESCUE BRINGS HONOR TO 3 AMERICANS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1142 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Oct. 8


Chua Quach was not present at an awards ceremony here today at which three
American seamen were honored by Poul Hartling of Denmark, the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

Yet no one knows better than Mr. Quach, a Vietnamese refugee who now works as a
laborer in a furniture factory in Philadelphia, what happened on the night of
Sept. 23, 1983, in the stormy sea off the north coast of Borneo.

That was when Capt. Lewis M. Hiller stopped his 94,000-ton tanker, the Rose
City, and went to the aid of Mr. Quach and 85 other refugees who were adrift in
a small boat. Neither Mr. Quach nor the other refugees were present at the award
ceremony today.

Without the heroic assistance of the Americans, Mr. Quach says, he would have
died that night, together with his son. So would the other Vietnamese ''boat
people'' adrift with him in the South China Sea - without food, with water only
for the children and having burned most of their clothes in eight days and
nights trying vainly to signal passing ships.

The award given to Captain Hiller and two crew members, Jeffrey H. Kass and
Gregg Turay, was the Nansen Medal, the highest honor for humanitarian efforts on
behalf of refugees. It was presented at the Palace of Nations here by Mr.
Hartling on behalf of a special committee. The group, similar to the one that
awards the Nobel Peace Prize, is made up of representatives of Norway and other
governments and international organizations.

Since Vietnamese began fleeing their country in great numbers in 1975, accounts
have multiplied of their small, often disabled, boats being ignored by merchant
vessels whose masters are eager to avoid the often time consuming, and thus
expensive, formalities of bringing the refugees to land.

Mr. Quach, said that ''more than 10'' ships had passed the refugee vessel before
the American tanker stopped. He recalled that crew members on one ship waved in
greeting as the ship sailed out of sight of the refugee boat.

In honoring the seamen, the awards committee departed from a custom of giving
the prize to an important international personality or refugee officials and
sought to highlight the importance that international bodies and many
governments attach to rescuing boat people.

Swam to Save 2


Mr. Quach said in an interview from the United States that he was particularly
grateful to Mr. Kass, 31 years old, a seaman from Seattle whose chief activity
when he is not at sea is tending an organic garden on an island off Vancouver.

Mr. Kass swam through turbulent waters at night to rescue Mr. Quach, 43, and his
8-year-old son, who had clung to a lifesaver for two hours.

Mr. Quach said that at the time of the rescue, there was no food and little
water left on the rickety boat, heavily overloaded with 36 men, 20 women and 30
children. A 16-year-old girl drowned during the rescue operation.

When he decided to escape, Mr. Quach had just been released after seven and a
half years in a ''re-education'' camp, to which he was confined for having been
a lieutenant in the South Vietnamese Army. ''I had never done my duty as a
father to my son,'' he said, ''so my wife and I decided we had to do this.''

Mr. Quach and his son said they hoped Mrs. Quach, who remained behind in
Vietnam, would soon be able to join them.



Abandons Hope

When the lights of the Rose City beckoned in the distance, Mr. Quach said, he
had abandoned hope for two days and was devoting all his time to consoling his
son, ''to spend my time on him before we die.''

''I held my son to my bosom and waited for the time to die,'' said Mr. Quach, a
graduate of Saigon University in linguistics who speaks fluent English.

He was chosen to be the first to try to climb aboard the Rose City, which had
let down rope ladders. ''I was supposed to lie,'' he said. ''I was supposed to
say we were 50, because we feared we would be refused if I said we were about
90.''

He never told his lie, because his son slipped out of his embrace as he tried to
climb the ladder and Mr. Quach jumped into the sea after him.

Fortunately, he had instructed the child before leaving Vietnam in how to stay
underwater. He had made his son immerse his head fully in a tub, successively
lengthening the time the child held his breath. They reached one of the life
rings Captain Hiller had ordered thrown toward the refugee boat.

From his reading, Mr. Quach recalled that lifesavers had signal lights attached.
''When I found it and turned it on,'' he said, ''I felt hope and told my son we
would be rescued. But time passed and nobody came. The Rose City got smaller and
smaller, and I came to lose hope.''

''I told my son, 'I'm very sorry I haven't done my duty as a father.'

''He said, 'Don't talk about this; say something cheerful.' But I made up my
mind to throw away the lifesaver and to hold my son and die quickly together.''

Help Arrives


At about that time, Mr. Kass, who with others of the crew had descended into the
refugee boat to use it to search for survivors and had been overcome by
seasickness, spotted the father and son. He handed one end of a line to a
shipmate and jumped into the chopppy sea. Reaching father and son with great
difficulty, he pulled the lifesaver and those holding onto it to the refugee
boat.

Mr. Kass jumped into the sea a second time when Mr. Turay, 27 years old,
carrying an unsecured line, swam out to rescue another survivor who was clinging
to a lifesaver. All three men made it back through a heaving sea. Earlier, a
human chain of seamen on the rope ladders had handed the young and old up to
safety, timing their moves as the heavy waves raised the refugee boat partly up
the 40-foot height difference between the vessels.

'Felt Totally Obliged'


The principal message of the High Commissioner's speech was to plead with the
maritime industry to obey the moral law of the sea that Captain Hiller said he
followed without hesitation.

The moral law of the sea, which is not codified in any statute book, is to give
help to those in need and has long been a tradition among seamen. But there is
no stated policy per se that has been adopted toward the boat people.

''I am sad and disturbed about so many reports that ships are passing by
refugees in trouble,'' said Captain Hiller, 55, of Lakehurst, N.J., in an
interview. ''I felt totally obliged to stop and offer any assistance I could.''

Captain Hiller was warmly supported by Stephanos Alexiou, vice president of the
Apex Marine Corporation of Lake Success, L.I., operator of the Rose City. ''We
were so happy to rescue refugees we didn't even calculate the cost,'' he said.

The award was named after Fridtjof Nansen, the Norwegian Arctic explorer and
statesman, who was High Commissioner for Refugees under the old League of
Nations.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of boat people

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR OFFICER SAID TO HAVE TOLD OF NAPALM USE

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 8


The commander of El Salvador's air force told visiting members of the United
States Congress last year that napalm incendiary weapons had been used against
guerrilla forces, a member of the delegation said today.

Representative James L. Oberstar, a Minnesota Democrat who was a member of a
fact-finding mission to El Salvador in March 1983, said the air force leader,
Col. Rafael Bustillo, had informed the delegation that before the availability
of American-built A-37 aircraft provided Salvadoran pilots with good accuracy
for conventional bombing, they used napalm weapons supplied by Israel.

A report on the delegation's trip quoted Colonel Bustillo as having said:
''Before the U.S. started helping us, we had to use napalm, because we didn't
have any other equipment. We bought it from Israel several years ago, and used
it until 1981. If we hadn't done that, I might not be sitting here today.''

Napalm, a sticky, jellylike substance formed by mixing liquid fuels with a
thickener, was widely used in World War II and in the Korean and Vietnam wars.
Its purported use during El Salvador's civil war has been a matter of
controversy, with reports by refugees and field doctors being matched against
denials by the Salvadoran Government.

The delegation's report appeared in The Congressional Record of May 26, 1983,
shortly after the delegation's trip, but attracted little notice.

Besides Mr. Oberstar, the Congressional delegation consisted of Representative
James M. Jeffords, Republican of Vermont, and Representative Bill Richardson,
Democrat of New Mexico. The report was written by William Woodward, a staff aide
who accompanied them, with the approval of each Congressman. Their trip had been
organized by the Unitarian Universalist Service Committee, a private
Boston-based group that began sponsoring fact-finding missions to Central
America in 1978.

''I raised questions about what equipment the Salvadoran Air Force could use and
what additional equipment they needed,'' Mr. Oberstar said today of his meeting
with Colonel Bustillo. ''He said the A-37 gave them pinpoint capability, but
before that they had to use napalm they were getting from the Israelis.''

A spokesman at the Israeli Embassy in Washington declined comment today on
whether Israel had supplied the napalm weapons, citing a ''longstanding policy
of making no comment concerning military sales.''

Repeated attempts to reach Colonel Bustillo by telephone in San Salvador went
unanswered.

Last month, Thomas R. Pickering, the United States Ambassador to El Salvador,
confirmed the existence of a Salvadoran Government stockpile of napalm
incendiary weapons. He refused to comment on the size or source of the
stockpile, other than to say the napalm had come from outside El Salvador but
not from the United States.

On Sunday, the Salvadoran Defense Minister, Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova, told
reporters in San Salvdor that the air force possessed about 25 napalm bombs.

Mr. Pickering said he knew of ''no verifiable reports'' of napalm bombing in El
Salvador.

Medical Aid for El Salvador, an American humanitarian aid group, has charged
that the Salvadoran Government was using incendiary weapons, based on testimony
from refugees and medical examinations of burn victims.

Last week, 47 members of Congress sent a letter to President Reagan urging that
he ''strongly oppose the use or acquisition of napalm by Salvadoran armed
forces.''

Israel entered the Central American arms market in the mid-1970's, largely to
provide weapons to the Nicaraguan Government, then headed by Anastasio Somoza
Debayle. According to State Department and intelligence officials, Israeli
munitions moved mainly into countries that were denied American arms because of
human rights violations. In recent years, Israel has become one of the principal
suppliers of weapons not only in Central America but in Argentina and Chile.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Conscientious Objectors

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 301 words


Virtually every constituency in the country has at least a few members of
Congress as its champions. For conscientious objectors opposed to military
spending, there is Senator Mark O. Hatfield, an Oregon Republican.

''Every hour the world spends more than $30 million to prepare for and engage it
in war,'' Senator Hatfield estimated. ''World military expenditures in two weeks
could provide food, clothing and housing for all poor men, women and children
around the globe.''

So each year since 1977, the Senator has introduced what he calls the world
peace tax fund bill.

''Conscientious objectors must either compromise deeply held moral and religious
principles by paying the military portion of their taxes or break the law of our
land,'' the Senator said in a statement in support of his latest measure. ''The
world peace tax fund bill seeks to provide a resolution to that dilemma by
allowing the conscientious objector to channel his income, estate and gift tax
payments into nonmilitary programs and special peacemaking projects.''

He added that in the Vietnam War 1.57 percent of draftees were recognized as
conscientious objectors and that if the same percentage of taxpayers diverted
tax payments to the peace fund it would produce $1.6 billion for ''the active
pursuit of peace.''

The Hatfield measure of 1984, which is in the Finance Committee, is not likely
to be approved before Congress adjourns for the year, but it has picked up
additional support. Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr., the Maryland Republican,
has been a co-sponsor with Mr. Hatfield for a few years, and this year they were
joined by Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the Connecticut Republican. Mr.
Hatfield said the three of them would ''continue to work to see that the world
peace tax fund becomes a reality.'

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 9, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


TUESDAY, OCTOBER 9, 1984 International

Jose Napoleon Duarte offered to hold peace talks with Salvadoran guerrilla
leaders, starting next Monday. President Duarte, who made the proposal at the
end of a 55-minute address to the United Nations, said he was ready to begin the
negotiations in La Palma, a Salvadoran town near the Honduran border. (Page A1,
Col. 2.)

Senior Salvadoran rebel officials in Mexico City said they were ''open and
attentive'' to the prospect of a meeting with President Jose Napoleon Duarte,
provided he formally invited them to El Salvador. (A10:1.)

A shift in U.S.-Honduras ties is sought by the Honduran Government, according to
Foreign Minister Edgardo Paz Barnica. In an interview in New York, he said his
Government wanted to reduce military ties with Washington and to receive more
economic aid from Washington. (A1:1.)

Iraqi warplanes hit a supertanker with a missile and killed six crewmen,
shipping officials in Bahrain reported. They said six other seamen were badly
burned in the attack on the Liberian-registry ship. (A1:1.)

Israel asked the United States for increased aid and other help for Israel's
troubled economy, according to Israeli and American officials. They said the
requests were made by Prime Minister Shimon Peres as he met for two and a half
hours in Washington with Secretary of State George P. Shultz. (A4:1-4.)

Three U.S. seamen were honored for rescuing, at great risk, 85 Vietnamese ''boat
people'' adrift in a storm in the South China Sea in 1983. The United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees presented the award in Geneva to the master of
the tanker Rose City, Captain Lewis M. Hiller, and two crew members, Jeffrey H.
Kass and Gregg Turay. (A1:2-3.) National

Walter F. Mondale made gains at President Reagan's expense in their Sunday
evening debate, in the view of many voters, according to public opinion polls.
Both The New York Times/CBS News Poll and a Gallup Poll for Newsweek magazine
showed that a solid plurality of voters regarded Mr. Mondale as the winner of
the 90-minute debate. (A1:6.)

President Reagan's aides indulged in the prize-fight metaphor of a champion
stung by jabs but hardly knocked out in his broadcast debate with Walter
Mondale. Mr. Reagan campaigned at rallies in Charlotte, N.C. and Baltimore.
(A29:1.)

An exuberant Walter Mondale proclaimed, ''Today we have a brand new race, today
everything is different.'' The Democratic Presidential candidate appeared
convinced that his performance in his debate with President Reagan had, in the
words of one key adviser, ''turned the election around.'' (A29:1-3.)

The nation's economic well-being has improved markedly in the last four years,
according to President Reagan. Federal Government statistics and experts'
analyses indicate that the overall economy is healthier. However, middle-class
Americans have done little better than hold their own, and the disparities
between groups have widened. (A1:5.)

Neither debater was precisely right many times in the 90-minute session Sunday
evening. The sharpest exchanges occurred when Walter Mondale charged that
President Reagan had sought to make major reductions in Medicare and Social
Security benefits. (A29:4-6.)

The Challenger astronauts lost much of their communications temporarily when
cosmic radiation disabled a relay satellite. But the astronauts, acting
resourcefully and coolly, and their helpers on the ground quickly activated an
alternative network for relaying human messages and scientific data. (A1:3-4.)

The last hunter-gatherer societies in the world are in a traumatic transition to
an uncertain future. Anthropologists and tribal leaders say the main question is
whether the remnants of hunting and gathering peoples can find dignified new
modes of living amid societies that have treated them with hostility,
indifference or condescension. (C1:5.)

The liner United States's contents are being sold in Norfolk Va. The auction of
about one million art works, furnishings and fittings from the luxury liner
attracted more than 1,000 enthusiastic viewers and bidders for the first day of
a sale that continues through Sunday. The auction is the first step in
transforming the liner into a cruise ship. (C12:5-6.) Metropolitan

William C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS goes to trial today with the
start of jury selecion in Federal District Court in Manhattan. In the $120
million suit, General Westmoreland charges he was falsely accused on a CBS
program of deceiving President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the
strength of enemy forces in Vietnam before the Tet offensive of 1968. (A1:5-6.)

The Columbus Day Parade up Manhattan's Fifth Avenue became an exuberant
political rally as Vice President Bush and the Democratic national candidates,
Walter F. Mondale and Geraldine A. Ferraro, marched before a crowd of hundreds
of thousands of people dominated by campaign banners, placards and posters. Mr.
Bush marched beside the grand marshal, Sophia Loren. (B3:3-6.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SUPREME COURT ROUNDUP;
PAROCHIAL SCHOOL CASE WILL BE HEARD

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 9


The Supreme Court expanded its already crowded docket of church-state cases
today by agreeing to decide whether the Constitution permits local school
systems to use Federal funds to teach remedial classes for disadvantaged
children in parochial schools.

At issue in the case, an appeal filed jointly by the Federal Government and the
New York City Board of Education, is one of the major Federal programs of aid to
local education. The program is Title I of the Elementary and Secondary
Education Act of 1965, and it channels $3 billion a year to local school
districts for special programs for children from areas with high concentrations
of poverty.

New York City administers the largest Title I program in the country, with
300,000 students enrolled in the special classes. Since 1966 the New York City
school system has used part of its Title I funds to pay the salaries of public
school teachers who teach the remedial classes full time in regular school hours
for eligible children in parochial schools. Forty thousand students attend the
parochial school Title I classes.

Three months ago the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in
New York, ruled that the city's use of the money on parochial school premises
violated the constitutionally required separation of church and state. The
program was challenged in 1978 by five individual New York City taxpayers.



Program Not Ruled Out

The appeals court did not rule that the Title I program itself was
unconstitutional. Its decision left open the possibility that the classes for
parochial school students could continue under different conditions, such as
after school hours on public school property. The case is complicated by the
fact that the Federal law itself requires local school districts that accept
Title I funds to make the program available on an ''equal'' basis to
''educationally deprived children'' in private and parochial schools.

New York initially tried to offer its Title I program to parochial school
students after hours in the public schools but discontinued that arrangement
because of low attendance.

The appeals court struck down the New York City program with evident reluctance.
Judge Henry J. Friendly's opinion said that ''we have no doubt'' the program
''has done much good,'' but that it was nonetheless clearly unconstitutional
under a 1975 Supreme Court decision, Meek v. Pittenger.

In that 6-to-3 decision, the High Court held unconstitutional a Pennsylvania law
under which public school teachers were to enter the parochial schools to offer
''auxiliary services,'' including remedial courses for disadvantaged children.

In its appeal in the New York case, the Justice Department argued that the issue
should not be regarded as foreclosed by the 1975 decision. Because the
Pennsylvania statute was challenged soon after its enactment, the Government
brief said, the Court did not have a chance to see a record of the program in
operation, while the New York program has been operating for 18 years and ''has
avoided the dangers identified by the Court in Meek.''

Parents Join the AppealThe Government said the issue was whether ''those who
exercise their constitutional right to send their children to religiously
oriented schools'' can receive Federal benefits without discrimination.

A group of parents of New York City parochial school children also joined the
appeal, Aguilar v. Felton, No. 84- 237. The case will probably be argued in
December along with another very similar parochial aid case already accepted for
argument. In that case, the city of Grand Rapids, Mich., is appealing a Federal
court ruling that barred it from sending public school teachers into the
parochial schools.

Other actions as the new Court term entered its second week included these:

Residency Test

The Court agreed to hear a challenge to a New Mexico law that gives a special
tax exemption to Vietnam veterans, limited to those veterans who have lived in
New Mexico since May 1976. The law was unsuccessfully challenged in the state
courts by a veteran who did not move to New Mexico until 1981. In his appeal,
Hooper v. Bernalillo County, No. 84-231, the veteran is arguing that by linking
a benefit to length of residency, the state is violating the constitutional
guarantees of equal protection, due process of law and the right to travel.

Voting Rights

The Court agreed to decide whether the State of Alabama may continue to strip
people of their right to vote after conviction for various petty offenses.

Convicted felons lose the right to vote in many states. At issue in the Alabama
case is a provision of the State Constitution from the Reconstruction era under
which those convicted of such misdemeanors as vagrancy and adultery are
disqualified from voting. More serious offenses, such as manslaughter and
assault, do not lead to disqualification.

The state is appealing a decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the
11th Circuit, which ruled that the provision discriminated against blacks in
violation of the 14th Amendment. The appeals court based its conclusion on
evidence from the State's Constitutional Convention of 1901, showing that the
specific crimes were selected for the purpose of stripping the right to vote
from the recently enfranchised black voters. ''We want to be relieved of
purchasing the Negroes to carry elections,'' one delegate said.

In its appeal, Hunter v. Underwood, No. 84-76, Alabama is arguing that the
Federal court itself violated the Constitution by interfering with the state's
control of its electoral process.

Defendant's Aid

Accepting an appeal from an inmate on Mississippi's death row, the Court agreed
to decide whether an indigent defendant ever has a right to court-appointed
ballistics and fingerprint experts to help him establish his defense. The
Mississippi Supreme Court rejected the inmate's request on the ground that the
Constitution provides no more than the right to a court-appointed lawyer. The
Justices have already scheduled arguments in a similar case from Oklahoma on
whether there is a constitutional right to a court- appointed psychiatrist. The
new case is Caldwell v. Miss., No. 83-6607.

Hostage Suit

The Court refused to hear an appeal by a group of former hostages in the United
States Embassy in Teheran, Iran. Two separate damage suits by former hostages
against the Government of Iran were dismissed by Federal appeals courts here and
in California on the ground that the Federal courts do not have jurisdiction
over actions taken by a foreign government in its own territory. The Federal
Government told the Court that those rulings were correct. The decision came in
McKeel v. Islamic Republic of Iran, No. 83-1890.

Diplomatic Immunity

The Court refused to hear an appeal by a Bulgarian trade official arrested in
New York a year ago on espionage charges. The official, Penyu B. Kostadinov,
argued that he was entitled to diplomatic immunity. A Federal district judge in
New York agreed with him, but the appeals court reinstated the charges and the
official is now expected to stand trial. The case is Kostadinov v. U.S., No.
84-35.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A SMALL WORKERS PARTY AIMS FIRE AT CAPITALISM

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 641 words


If Larry Holmes is elected President, he cannot serve. He is 32 years old, three
years less than the minimum age set by the Constitution. Nor can he step aside
in favor of his running mate, Gloria La Riva. She is 30.

Mr. Holmes is running on the ticket of the Workers World Party, one of several
small parties that have entered the Presidential contest this year. As he put it
in a recent interview: ''We're conducting an educational campaign to influence
people to become more interested in our party and other independent parties, so
that on Nov. 8, whoever is elected, the people will join the fight for
socialism.''

Mr. Holmes, born in Boston, was 6 years old when his mother moved with her four
children to Harlem. He was drafted in 1971 while he was attending Hunter
College, and he traces his political awakening to his year and a half in the
Army. In his telling, his efforts to organize the American Servicemen's Union
earned him an undesirable discharge.

He went back to school only fitfully, making a living as an office worker - ''a
little typing, a little bookkeeping, the sort of thing you can get in New
York,'' he said. When the campaign is over he expects to start looking for a new
job. He is not married.

Mr. Holmes was the Vice-Presidental candidate of the Workers World Party in its
first national campaign in 1980. The party was on the ballot in 13 states and
received 15,000 votes. It spent $150,000, which the candidate calls ''a teardrop
in a bucket.'' The money came from small contributors. This year, he expects to
spend about the same amount and to be on the ballot in 16 states. ''When we
travel, we don't stay in hotels,'' he said.

'Capitalism in Crisis'

Running on the slogan ''Jobs, Equality, Socialism, Not War!'' Mr. Holmes and
Miss La Riva, who lives in San Francisco, hold that ''capitalism is in a
crisis,'' and they look forward to the emergence of a ''class struggle'' in this
country.

''An election doesn't change much,'' said Mr. Holmes, who has played a prominent
role in rallies against the Reagan Administration's policies in Central America.

''The poor stay poor,'' he said. ''What changes things is when the masses come
out into the streets, like the unions did in the 30's and blacks and antiwar
people did in the 60's.''

''The working class is more and more impoverished,'' Mr. Holmes said. ''Laid-off
workers are being forced into menial jobs.'' He is running on a platform of
guaranteed jobs, food, education and health care. ''Without these rights,'' he
declared, ''human rights mean nothing.''

Party Supported Jackson

The Workers World Party supported the Rev. Jesse Jackson's campaign for the
Democratic Presidential nomination. If it had succeeded, Mr. Holmes said he
would not have entered the race. But he has no sympathy for Mr. Jackson's
subsequent efforts in behalf of the Democratic nominee, saying, ''Under no
circumstances could we support Walter Mondale.''

Mr. Holmes and Miss La Riva express admiration for such states as the Soviet
Union, Vietnam, Cuba, Nicaragua and Mozambique. ''A Russian citizen,'' said Mr.
Holmes, ''doesn't have to worry that if he passes out on a street in Leningrad
he won't get high-quality medical care.''

The Workers World candidates are strongly opposed to United States involvement
in countries like Nicaragua. They are skeptical of the Solidarity movement in
Poland, which Mr. Holmes suggested was being used by bankers in the United
States to undermine the Polish Government.

Mr. Holmes said he was certain of one thing: ''If the majority of the people in
most socialist countries, whatever their grievances, were asked to choose
between their own countries and America, and they knew what life was really like
for the workers in this country, they would choose the way they live now.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Larry Holmes

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE WITH GENTLE FIRMNESS

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section B; Page 28, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


Judge Pierre N. Leval was the man in charge yesterday when the opposing sides,
their lawyers and the prospective jurors assembled for the start of Gen. William
C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS.  The affable 48-year-old judge, who is
known for his calm and confident manner, may need all his equanimity to cope
with a case that has already attracted extraordinary attention. It involves a
$120 million lawsuit by General Westmoreland, who contends that he was libeled
by a CBS television program in 1982 about the Vietnam War.

Judge Leval will play a key role throughout the trial, from questioning
prospective jurors to maintaining courtroom decorum, supervising the admission
of evidence, ruling on requests by the lawyers and giving final instructions to
the jury.

Twenty years ago, Judge Leval began his career as a Federal prosecutor in the
United States Court House at Foley Square, where the current case is taking
place. He was working then for Robert M. Morgenthau, the United States Attorney
who later became the Manhattan District Attorney.

Asleep on the Floor


As a young Assistant United States Attorney, Judge Leval sometimes worked all
night, Mr. Morgenthau said last week. One night, Mr. Morgenthau recalled, the
future judge fell asleep at his desk and rolled off his chair onto the floor,
where a cleaning women found him the next morning - sound asleep on the floor.

''He's a very hard worker, a very conscientious guy, a first-rate legal
scholar,'' Mr. Morgenthau said, adding, ''He's a great judge.''

Lawyers note that Judge Leval has a relatively informal style that avoids the
stuffiness sometimes associated with judges. He is youthful looking, slightly
over 6 feet tall, with blue eyes and sandy hair. Recently, he has been using a
cane to help him walk, while recovering from a foot injury he suffered during
his summer vacation.

Pierre Nelson Leval was born in New York City on Sept. 4, 1936. His father, who
was in the grain business, came to this country from the French- speaking part
of Switzerland. The family lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.

Studied Art History


As a young man, the future judge attended Phillips Exeter Academy in New
Hampshire. He went on to Harvard University, where he majored in art history and
was graduated with honors in 1959. He considered a teaching career, but decided
to become a lawyer.

After his graduation, he served a six-month stint in the Army as an enlisted
man, then returned to Harvard, this time to the Law School. He worked on the Law
Review and ranked near the top of his graduating class in 1963. He then became a
law clerk for Judge Henry J. Friendly of the United States Court of Appeals for
the Second Circuit.

''He was a wonderful law clerk,'' according to Judge Friendly, who remembers him
as a hard-working, pleasant young man with a good sense of humor. Judge Friendly
added that Judge Leval was one of several in ''my pantheon of best clerks.''

''He's confident - he seems very gentle, but there's a lot of firmness behind
that,'' Judge Friendly said, noting that they have remained friends over the
years. He added, ''I encouraged him to become a judge.''

Law and Apples


Judge Leval followed his one-year clerkship by serving as an Assistant United
States Attorney in Manhattan from 1964 to 1968, working for Mr. Morgenthau. He
was one of the assistants who was often invited into the boss's office to
discuss cases - and munch apples that came in an endless supply from Mr.
Morgenthau's upstate farm.

The future judge rose to the position of chief appellate attorney before leaving
the prosecutor's office to join the law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &
Hamilton, where he handled litigation and financial matters.

He left the firm in 1975 to rejoin Mr. Morgenthau, this time in the District
Attorney's office. He had managed Mr. Morgenthau's political campaign for
District Attorney. And he worked in the office for two years, becoming the Chief
Assistant District Attorney.

Appointed by Carter


In 1977, at the unusually early age of 41, he was appointed to the lifetime post
of a Federal judge. He sits in the Federal District Court for the Southern
District of New York, based in Manhattan, with jurisdiction extending to the
Bronx and six counties north of the city. He is a Democrat appointed by
President Carter.

The Westmoreland-CBS libel case was assigned to Judge Leval by chance under a
random assignment system used in the court. The judge has declined all requests
for interviews.

Judge Leval is married to the former Susana Torruella, who is an art historian.
They live in New York City and have an eight-year-old daughter named India.

Reflecting his French background, the judge enjoys good food and wine, and he
has been described by friends as an excellent host. They also note that he is
interested in photography, enjoys carpentry and builds furniture for his country
house in Woodstock, N.Y.

His life was strongly influenced by Judge Friendly and by Mr. Morgenthau,
according to Stephen Kaufman, a friend who worked closely with him as a
prosecutor. Mr. Kaufman added that Judge Leval was ''very independent and
concerned with quality.''

''He creates an atmosphere in the courtroom that litigants look for and rarely
find,'' Mr. Kaufman said. ''No responsible lawyer would ever complain about not
having an opportunity to try his case.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge Pierre Leval

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 10, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JURY SELECTION NEAR COMPLETION IN LIBEL SUIT

SECTION: Section B; Page 28, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


Jury selection neared completion yesterday in the $120 million libel suit
brought against CBS by Gen. William C. Westmoreland, who commanded United States
forces in Vietnam between 1964 and 1968.

Dan M. Burt, the lawyer for General Westmoreland, and David Boies, the lawyer
for CBS, said they were satisified with 12 of the jurors who were question
intensively by Federal Judge Pierre N. Leval at the United States District Court
in Manhattan.

However, legal sources indicated last night that there may be a problem with one
or two of the jurors arranging to be absent from work for the duration of the
trial.

Cross Section of Jurors


Among the jurors who appeared to have been approved by the lawyers were: two
accountants, one 33-years- old and the other 42; a 32-year-old insurance
casualty underwriter; a 24- year-old foreman at a cosmetics manufacturing plant;
the 53-year-old owner of a gift shop; a 26-year-old dental assistant; a
55-year-old Consolidated Edison Company service representative; a 30-year-old
Citibank employe, and a 49-year-old employe of the Internal Revenue Service.
Many are college educated.

The selection of six alternate jurors is expected to take place today.

General Westmoreland, who is retired, contends in his suit that he was falsely
accused on a 1982 CBS Reports documentary of deceiving President Johnson and the
Joint Chiefs of Staff about the strength of the enemy in Vietnam. CBS has
defended the documentary - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - as
true.

The prospective jurors were questioned for six hours about their connections to
the Vietnam War and to the press, as well as their reading habits, the
regularity with which they watched television, their membership in organizations
and even whether they played golf or bowled. Occasionally the lawyers in the
case joined the questioning.

Dozen Candidates Excused


More than a dozen candidates were excused, some for their own personal reasons
and others on formal challenges by lawyers in the case.

General Westmoreland, wearing a gray suit, sat a few feet from the jury box as
Judge Leval asked candidates whether they recognized the names of scores of
possible witnesses in the case, including Robert S. McNamara, former Secretary
of Defense; Dean Rusk, former Secretary of State and Richard M. Helms, former
Director of Central Intelligence. Only one or two indicated that they were
familiar with the names.

The other defendants in the suit, which will raise such issues as the conduct of
the war and the procedures used in the making of a television documentary,
include Mike Wallace, the narrator and ''chief correspondent'' of the program;
George Crile, the program's producer, and Samuel A. Adams, a former analyst for
the Central Intelligence Agency who was a paid consultant for the documentary.

None of the prospective jurors who were questioned yesterday had served in
Vietnam. One has a son who is an Army staff sergeant and another said he ''had a
personal view against the Vietnam War.'' Like the other jurors, however, they
said they would not be prejudiced in their consideration of evidence in the
trial, which Judge Leval said would probably take 10 weeks to four months.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 11, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON FORMS WAR PRESS POOL; NEWSPAPER REPORTERS EXCLUDED

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1442 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 10


Defense Department officials today disclosed the makeup of a press pool the
Government would form to cover the initial stages of surprise military
operations. It would include news agency, radio, television and magazine
reporters but not reporters from individual newspapers.

The news agencies to be included in the pool, The Associated Press and United
Press International, send their reports to newspapers as well as to television
and radio stations.

Representatives of some newspapers protested the exclusion of their reporters
and the fact that the Pentagon was determining the composition of the pool.
They said they would call for revision of the planned pool.

Pentagon officials said the organizations to be represented in the pool, which
was set up in answer to criticisms from the press over limits on coverage of the
invasion of Grenada a year ago, had been picked by the Defense Department but
that the news organizations could choose the correspondents. They said the pool
should be ready to cover military contingencies on short notice.



A Total of 11 People

The officials said the Defense Department had proposed ground rules, similar to
those used during the war in Vietnam, to govern the coverage. Those proposals
are being studied by the organizations that have been selected and are not yet
final, the officials said.

The pool would include two news agency reporters, one radio correspondent, four
television reporters, a camera operator, a sound technician, a still
photographer and a magazine writer, for a total of 11 people.

The Pentagon pool would be unusual in at least two respects:


- Its composition would be determined by the Government. Traditionally,
Government agencies have established the need for a pool when coverage had to be
restricted because of limited space or transport, but left to the press the
choice on which organizations would be represented.


- Newspapers have been left out. In most press pools in the past,
representatives of all segments of mass communications have been included, with
priority given to news agencies when space was severely limited.  The Pentagon
officials said reporters from newspapers had been excluded because they thought
the newspapers' needs could be filled by news agencies. They also said the large
number of newspapers made negotiating with them difficult.

Moreover, some officials said privately, senior Pentagon officials had expected
more resistance to proposed ground rules for coverage from newspapers than from
other news organizations because newspapers have usually taken more independent
stands against restrictions.



Invasion of Grenada

The issue of coverage of military operations erupted when President Reagan
ordered the Grenada invasion. At the request of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger prohibited coverage of the initial
stages of the operation and permitted only limited reporting until it was nearly
over.

That touched off a wave of protests from most news organizations, although polls
indicated a majority of the public initially supported the exclusion. News
executives cited the Grenada restrictions as a departure from a long history of
war correspondence dating from the Civil War.

In response to the protests from news organizations, the Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., formed a panel of officers and
journalists led by a retired Army public affairs officer, Maj. Gen. Winant
Sidle, to take testimony from news executives.

Several Executives Astonished


Today several newspaper executives reacted with astonishment to the Pentagon's
disclosure of the pool.

Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, publisher of The New York Times, said in a statement:
''The Defense Department's plan to ban newspaper reporters from selected
military operations is incredible. It reveals the Administration to be out of
touch with journalism, reality and the First Amendment.'' Mr. Sulzberger, who
has served as a captain in the Marine Corps, said: ''From the earliest days of
this republic, newspaper reporters have had a long and honorable relationship
with our nation's soldiers. If any coverage anywhere does ever have to be
limited, it is impermissible that Defense Secretary Weinberger should be the one
to choose his favorites.

''The New York Times's duty to its readers will find us making strenuous efforts
to reverse this whole approach and this blatant act of discrimination.''

Association Seeks 'Correction'


The chairman of the American Newspaper Publishers Association, Richard J. V.
Johnson, president of The Houston Chronicle, said in a statement: ''We are
pleased that the Department of Defense has taken the first step toward creating
an effective contingency press pool for U.S. military operations. Obviously, a
pool of 11 must include at least one experienced daily newspaper reporter, and
we have asked the Pentagon to make that correction promptly.''

Seymour Topping, managing editor of The New York Times, said The Times intended
to join other newspaper organizations in pressing for revisions of the decision.
''The special needs of newspapers in serving their readers cannot be fully met
by news agency reports,'' he said.

Albert R. Hunt, Washington bureau chief of The Wall Street Journal, called the
decision ''outrageous and unacceptable,'' saying ''the notion of not having a
single newspaper in a pool is unprecedented.'' He added: ''I have never heard of
a pool arrangement that totally excludes newspapers. It would appear that they
are not anxious to give any opportunity for in-depth reporting on this.''

Benjamin Bradlee, executive editor of The Washington Post, said, ''The
Washington Post will do everything it can to report the news whether we are in
any pool or not.''

Reached in Gatlinburg, Tenn., where directors of the American Association of
Newspaper Editors opened a board meeting today, Richard D. Smyser, the
association president, said: ''I can't speak for the board, but my personal
opinion is that there is a great void there. I am certainly disturbed that there
is no provision for daily newspapers. Our freedom of information committee is
here. It is fortunate that we are all meeting here to consider this.''

'Maximum Degree Possible'


In its report in August, the Pentagon panel said, ''It is essential that the
U.S. news media cover U.S. military operations to the maximum degree possible,
consistent with mission security and the safety of U.S. forces.''

But the Pentagon's chief spokesman, Michael I. Burch, made clear in a briefing
on that report that the Secretary of Defense ''can dictate a national policy on
how an operation is covered.'' A news pool, Mr. Burch said, ''will more or less
be selected by us.'' He added, ''There will be some consultation, but the final
decisions are ours.''

The Pentagon officials said Mr. Burch met a week ago with the chiefs of
television, radio, magazine and news agency bureaus here to lay out his decision
and to propose a set of ground rules intended to provide security for military
forces.

The pool he described, the officials said, would be available on short notice,
with specific reporters and specific contacts in news organizations known to the
Pentagon. They said the number of people to be notified of an impending
operation would be restricted to preserve security.

Might Grow to 20


The officials said the pool would include reporters from the A.P. and U.P.I., a
radio reporter to be decided by radio networks and one correspondent each from
ABC News, CBS News and NBC News and from Cable News Network, to be decided by
each organization.

In addition, the officials said, the television networks could select a camera
operator and sound technician to work with the television reporters. The news
magazines, Newsweek, Time and U.S. News & World Report, would be allowed to
select one writer to represent all three. How a still photographer would be
chosen has not been decided, the officials said.

The officials said the pool might be enlarged to 20 people if space permitted
for a given operation, or might drop to two, one news agency reporter and a news
agency photographer, if military commanders decided no more could be taken.

They also said they expected the pool to last only for the first 24 hours of an
operation, after which coverage might be widened so that newspaper
correspondents and more reporters from other news organizations could enter the
battle zone. But that decision, they said, would be made by military commanders.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 11, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAGIC DRAGON'S NOT-SO-INNOCUOUS PUFF

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


To the Editor:


I take issue with '' 'Puff' the Magic Gunship'' by Mary Travers.

Her statement that ''the AC-47 caused many deaths in Vietnam - mostly of women
and children'' is false. Having worked with the weapons system, I know that its
use was tightly controlled. At no time was it allowed to be used
indiscriminately on ''peasant villages.'' In fact, the decision to fire on a
target usually required clearance from both the U.S. and Vietnamese commands,
causing delays that sometimes endangered the crew. Miss Travers suggests that it
was an uncontrollable and inaccurate weapon; the opposite is true. The AC-47 was
precise enough to be used close to our own soldiers - for which many troopers
serving in remote camps under siege were grateful.

More significant, I'm disturbed by the implication that the AC-47 killed mostly
women and children. It's grossly untrue and in a short phrase captures the
essence of why we veterans will always be bitter about our return from Vietnam.
My comrades fought and died with honor; criticism of their wartime actions
should at least be made with accuracy.

TERRENCE J. ENGLISH New York, Sept. 28, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 11, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND'S LAWYER OUTLINES CASE TODAY FOR THE JURORS

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


A. FARBER

Dan M. Burt, the lawyer for Gen. William C. Westmoreland in his $120 million
libel suit against CBS, will present his opening statement this morning to a
jury of six men and six women.

Mr. Burt is expected to take several hours to outline his evidence for the
jurors, who were selected yesterday and then instructed by Judge Pierre N. Leval
of Federal District Court in Manhattan on the rules of evidence and libel law.

An opening statement by David Boies, the attorney for CBS, may begin this
afternoon and continue on Friday. The first witnesses are not expected to
testify until next week.

General Westmoreland contends that he was falsely accused in a 1982 ''CBS
Reports'' documentary of having deceived President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs
of Staff about the strength of the enemy in South Vietnam, where the general
commanded American forces from 1964 to 1968.

CBS has defended the documentary - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception''
- as true.

'Then the Plaintiff Loses'


Judge Leval, addressing the jurors in a third-floor courtroom at the United
States Court House at Foley Square, instructed them that, if the supposedly
libelous statements were indeed true, ''then the plaintiff loses.''

Besides 12 regular members, who must render a unanimous verdict, the jury
selected yesterday includes 6 alternates.

The regular jurors, almost evenly divided between residents of the city and
residents of Westchester and Rockland Counties, are:

Richard Bendeniste, 32 years old, an insurance casualty underwriter. He is a
college graduate.

M. Patricia Roth, 42, an art teacher and a real-estate agent. She has a master's
degree.

Miriam Lucas, 55, a Consolidated Edison customer-service representative. She is
a high school graduate.

Michael Sussman, 42, an accountant and a college graduate.

David Lederman, 26, a research technician who holds a bachelor's degree.

Randy Frost, 24, a foreman for a cosmetics manufacturer. He is a junior in
college.

Eileen Miller, 30, a Citibank employe and a real-estate acquisitions specialist.
She holds a master's degree.

Myron Gold, 49, an employe of the Internal Revenue Service. He is a college
graduate.

Catherine Ryan, 53, the owner of a gift shop.

Carmen Batista, 54, born in Cuba and a resident of the United States for 20
years. She is an aide in a nursing home.

Linda Pasquale, 26, a dental assistant. She is a high school graduate.

Philip R. Chase, 33, a college graduate who is an accountant for New York State.

Of the jurors, only Mr. Frost expressed an opinion during questioning by Judge
Leval. He said he had ''a personal view against'' the Vietnam War. None of the
male jurors served in Indochina.

Chosen as alternate jurors were Loretta Brown, Norma Parker, Harold Boro, Li Li
Chan, Jean Betancourt and Cheryl Raymond.

The Conduct of the War


The trial, which is expected to last three or four months, will be a forum for
re-examining both the conduct of the war and the procedures used in the
preparation of the documentary.

Because of the trial's complexity and anticipated length, Judge Leval announced
that he was making two exceptions to regular court rules.

First, he said, the jurors will be allowed to take notes - although they may not
share their notes among themselves or quote from their notes during
deliberations. Yesterday afternoon notebooks were passed out to the jurors by
court officials.

Second, the judge said, each of the principal lawyers in the case will get an
additional two hours to address the jury, beyond their opening and closing
statements.

The lawyers may divide the two hours if they wish and use the time to clarify
issues for the jury or underscore the importance of particular evidence, he
said.

An 'Impossible' Task


Before his instructions to the jury, Judge Leval told the lawyers that it would
be ''hard, if not impossible'' for the jurors to refrain from discussing the
case among themselves over a period of several months, and that he would not ask
them to do so.

The case, he noted, is not a simple one of negligence where someone ''sprained
his back on the railroad.''

He said that, if the jurors were inevitably ''going to talk about it, I don't
know that it serves the institutions of justice'' to impose a rule that would be
ignored.

''What was it that Yogi Berra said?'' the judge asked Mr. Boies.

''It's not over till the defendant's case,'' the lawyer replied, smiling.

In explaining libel law to the jurors, Judge Leval said the burden of proof was
on the plaintiff, General Westmoreland.

The judge said the plaintiff must prove that the statements in question in the
documentary were defamatory, false and about General Westmoreland.

If the statements were ''substantially accurate,'' the judge said, ''you must
find for the defendant.''

If they were false, he continued, the plaintiff must show that they were made
with knowledge of their falsity or ''reckless disregard.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS APPROVES SPENDING BILL; DEBT LIMIT DELAYS ADJOURNMENT

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Friday, Oct. 12


Frustrated and exhausted, the nation's lawmakers early this morning abandoned
until later in the day efforts to increase the Federal debt limit. They were
thus forced once again to postpone adjournment of the 98th Congress.

The legislative snarl on the debt limit ended a day that began with jubilation
over the passage of a $470 billion spending bill, causing expectations of a
speedy adjournment. Both the House and Senate had in fact passed adjournment
resolutions, and by early Thursday morning many lawmakers had already left town,
some to campaign full- time for re-election.



Flying Them Back to Work

The Senate leadership this morning ordered Air Force planes to bring the absent
senators back to Washington for an 11 A.M. session.

The Senate voted 46 to 14 against increasing the debt limit, as Democrats
resolved to require Republicans to furnish a majority of the votes. Many
Democrats had been assailed in previous election campaigns by Republicans for
having voted to increase the debt limit, and the Democrats were determined to
make the Republicans accept responsibility for this increase.

''Closing a legislature is like killing a snake in the desert,'' said Senator
Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, the majority whip. ''You have to do it by
dark of night, chop it into pieces and then separate the pieces so they can't
get back together again.''

In adherence to Congressional tradition, the House majority and minority leaders
telephoned President Reagan at 7:30 Thursday evening to tell him Congress was
about to adjourn.

Jim Wright, Democrat of Texas, the majority leader of the House, told Mr. Reagan
that if he sought any new legislation, ''speak now or forever hold your peace.''
Robert H. Michel, Illinois Republican, the House minority leader, reported Mr.
Reagan's comments on the other end of the line.

''He said he thought on balance it was a pretty fair session, and wished us both
well,'' Mr. Michel said.  Howard H. Baker Jr., Republican of Tennessee, the
majority leader of the Senate, relieved any lingering concern that Mr. Reagan
might veto the spending bill, keeping the legislators away from the campaign
even longer.

''I'm authorized to say that the President will approve this measure,'' Mr.
Baker said of the spending bill, which provides funds for most Government
agencies for the next 12 months.

School Is OutThe Capitol Hill atmosphere had resembled the last day of school
when legislators felt that adjournment was within their grasp. The outflow began
Thursday morning, as some members of Congress headed for National Airport before
the final votes were taken on the spending bill or the increase in the debt
limit, the last remaining business before Congress.

''The buoyant spirit is tempered by fatigue,'' said Representative Thomas S.
Foley, a Washington Democrat, the majority whip. ''Our members got only three
hours' sleep last night.''

Thursday was a day to tidy up loose ends. Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of
Wyoming, finally conceded defeat on a measure to overhaul the nation's
immigration laws, which is interred in a House-Senate conference. He vowed to
work with his House counterpart, Representative Romano L. Mazzoli, a Kentucky
Democrat, to bring up a bill next year.

The Senate, which ran out of time to deliberate on and ratify the Genocide
Convention, which has been in limbo since 1949, voted to support the treaty's
principles and declared its intention to act quickly in the next Congress.
However, the measure will have to be approved again by the Foreign Relations
Committee before it reaches the floor.

The necessary business before adjournment was legislation to raise the debt
ceiling from $1,573 billion to $1,824 billion, a measure needed to permit the
Government to borrow more money to pay bills already incurred. In previous
years, votes to increase the debt limit have proven politically costly, and the
legislators approached the action with some trepidation.

Passage of the debt ceiling legislation was delayed earlier by a House-Senate
tussle over a tax bill mainly affecting real estate developers and sellers of
farms, small businesses and vacation homes who finance their own sales.

The Senate first postponed its debt ceiling vote to put pressure on the House to
approve a measure to ease provisions in the 1984 tax bill governing such
owner-financed sales of properties and businesses when interest rates charged
are below market rates. The new tax provisions were to have taken effect on Jan.
1, 1985.

But Representative Dan Rostenkowski, Democrat of Illinois, the chairman of the
Ways and Means Committee, remained adamant in opposing the Senate measure. The
two chambers eventually compromised on postponing the effective date of the new,
harsher tax provisions for six months so the new Congress could study the issue.

As part of the same compromise, both chambers also approved an extension through
Dec. 31, 1985, of the tax- free status of employer contributions to group legal
services plans.

Exception on Latin America

Senator John P. East, North Carolina Republican, took vigorous issue with the
House-Senate conference agreement to continue the ban on covert aid to the
Nicaraguan guerrillas at least until March 1, after which it could be lifted
only by an affirmative vote of both Houses after a Presidential certification
that the Nicaraguan Government was undermining its neighbors.

''We're going to lose Central America, as we lost South Vietnam, because the
U.S. Congress refused to provide the aid in this protracted conflict,'' the
Senator said. ''I hate to say it, but the average American doesn't know the
difference between a contra and a caterpillar, or between a Sandinista and a
sardine.''

With most of its major decisions behind it, Congress worked at a leisurely pace
Thursday.  Several legislators acknowledged that few knew the details of the
spending measure they adopted, which set both financing levels and policy for
most Government agencies. The House approved it early Thursday by a vote of 252
to 60. A total of 141 members, nearly one-third of the chamber, did not vote.

''I haven't been able to find anybody who can tell me what the level of
appropriations in this bill is,'' said Representative William E. Dannemeyer,
California Republican, of the 10-pound bill, which had been printed only minutes
before.

Some Will Be Deducted


Managers of the bill said it provided $470 billion, but this amount will be
reduced by $101 billion when Mr. Reagan signs a separate bill for the
Departments of Labor and Health and Human Services, which the House and Senate
approved Wednesday.

The Senate later approved the spending bill by a vote of 78 to 11.

The spending bill also includes a package of anticrime legislation that would
revise Federal sentencing procedures, allow pretrial detention of ''dangerous''
suspects, restrict the use of the insanity defense, increase penalties for drug
trafficking and reestablish a program of anticrime grants to the states.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DENG WARNS OF 'ERUPTION' IN U.S.-CHINA TIES OVER TAIWAN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 11


United States policy toward Taiwan could lead to an ''eruption'' in
American-Chinese relations, China's leader, Deng Xiaoping, was quoted today as
saying.

Japanese visitors said Mr. Deng added that he told Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger in Peking last year, ''Now China does not have the military force to
invade and occupy Taiwan, but we have the military power to blockade'' the
Strait of Formosa.

Mr. Deng also said for the first time that China had differences with its
closest ally, North Korea.

Mr. Deng's reported statement on Taiwan broke a lull in anti-United States
polemics on the issue and appeared to reflect Peking's impatience for movement
toward reunification with the island. There was no suggestion in Mr. Deng's
reported remarks that he was signaling a change in policy toward either Taiwan
or North Korea.

Not Optimistic on Soviet Ties


In the meeting, Mr. Deng predicted that the Chinese-Soviet normalization talks
in Peking scheduled for next week were unlikely to improve relations.

Mr. Deng met for 90 minutes in Peking with the group from Japan's opposition
Komeito Party, led by Yoshikatsu Takeiri. The Japanese briefed reporters on Mr.
Deng's remarks.

''There is the possibility of an eruption between China and the United States if
there is no resolution of the Taiwan problem,'' the Japanese quoted Mr. Deng as
saying.

The Peking Government has been hoping that its pact to preserve Hong Kong's
capitalist system after China regains sovereignty over the British colony in
1997 would induce Taiwan to consider a similar arrangement, but Taiwan has
called the Hong Kong treaty a farce.

The United States is the main weapons supplier to Taiwan, where the Chinese
Nationalists fled when the Communists took power on the mainland in 1949.

Peking considers Taiwan a rebel province and says the arms sales amount to
United States interference in China's internal affairs.

'Satisfactory and Unsatisfactory'


The Japanese said Mr. Deng, asked if he was satisfied with American-Chinese
relations, replied, ''There are satisfactory aspects and unsatisfactory
aspects.''

They quoted him as saying, ''It is very necessary to resolve the Taiwan
problem.''

The official New China News Agency said Mr. Deng answered questions from the
Japanese guests, ''including questions about Sino-U.S. relations.'' It did not
elaborate.

Regarding recent United States trade restrictions on textile imports, which have
angered the Chinese, the Japanese said Mr. Deng implied that China could
retaliate by halting purchases of American grain.

''The Americans are shortsighted and see only small things,'' they quoted Mr.
Deng as saying. ''They cannot see big things. This is the reason why we are not
satisfied.''

On North Korea, the Japanese quoted Mr. Deng as saying China wanted to help
achieve peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula, divided into the Communist
north and non-Communist south for more than three decades.

Differences With North Korea


He said China backed North Korea's reunification proposal, according to the
Japanese. But they also quoted him as saying, ''We do not necessarily agree with
some policies made by North Korea.''

It would be the first time a senior Chinese leader has said that Peking does not
always concur with the North Korean Government.

On strained Chinese-Soviet relations, the Japanese quoted Mr. Deng as saying he
expected no progress from the fifth round of normalization talks scheduled next
week in Peking.

China has said relations cannot improve until Moscow pulls its troops back from
the border, ends its intervention in Afghanistan and stops supporting Vietnam's
occupation of Cambodia.

''The three big obstacles still exist,'' the Japanese quoted Mr. Deng as saying,
''so I would say the meeting is nothing but a routine meeting.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND'S LAWYER ACCUSES CBS OF TWISTING THE TRUTH

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1385 words


A. FARBER

The lawyer for General William C. Westmoreland charged yesterday that CBS, in a
1982 documentary, knowingly converted ''an honest debate'' about enemy strength
in South Vietnam in 1967 into the ''illusion'' of a conspiracy led by the
general.

The lawyer, Dan M. Burt, portrayed the the producer of the documentary, George
Crile, as an irresponsible, ambitious person who was under pressure to show his
talent, and needed a ''sensational story.''

Mr. Burt made his remarks in a three-hour opening statement to the jury in the
$120 million libel suit by General Westmoreland against CBS and several other
defendants.

By means of selective interviews and editing, Mr. Burt said, Mr. Crile and Mike
Wallace, the narrator of the documentary, gave the public a distorted, dishonest
account of the events, and ''shamed and humiliated'' General Westmoreland.

Charts and Film Clips


Mr. Burt, who repeatedly interrupted his statement to refer to large charts and
to show film clips on six television sets, said, moreover, that the makers of
the documentary knew what they were doing. General Westmoreland, he said, will
testify ''how he was rattlesnaked'' by CBS.

After Mr. Burt spoke at the Federal District Court trial in Manhattan, David
Boies, a lawyer for CBS, began an opening statement that will continue this
morning.  He told the jury that it would conclude that the documentary was
''accurate, well-reported.''

Mr. Boies said the focus of the program was ''less on one part of our Government
deceiving another part of our Government than the Government as a whole
deceiving the people.''

'A Vietnam Deception'


The 90-minute documentary, the first that the 39-year old Mr. Crile produced on
his own, was called ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in South Vietnam, contends
that he was falsely accused on the program of deceiving President Johnson and
the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of the enemy in the year
before the Tet offensive at the end of January 1968.

Mr. Burt accused CBS of saying that General Westmoreland had placed an arbitrary
ceiling of 300,000 on enemy forces and that he had suppressed a purportedly
contrary report by his intelligence chief and high figures on enemy
infiltration. In addition, CBS accused the general of ''engineering a coverup''
after Tet, Mr. Burt said.

Judge Pierre N. Leval is presiding over the trial in a third-floor courtroom of
the United States Court House in Foley Square. The court was packed yesterday
with a standing-room-only crowd of spectators and reporters.

Westmoreland and Wallace


The silver-haired, 70-year old plaintiff, who sat a few feet in front of Mr.
Crile and Mr. Wallace, must prove that the supposedly libelous statements on the
program were false and, if so, were made with knowledge of their falsity or with
''reckless disregard'' for whether they were true.

In addition to CBS, Mr. Wallace and Mr. Crile are defendants in the suit, as is
a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst named Samuel A. Adams. Mr. Adams
served as a paid consultant for the documentary, and appeared on it.

The documentary, like the trial, concerns the events surrounding the preparation
in the summer and fall of 1967 of a new intelligence estimate of enemy strength.
The official military document in which these figures were recorded is known as
an order of battle.

A 16-Page Proposal


In 1980, Mr. Crile proposed making a ''CBS Reports'' documentary that would
explore an ''elaborate conspiracy'' by General Westmoreland and others to
understate the strength of the enemy in the order of battle. The intention of
the ''conspiracy,' according to the proposal, was to bolster optimistic reports
that American troops were winning a ''war of attrition.'' The word conspiracy
was used 24 times in the 16-page proposal.

At the outset of the eventual documentary, Mr. Wallace, who was also the ''chief
correspondent'' for the program, said: ''The fact is that we Americans were
misinformed about the nature and size of the enemy we were facing, and tonight
we're going to present evidence of what we have come to believe was a conscious
effort - indeed, a conspiracy at the highest levels of American military
intelligence - to suppress and alter critical intelligence on the enemy in the
year leading up to the Tet offensive.''

Statements and Admissions


Mr. Wallace's remarks, shown yesterday to the jury, were based on statements and
admissions that appeared later in the program from a half-dozen retired military
intelligence officers and from George Allen, who, like Mr. Adams, was a C.I.A.
specialist on Vietnam.  The program was broadcast Jan. 23, 1982.

But Mr. Burt told the jury yesterday that it would hear from numerous witnesses
that there was no deception involved in the consideration of various figures for
the order of battle.

On the other hand, he said, Ira Klein, a CBS film editor on the documentary,
will testify that Mr. Crile ''fabricated'' the program and that, from the
beginning, Mr. Klein complained ''time and again'' that General Westmoreland was
being treated unfairly.

'A Program of His Own'


Mr. Burt said that by 1980, four years after Mr. Crile became a producer at CBS,
his superiors thought that ''Mr. Crile needed a big story.''

Mr. Burt said Mr. Crile had used a variety of techniques - answers to
hypothetical questions, the combining of multiple events and ''mis-editing'' -
to build a documentary without foundation, and had been fully aware of the
''seriousness'' of the subject.

The documentary that was commissioned by CBS, Mr. Burt said, ''was not the story
Crile had been told.''

Jury Shown Tape Excerpts


Mr. Burt compared examples of interviews used on the program with excerpts from
the ''outtakes,'' or unedited tapes, of 20 hours of interviewing.

In each case, he maintained, the interviewee's views had been misrepresented on
the documentary - Mr. Crile had ''carefully picked out fragments'' to support
the conspiracy thesis.

Mr. Burt showed the jury excerpts from a taped three-hour interview with Walt W.
Rostow, President Johnson's special assistant for national security affairs. It
was done for the program but not used.

Mr. Boies, who showed some tape from the Rostow interview that Mr. Burt had not,
accused Mr. Burt of using the kind of selective editing that Mr. Burt was
attributing to CBS.

Mr. Rostow told CBS that he was unaware that ''the books were cooked'' by the
military command in South Vietnam but that Mr. Johnson had known of the debate
over the order of battle and had relied on other, more current and sensitive
''communications intelligence'' in his decision-making.

Mr. Burt also said that Mr. Crile had failed to interview important intelligence
officers in South Vietnam in 1967.

Mr. Burt listed a number of officials, including Ellsworth Bunker, the American
Ambassador at the time, whom General Westmoreland had advised CBS to interview.
Others were Robert Komer, a senior civilian aide to the general, and George
Carver, the chief of Vietnamese affairs for the C.I.A. Of them, only Mr. Carver
was interviewed, off camera - and that was done shortly before the program was
broadcast.

Mr. Burt said George Godding, the general who represented the military command
in discussions of enemy strength with the C.I.A., would testify that he had
never been ordered by General Westmoreland to keep the figure under 300,000.
Actually, Mr. Burt said, the military's total figure, when all categories of the
enemy were included, was 431,000.

Mr. Boies is expected to show, however, that General Godding - like some other
witnesses in the case - said different things to different people at different
times.

According to Mr. Burt, the ''whole debate'' centered on whether enemy ''home
guard'' forces - officially called self-defense and secret self-defense forces -
''properly belonged'' in the order of battle, which had included them since the
early 1960's. General Westmoreland felt they should be excluded, which they were
in late 1967, but some C.I.A. analysts, like Mr. Adams, believed they should be
listed.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Artist's sketch of courtroom scene

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 60 words


''We're going to lose Central America, as we lost South Vietnam, because the
U.S. Congress refused to provide the aid in this protracted conflict. I hate to
say it, but the average American doesn't know the difference between a contra
and a caterpillar, or between a Sandinista and a sardine.'' - Senator John East,
Republican of North Carolina. (A15:6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 859 words


FRIDAY, OCTOBER 12, 1984 International

Benigno S. Aquino Jr.  was shot to death by one of his Philippine Government
escorts in a wide-ranging military conspiracy, according to a key document being
considered in the inquiry into the assassination of the opposition leader. The
document is a 497-page memorandum compiled by four lawyers who assisted the
citizens' panel that has been investigating the slaying. (Page A1, Column 3.)

Margaret Thatcher escaped unhurt when a powerful explosion damaged the English
seaside hotel where the Prime Minister and other ministers were staying for the
annual Conservative Party conference, her office in London said. (A1:2-3.)

A single newspaper reporter would be included in a national press pool that
would be formed to cover the initial stages of any surprise military operation,
the Pentagon announced in reversing a decision. (A1:1-2.)

Salvadoran rebel leaders said they would attend a meeting with President Jose
Napoleon Duarte on Monday unless they find that security is inadequate at the
site. (A4:3-6.)

The Nobel Prize for Literature has been awarded to Jaroslav Seifert, a
Czechoslovak poet, the Swedish Academy announced. The award to Mr. Seifert, who
is 83 years old and considered his country's national poet, cited work that
''provides a liberating image of the indomitable spirit and versatility of
man.'' (A1:1-2.) National

A Bush-Ferraro debate was marked by repeated clashes over President Reagan's
policies. Vice President Bush offered impassioned defenses of Mr. Reagan. In
contrast, Geraldine A. Ferraro spoke at a deliberately slow pace as she hammered
at Mr. Reagan's record and accused him of negligence in the bombings of American
facilities in Lebanon. (A1:6.)

The President said his performance in the Sunday debate with Walter F. Mondale
resulted from too much study and too little relaxation. Senator Paul Laxalt of
Nevada, the general chairman of the Republican re- election campaign, said the
President had been ''brutalized'' and ''smothered'' by the debate preparation
process. (B8:1-2.)

Walter F. Mondale attracted an unusually large crowd of perhaps 10,000 people
outside the Capitol steps and told them the Presidential race was now ''wide
open.'' It was an unusually attentive crowd, like those at other big rallies in
Detroit and Pittsburgh after Mr. Mondale's debate Sunday with President Reagan.
(B8:1-4.)

Walter F. Mondale's performance in the Presidential debate has sharply boosted
his fund-raising efforts. New York's loyal Democrats and affluent political
figures jostled one another Wednesday night to pick up tickets for a
$1,000-a-plate black-tie dinner for Mr. Mondale. (B7:1-4.)

A $470 billion spending bill won final approval in Congress. Jubilant but
exhausted, the lawmakers also put the finishing touches on an increase in the
debt limit as the 98th Congress prepared to adjourn. (A1:4-5.)

An immigration bill died as Congress adjourned. The legislators had shaped
comprehensive legislation after much labor, but failed to pass it. The issue was
put over to next year, when action will have to start all over again. Democrats
and Republicans blamed each other. (A16:4-6.)

The first U.S. female space walker is Dr. Kathryn D. Sullivan. She floated
outside the shuttle Challenger 140 miles above the earth for more than three
hours with Lieut. Comdr. David C. Leestma. They also successfully tested a
system for refueling satellites in space. (D16:1-3.)

Ratification of a tentative pact between the General Motors Corporatin and the
United Automobile Workers appeared likely as historically militant locals in
Flint and Pontiac approved the agreement by substantial margins. However, some
top union leaders cautioned against premature optimism. (A20:6.) Metropolitan

13,000 subway riders were removed from smoky trains, and thousands more were
delayed for long periods as six fires erupted under trains in Manhattan and
Brooklyn and in tunnels between several boroughs, officials said. At least 22
people, including 6 transit officers aiding the removal of passengers, were
overcome by smoke and taken to hospitals, according to the authorities. (A1:6.)

Use of seat belts would be mandated for drivers and front-seat passengers under
a bill approved in the New Jersey Assembly by a 60-12 vote. The State Senate is
expected to pass the measure soon and Governor Kean has pledged to sign the
bill, which would make New Jersey the second state, after New York, to require
motorists to buckle up. (B1:5.)

CBS, Mike Wallace and a producer for the program ''60 Minutes'' must stand trial
on accusations they libeled a former Army officer who accused American forces of
committing war crimes in Vietnam, a Federal judge ruled. The officer is former
Lieut. Col. Anthony Herbert and the producer is Barry Lando. (B3:1-3.)

The board of the Vivian Beaumont Theater is being expanded through the election
of 13 new members, John V. Lindsay, the new chairman of the troubled theater in
Lincoln Center, announced. (C14:3-4.)


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CBS IS ORDERED TO FACE A 2D VIETNAM LIBEL TRIAL



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 567 words


CBS Inc. and a correspondent and producer for its program ''60 Minutes'' must
stand trial on charges they libeled a retired Army officer who accused American
forces of committing war crimes in Vietnam, a Federal judge in Manhattan ruled
yesterday.

The judge, Charles S. Haight Jr., threw out many of the libel charges raised by
Lieut. Col. Anthony Herbert.

He said, however, that a jury must still decide whether the network knowingly or
recklessly broadcast a falsehood in attempting to debunk Colonel Herbert's story
in 1973 and whether an Atlantic Monthly article by the producer, Barry Lando,
that year contained a second misstatement. But the judge threw out the colonel's
libel complaint against the magazine.

Colonel Herbert was seeking $22.5 million from CBS, the correspondent Mike
Wallace and Mr. Lando for the broadcast and $22.2 million from Mr. Lando and the
magazine for the article.

Judge Haight's ruling coincided with opening statements in another, unrelated
libel suit against CBS, Mr. Wallace and two other defendants. In that case Gen.
William C. Westmoreland charges the network with falsely accusing him in 1982 of
conspiring to mislead his superiors on the strength of enemy forces in Vietnam.

CBS Surrendered Tapes


In 1979, Colonel Herbert's libel suit reached the United States Supreme Court,
which ordered the network to turn over segments of interviews that were taped in
preparing the broadcast, but which were not aired. The network had vigorously
resisted surrendering them.

Colonel Herbert served in Vietnam from 1968 to 1969. For two months in early
1969 he commanded the Second Battalion of the 173d Airborne Brigade. He was
transferred back to the United States in 1969, after fighting unsuccessfully to
regain his Vietnam command, and retired in 1972.

In 1970, amid national attention to the reports of a massacre at My Lai, Colonel
Herbert told Army officials that he had been relieved of his battalion command
because he reported other war crimes to his superiors. Shortly thereafter he
made his charges public and detailed them in a best-selling book, ''Soldier.''

CBS aired a ''60 Minutes'' segment on Feb. 4, 1973, entitled ''The Selling of
Colonel Herbert.'' The segment challenged many of Colonel Herbert's public
assertions and said CBS was unable to document the officer's claim that he had
reported war crimes while still in Vietnam.

The defendants asked Judge Haight to throw out the suit on two grounds: that the
''60 Minutes'' broadcast and the magazine article did not misstate the facts,
and that even if they did, the misstatements were not made knowingly or
recklessly. Public figures must prove such knowing or reckless conduct in order
to win a libel suit.

In his 125-page decision, Judge Haight said he found that in two of the 11
assertions Colonel Herbert's lawyers said were false - involving purported
challenges to the colonel's contention that he had made war-crimes charges -
enough of a factual question exists for the case to go to a jury.

But he found no ground for the suit against Atlantic Monthly. He noted that the
magazine had not solicited Mr. Lando's manuscript, that it had no obligation to
do independent research on the issue and that Mr. Lando ''was not a wild-eyed
unknown, mouthing an improbable yarn about a prominent person.'' The article
appeared in the magazine's May 1973 issue.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF PHILADELPHIA DEBATE BETWEEN BUSH AND FERRARO

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 11202 words


Participants in the Debate


The following people participated in last night's Vice-Presidential debate in
Philadelphia:

CANDIDATES: Vice President Bush, Republican, and Representative Geraldine A.
Ferraro, Democrat.

MODERATOR: Sander Vanocur, senior political correspondent, ABC News.

PANELISTS: Robert S. Boyd, Washington bureau chief, Knight-Ridder Newspapers;
John Mashek, national correspondent, U.S. News & World Report; Jack White,
correspondent, Time, and Norma Quarles, correspondent, NBC News.



Following is a transcript of the televised debate between Vice President Bush
and Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro sponsored by the League of Women Voters
in Philadelphia last night, as recorded by The New York Times:



DOROTHY S. RIDINGS: Good evening from the Civic Center in Philadelphia, Pa. I'm
Dorothy Ridings, president of the League of Women Voters, the sponsor of
tonight's Vice- Presidential debate between Republican George Bush and Democrat
Geraldine Ferraro.

Our panelists for tonight's debate are John Mashek, national correspondent for
U.S. News & World Report; Jack White, correspondent for Time Magazine; Norma
Quarles, correspondent for NBC News; and Robert Boyd, Washington bureau chief
for Knight-Ridder Newspapers.

Sander Vanocur, senior political correspondent for ABC News, is our moderator
tonight. Sandy.

MODERATOR: Thank you, Dorothy. A few words about the order of our format
tonight. The order of questioning was determined by a toss of the coin.
Congresswoman Ferraro won the toss. She elected to speak last. Therefore Vice
President Bush will get the first question.

The debate will be built upon a series of questions from the four reporters on
the panel. A reporter will ask a candidate a question, a followup question and
then the same to the other candidate, then each candidate will get to rebut the
other.

The debate will be divided into two parts. There'll be a section, the first one,
on domestic affairs; the second on foreign affairs.

Now the manner of address was decided by the candidates. Therefore it will be
Vice President Bush, Congresswoman Ferraro.

And we begin our questioning with Mr. Mashek.


Relations With President

Q: John Adams, our nation's first President, once said: ''Today I am nothing.
Tomorrow I may be everything.'' With that in mind, I'd like to ask the following
question: Vice President Bush, four years ago, you ran against Mr. Reagan for
the Republican nomination. You disagreed with him on such issues as the equal
rights amendment, abortion and you even labeled his economic policies as voodoo.
Now you apparently agree with him on every issue. If you should be called upon
to assume the Presidency, would you follow Mr. Reagan's policies down the line
or would you revert to some of your own ideas.

BUSH: Well, I don't think there's a great difference, Mr. Mashek, between my
ideas and President Reagan's.

One of the reasons I think we're an effective team is that I believe firmly in
his leadership. He's really turned this country around. We agree on the economic
program.

When we came into office, why, inflation was 21, 12 1/2 percent interest rates
wiping out every single American were 21 1/2 percent if you can believe it.
Productivity was down. Savings was down. There was despair. In fact, the
leadership of the country told the people that there was a malaise out there.

And this President turned it around and I've been with him every step of the
way. And of course I would continue those kinds of programs because it's brought
America back. America's better off. People are going back to work. And why Mr.
Mondale can't understand that there's a new enthusiasm in this country, that
America is back, there's new strong leadership, I don't know.

He has one answer to the problem. Raise everybody's taxes. He looked right into
that lens and he said out there in San Francisco, he said, ''I'm gonna raise
your taxes.'' Well he's had a lot of experience in that and he's sure gonna go
ahead and do it. But I remember a statement of Lyndon Johnson's when he was
looking around, why his party people weren't supporting him, and he said, ''Hey,
they painted their tails white and they ran with the antelopes.'' There's a lot
of Democratic white tails running with the antelopes. Not one single Democrat
has introduced the Mondale tax bill into the Congress.

Of course I support the President's economic program and I support him in
everything else.

And I'm not sure, because of my concept of the Vice Presidency, that if I
didn't, I'd go doing what Mr. Mondale has done with Jimmy Carter; jump away from
him. I couldn't do that to Ronald Reagan, now, next year or any other time. I
have too much trust in him. I have too much friendship for him. And I'd feel
very uncomfortable doing that.


Q. Well some Republicans have criticized Mr. Mondale for now claiming he
disagreed privately with Jimmy Carter's decision to impose the grain embargo.
Have you ever disagreed with any decision of the Reagan Administration and its
inner circles? And in following that up, where in your judgment does loyalty end
and principle begin?

BUSH: I owe my President my judgment and then I owe him loyalty. You can't have
the President of the United States out there looking over his shoulder wondering
whether his Vice President is going to be supporting him.

Mrs. Ferraro has quite a few differences with Vice President Mondale and I
understood it when she changed her position on tuition tax credits. They're
different on busing; she voted to extend the grain embargo; he now says that he
was against it. If they win - and I hope they don't - but if they win, she'll
have to accommodate some views. But she'll give him the same kind of loyalty
that I'm giving President Reagan. One, we're not far apart on anything. Two, I
can walk into that Oval Office anytime and give him my judgment and he might
agree or he might not. But he also knows I won't be talking about it to the
press or I won't be knifing in the back by leaking to make me look good and
complicate the problems of the President of the United States.

Issue of Experience

Q. Congresswoman Ferraro, your opponent has served in the House of
Representatives, he's been Ambassador to the United Nations, Ambassador to
China, Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and now he's been Vice
President for four years. How does your three terms in the House of
Representatives stack up against experience like that?

FERRARO: Well, let me first say that I wasn't born at the age of 43 when I
entered Congress. I did have a life before that as well. I was a prosecutor for
almost five years in the District Attorney's office in Queens County and I was a
teacher. There's not only what is on your paper resume that makes you qualified
to run for or to hold office. It's how you approach problems and what your
values are. I think if one is taking a look at my career they'll that I level
with the people; that I approach problems analytically; that I am able to assess
the various facts with reference to a problem, and I can make the hard
decisions.

I'm intrigued when I hear Vice President Bush talk about his support of the
President's economic program and how everything is just going so beautifully. I,
too, recall when Vice President Bush was running in the primary against
President Reagan and he called the program voodoo economics, and it was and it
is. We are facing absolutely massive deficits; this Administration has chosen to
ignore it; the President has failed to put forth a plan to deal with those
deficits and if everything believes that everything is coming up roses, perhaps
the Vice President should join me as I travel around the country and speak to
people.

'Economy Is Not Doing Well'


People in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, are not terribly thrilled with what's
happening in the economy because they're standing in the light of a closed plant
because they've lost their jobs. The people in Youngstown, Ohio, have stores
that are boarded up because the economy is not doing well. It's not only the old
industries that are failing, it's also the new ones. In San Jose, California,
they're complaining because they can't export their high-tech qualities - goods
- to Japan and other countries. The people in the Northwest - in the State of
Washington and Oregon - are complaining about what's happening to the timber
industry and to the agriculture industry. So, so things are not as great as the
Administration is wanting us to believe in their television commercials. My
feeling, quite frankly, is that I have enough experience to see the problems,
address them and make the tough decisions and level with people with reference
to those problems.

Q. Despite the historic aspects of your candidacy, how do you account for the
fact that a majority of women - at least according to the polls - favor the
Reagan-Bush ticket over the Mondale-Ferraro ticket?

FERRARO: I don't. Let me say that I'm not a believer in polls and let me say
further that what we are talking about are problems that are facing the entire
nation. They're not just problems facing women. The issues in this campaign are
the war-peace issues; the problems of deficits; the problems of trade deficits.
We are now facing a $120 billion trade deficit in this country. We're facing
problems of the environment. I think what we're going to be doing over the next
several weeks - and I'm absolutely delighted that the League is sponsoring these
debates and that we are, we are able to now speak to the American public and
address the issues in a way such as this. I think you're going to see a change
in those polls.



MODERATOR: Vice President Bush, you have one minute to rebuttal.

BUSH: Well, I was glad to get that vote of confidence from Mrs. Ferraro in my
economic judgment. So let me make a statement on the economy.

The other day she was in a plant and she said to the workers why are you all
voting for, why are so many of you voting for the Reagan-Bush ticket? And there
was a long deathly silence and she said come on, we delivered. That's the
problem. And I'm not blaming her except for the liberal voting record in the
House. They delivered. They delivered 21 1/2 percent interest rates. They
delivered what they called malaise. They delivered interest rates that were
right off the charts. They delivered take-home pay, checks that were shrinking,
and we've delivered optimism. People are going back to work; six million of
them. And 300,000 jobs a month being created. That's why there was that deathly
silence out there in that plant. They delivered the wrong thing. Ronald Reagan
is delivering leadership.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro, one minute rebuttal.

FERRARO: I, I think what I'm going to have to do is I'm going to start
correcting the Vice President's statistics. There are six million more people
who have jobs and that's supposed to happen in a growing economy. In fact in the
prior administration, with all their problems, they created 10 million jobs. The
housing interest rates during this Administration, for housing for middle-class
Americans, was 14.5 percent. Under the prior Administration with all their
problems, the average rate was 10.6 percent. If you take a look at the number of
people living in poverty as a result of this Administration, six million people,
500,000 people knocked off disability rolls. You know, it's, you can walk around
saying things are great and that's what we're going to be hearing, we've been
hearing that on those commercials for the past couple of months. I expect they
expect the American people to believe that. I'll become a one- woman truth squad
and we'll start tonight.

MODERATOR: Mr. White.



Civil Rights and Education

Q: Congresswoman Ferraro, I would like to ask you about civil rights. You have
in the past been a supporter of tuition tax credits for private parochial
schools. And also of a constitutional amendment to ban busing. Both these
measures are opposed not only by your running mate but by just about every
educational and civil rights organization in the country. Now that you're Mr.
Mondale's running mate have you changed your position on either of those?

FERRARO: With reference to the busing vote that I cast in 1979, both Fritz
Mondale and I agree on the same goal and that is non-discrimination. I just
don't agree on the same direction he does on how to achieve it. But I don't find
any problem with that. I think that's been something that's been handled by the
courts, and not being handled by Congress and will not be handled by the White
House. But we both support non-discrimination in housing and integration of
neighborhoods. The goals we both set forth.

With reference to tuition tax credits, I have represented a district in Queens
which is 70 percent Catholic. I represented my district. Let me say as well that
I have also been a great supporter of public school education and that is
something that Fritz and I feel very, very strongly about for the future of this
country. And this Administration over the past several years has gutted the
educational programs available to our young people.

It has attempted to knock out Pell Grants which are monies to young individuals
who are poor and who cannot afford to go to college. It has reduced by 25
percent the amount of monies going into college education and by a third those
going into secondary and primary schools. But Fritz Mondale and I feel very
strongly that if you educate your children that that's an effort and the way
that you build up and make a stronger America.

Cites Civil Rights Record

With reference to civil rights I think you've got to go beyond that and if you
take a look, also, at my record in the Congress and Fritz Mondale's record, both
in the Senate and as Vice President, we both have extremely strong civil rights
records. This Administration does not. It has come in in the Bob Jones on the
side of segregated academies. It came in in the Grove City case on the side of
discrimination against women, the handicapped, and the elderly. As a matter of
fact, in the Congress we just passed overwhelmingly the Civil Rights Bill of
1984 and this Administration, the Republican-controlled Senate, just killed it
in the last week or two in Congress. So there is a real difference between how
the Mondale- Ferraro Administration will address the problems of civil rights
and the failure of this Administration specifically in that particular area.

Q: In the area of affirmative action, what steps do you think government can
take to increase the representation of minorities and women in the work force,
and in colleges and universities, and specifically, would you support the use of
quotas to achieve those goals?

FERRARO: I do not support the use of quotas. Both Mr. Mondale and I feel very
strongly about affirmative action to correct inequities, and we believe that
steps should be taken both through government - for instance, the Small Business
Administration. We have supported set-asides for minority and women's
businesses. That's a positive thing.

We don't feel that you're in any way hurting anybody else by reaching out with
affirmative action to help those who've been disenfranchised. On the contrary,
if you have a growing economy, if you create the jobs, if you allow for small
business the opportunity with lower interest rates to reach out and grow, there
will be more than enough space for everybody. And affirmative action is a very
positive way to deal with the problems of discrimination.

Q: Vice President Bush, many critics of your Administration say that it is the
most hostile to minorities in recent memory. Have you inadvertenly perhaps
encouraged that view by supporting tuition tax credits, the antibusing amendment
and siding with Bob Jones University in a case before the Supreme Court, your
original opposition to the Voting Rights Act extension and so forth?

BUSH: No, Mr. White, I think our record on civil rights is a good record. You
mentioned the Voting Rights extension; it was extended for the longest period of
time by President Reagan. But we have some problems in attracting the black
vote, and I think our record deserves better. We have done more for black
colleges than any previous Administration.

We favor enterprise zones to give - and it's been blocked by Tip O'Neill and
that House of Representatives, those liberals in that House blocked a new idea
to bring jobs into the black communities across this country. And because it's
not an old handout, special Federal spending program, it's blocked there - a
good idea. And I'd like to see that tried.

The Young, Jobs, Training

We've brought more civil rights cases in the Justice Department than the
previous Administration by far. We believe in trying something new to help these
black teen-age kids; the minimum wage differential that says, ''Look,'' to an
employer, ''hire these guys. And, yes, they're willing to work for slightly less
than the minimum wage. Give'em a training job in a private sector.'' We threw
out that old CETA that didn't train people for jobs that existed, simply rammed
them onto the government payroll, and we put in a thing called the Job Training
Partnership Act. Wonderful, new legislation that's helping blacks more and more.

We think of civil rights as something like crime in your neighborhoods. And, for
example, when crime figures are going in the right direction that's good, that's
a civil right. Similarly, we think of it in terms of quality of life, and that
means interest rates.

You know, it's funny, Mr. Mondale talks about real interest rates. The real
interest rate is what you pay when you go down and try to buy a TV set or buy a
car, or do whatever it is. The interest rates when we left office were 21 1/2
percent. Inflation! Is it a civil right to have that going right off the chart
so you're busting every American family, those who can afford it the less?

An Economy Offering Hope

No, we've got a good record. We've got it on civil rights legislation, minority
set-asides, more help for black colleges, and we've got it in terms of an
economy that's offering people opportunity and hope instead of despair.

Q: Along those lines, sir, many recent studies have indicated that the poor and
minorities have not really shared in the new prosperity generated by the current
economic recovery. Was it right for your Administration to pursue policies,
economic policies, that required those at the bottom of the economic ladder to
wait for prosperity to trickle down from people who are much better off than
they?

BUSH: Mr. White, it's not trickling down. And I'm not suggesting there's no
poverty, but I am suggesting the way to work out of poverty is through real
opportunity. And in the meantime, the needy are getting more help. Human
resource spending is way, way up. Aid for Dependent Children spending is up.
Immunization programs are up. Almost every place you can point, contrary to Mr.
Mondale's - I gotta be careful - but contrary of how he goes around just saying
everyhing bad. If somebody sees a silver lining, he finds a big black cloud out
there. Whine on harvest moon! I mean, there's a lot going on, a lotta
opportunty.



MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro, your rebuttal.

FERRARO: The Vice President indicates that the President signed the Voting
Rights Act. That was after he was - he did not support it while it was in the
Congress, in the Senate, it was passed despite his opposition, and he did sign
it because he was required to do so. In the civil rights cases that he
mentioned, the great number of cases that they have enforced, the reason they
enforced them because under the law they're required to do that. And I'm
delighted that the Administration is following the law.

With reference . . .

MODERATOR: Excuse me - this will be out of my time, not yours - knowing and
cherishing the people of this city and knowing their restraint and diffidence
about emotion especially of athletic contexts of which this is not one, I
beseech you, try to hold your applause please. I'm sorry.

FERRARO: I just have to correct in my 30 seconds that are left the comment that
the Vice President made with reference specifically to a program like A.F.D.C.
If you take A.F.D.C., if you take food stamps, if you take - oh, go down the
line on poor people's programs, those are the programs that suffered
considerably under this Administration's first budget cuts and those are the
ones that in the second part of their part of their term, we were able to
restore some of those terribly, terribly unfair cuts to the poor people of this
country.

MODERATOR: Vice President Bush.

BUSH: Well, maybe we have a factual - maybe we can ask the experts to go to the
books. They'll do it anyway. Spending for food stamps is way, way up under the
Reagan Administration. A.F.D.C. is up under the Reagan Administration, and I am
not going to be found wrong on that. I am sure of my facts, and we are trying to
help and I think we're doing a reasonable job. But we are not going to rest
until every single American that wants a job gets a job and until this
prosperity and this recovery that's benefiting many Americans, benefits all
Americans.

MODERATOR: Miss Quarles.


Separation of Church and State

Q. Vice President Bush, one of the most emotional issues in this campaign has
been the separation of church and state. What are your views on the separation
of church and state specificlly with regard to abortion, and do you believe it
was right for the Archbishop of Philadelphia to have a letter read in 305
churches urging Catholics to fight abortion with their votes?

BUSH: I do believe in pluralism. I do believe in separation of church and state.
I don't consider abortion a religious issue. I consider it a moral issue. I
believe the archbishop has every right to do everything he wants in that
direction just as I never faulted Jesse Jackson from taking his message to the
black pulpits all across this country, just as I never objected when the nuclear
arms, the nuclear freeze or the anti-nuclear people - many of those movements
were led by priests. Suddenly, because a Catholic bishop or an evangelist feels
strongly on a political issue, people are saying it's merging of church and
state.

We favor - and I speak confidently for the President - we favor separation of
church and state. We favor pluralism. Now somebody says you ought to restore
prayer in schools. You don't think it's right to prohibit a kid from praying in
schools. For years kids were allowed to pray in schools. We don't think that's a
merger of church and state to have non-mandatory, volutary,
non-Government-ordered prayer. And yet some are accusing us of injecting
religion into politics. I have no problem with what the archbishop does, and I
have no problem with what the evangelists on the right do and I have no problem
what the priests on the left do.

And it didn't bother me when during the Vietnam War much of the opposition to
the Government - Democrat and Republican Governments - was led by priests,
encouraging people to break the law and the adage of the - you know - the civil
disobedience thing.

So our position, separation of church and state, pluralism, so no little kid
with a minority religion of some sort is going to feel offended or feel left out
or feel uncomfortable. But yes prayer in school on a voluntary basis worked for
many, many years until the Supreme Court ruled differently. And I'm glad we got
this question because I think there's been too much said about religion and
politics. We don't believe in denominationally moving in. It wasn't our side
that raised the question about our President whether he was a good Christian or
not and so I, so that's our position - separation of church and state,
pluralism, respect for all.


Q. Vice President Bush, four years ago you would have allowed Federal financing
of abortions in cases of rape and incest as well as when the mother's life was
threatened. Does your position now agree with that of President Reagan who in
Sunday's debate came very close to saying that abortion is murder?

BUSH: You know, there has been - I have to make a confession - an evolution in
my position. There's been 15 million abortions since 1973, and I don't take that
lightly. There's been a million and a half this year. The President and I do
favor a human rights amendment. I favor one that would have an exception for
incest and rape, and he doesn't, but we both - only for the life of the mother.
And I agree with him on that. So, yes, my position's evolved, but I'd like to
see the American who faced with 15 million abortions isn't re-thinking his or
her position and I'll just stand with the answer. I support the President's
position - and comfortably - from a moral standpoint.

Q. So you believe it's akin to murder?.

BUSH: No, I support the President's position.

Q: Fine. Congresswoman Ferraro, what are your views on the separation of church
and state with regard to abortions, and do you believe it was right for the
Archbishop of Philadelphia to have those letters read in the pulpits and urged
the voters to fight abortion with their vote?

Purposes of Immigration Noted

FERRARO: Let me say first of all I believe very, very sincerely in the
separation of church and state. I'm taking it from the historical viewpoint, if
you go back to the 1600's when people came here, the reason they came to this
country was to escape religious persecution, and that's the same reason why
people are coming here today in the 1940's to escape Nazism, now in the 1980's
and 1984 when they can get out of the country to escape Communism so they can
come here and practice their relgion.

Our country is founded on the principle that our Government should be neutral as
far as religion is concerned. Now what's happened over the past several years,
and quite frankly I'm not going to let you lay on me the intrusion of state
politics into religion or religion into politics by my comments with reference
to the President's policies, because it started in 1980 when this Administration
was running for office and the Rev. Jerry Falwell became very, very involved in
the campaign.

What has happened over the past four years has been I think a real fudging of
that line with the separation of church and state. The actions of the
Archbishops let me say to you I feel that they have not only a right but a
responsibility to speak up, and even though I've been the person that they're
speaking up about, I feel that they do have the responsibility to do so, and I
have no problem with it, no more than I did priest who marched at the time of
Vietnam and no more than I did at the time when Martin Luther King marched at
the time of the civil rights marches. I have absolutely no problem with them
speaking up, I think they have an obligation as well as a right.

Falwell and High CourtBut what I do have a problem with is when the President of
the United States gets up in Dallas and addresses a group of individuals and
said to them that anybody who doesn't support his Constitutional amendment for
prayer in the schools is intolerant of religion.

Now there are numerous groups who don't support that prayer in the school,
numerous religious groups. Are they intolerant of religion? Is that what the
President is saying?

I also object, when I am told, that the Reverend Falwell has been told that he
would pick two of our Supreme Court Justices. That's going a little bit far. In
that instance, let me say to you it is more than a fudging at the line: it is a
total intrusion, and I think that it's in violation of our Constitution.

Q. Congresswoman Ferraro, as a devout Catholic, does it trouble you that so many
of the leaders of your church disagree with you, and do you think that you're
being treated unfairly in any way by the Catholic Church?

FERRARO: Let me tell you that I did not come to my position on abortion very
lightly. I am a devout Catholic. When I was running for Congress in 1978 I sat
and met with a person I felt very close to, a monsignor currently a bishop. I
spoke to him about my personal feelings that I would never have an abortion, but
I was not quite sure if I were ever to become pregnant as a result of a rape if
I would be that self-righteous. I then spoke to him; he said, Gerry, that's not
good enough. There you can't support that position. I said, O.K. That's my
religious view; I will accept the teaching of the church, but I cannot impose my
religious views on someone else.

I truly take an oath as a public official to represent all the people in my
district, not only the Catholics. If there comes a time where I cannot practice
my religion and do my job properly, I will resign my job.

MODERATOR: Vice President Bush, your rebuttal.

BUSH: Well I respect that statement, I really and truly do. We have a difference
on a moral question here on abortion. I notice that Mr. Mondale keeps talking in
the debate and now it's come here about Mr. Falwell. And I don't know where this
canard could have come from about Mr. Falwell picking the Supreme Court
Justices. Ronald Reagan has made one superb, outstanding, the only one he's
made, appointment to the Supreme Court, and that was Sandra Day O'Connor, and
Mr. Falwell opposed her nomination. We still have respect for him, but he
opposed it. and so I hope this lays to rest this slander against the President.
We want Justices who will interpret the Constitution, not legislate it.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro, your rebuttal?

FERRARO: Yes, I still find it very difficult to believe because in the platform
which this Republican Party passed in Dallas - one of the things they did was
they said that this position on abortion would be a litmus test, not only for
Supreme Court Justices but for other Federal justices. That, again, seems to me
a blurring of the line of the separation between church and state.

MODERATOR: The next questioning from Mr. Boyd.




The Candidates' Finances

Q. Like many Americans, each of you has recently had an unhappy experience with
the Internal Revenue Service. I'm going to prolong your ordeal. Congresswoman
Ferraro, you disagree with the rule that says that a candidate must report the
income or assets of his or her spouse if you get any benefit from them. Your
husband's tax return showed that you did benefit because he paid the mortgage
and the property taxes on your home. Now the ethics committee is examining this
question, but it won't report its findings until after the election. Would you
be willing to ask that committee, which is controlled by Democrats, to hurry up
its work and report before the election.

FERRARO: Let me say to you that I already did that. I wanted them to move ahead.
If you recall, I spent about an hour and 45 minutes speaking to 200 reporters on
Aug. 21, which is the day after I was required to file my financial statement,
and I sat for as long as they had questions on the issue, and I believe that
they were satisfied. I filed more information than any other candidate for a
national office in the history of this country.

Not only did I agree to file my tax returns, after a little bit of prodding my
husband also agreed to file his with the - not only the ethics committee but the
F.E.C. But the action that you're speaking about with the ethics committee was
started by a right-wing legal organization - foundation - knowing that I would
have to - that there would be an automatic inquiry. We have filed the necessary
papers, I have asked them to move along. Unfortunately, the House, I believe,
went out of session today, so I don't know if they will move. But quite frankly,
I would like that to be taken care of anyway, because I just want it cleared up.

Q. Since that famous Aug. 21 press conference on your family finances, you filed
a new report with the ethics committee, and this showed that your previous
reports were full of mistakes and omissions. For example, you failed to report
about 12 trips that were paid for by special interest groups. In at least 18
cases your holdings were misstated. Do you think it showed good leadership or
attention to duty to blame all this on sloppy work by your accountant?

FERRARO: Well, what it showed was that - and it was truly that I hired an
accountant who had been with our family for well over 40 years. He was filling
out those ethics forms. I did not spend the time with him - I just gave him my
tax information and he did it. I have to tell you what we have done since I have
hired a marvelous accountant. I've spent a lot of money having him go through
all those ethics forms and he will be doing my taxes over the next eight years
while we're in the White House so that the American public can be sure it's all
been taken care of.

Q. Vice President Bush, last year you paid less than 13 percent of your income
in Federal taxes. According to the I.R.S., someone in your bracket normally pays
about 28 percent of his income. Now what you did was perfectly legal, but do you
think it was fair, and is there something wrong with our tax laws that allows
such large deductions for wealthy taxpayers?

BUSH: What that figure - and I kind of like the way Mrs. Ferraro and Mr. Zaccaro
reported - because they reported Federal taxes, state and local taxes - gives
people a clearer picture. That year I happened to pay a lot of state and local
taxes, which as you know are deducted from the other, and so I looked it up the
other day, and we had paid - I think it's 42 percent - of our gross income in
taxes. Now Mr. Mondale the other night took what I - I'll be honest - I think it
was a cheap shot - at me, and we did a little looking around to see about his.
We can't find his 1981 tax return - it may have been released.

Maybe my opponent knows whether Mr. Mondale released it. But we did find
estimates that his income for those three years is a million,
four-hundred-thousand dollars, and I think he paid about the same percentage as
I did in total taxes. He also made a reference that troubled me very much, Mr.
Boyd. He started talking about my chauffeur, and you know, I'm driven to work by
the Secret Service - so is Mrs. Ferraro - so is Mr. Mondale - they protected his
life for four years and now they've done a beautiful job for Barbara and mine.
They saved the life of the President of the United States. I think that was a
cheap shot - telling the American people to try to divide class - rich and poor.

But the big question isn't whether Mrs. Ferraro is doing well. I think they're
doing pretty well, and I know Barbara and I are doing well. And it's darn sure
that Mr. Mondale is doing well, with a million-four in income, but the question
really is - after we get through this disclosure - is the tax cut fair? Are
people getting a fair break, and the answer is the rich are paying 6 percent
more on taxes and the poor are getting a better break. Those lower- and
middle-income people that have borne the burden for a long time. So yes, I favor
disclosure. I've always disclosed. This year I had my taxes and everything I own
in a blind trust - so blind - blinder than the President's, so I didn't even
sign my tax return. But there seemed to be an interest in it so we went to the
Government ethics committee - they agreed to change the trust. The trust has
been revealed, and I was sure glad to see that I had paid 42 percent of my gross
income in taxes.


Q. Mr. Vice President, how can you claim that your home is in Maine for tax
purposes and at the same time claim that your home is in Texas for voting
purposes? Are you really a Texan or a New Englander?

BUSH: I'm really a Texan. But I got one house. And under the law, every taxpayer
is allowed, when he sells a house, and buys another house, to get the rollover.
Everybody, if it turns out, and I may hire, I notice she said she has a new good
accountant. I'd like to get his name and phone number because I think I've paid
too much in the way of taxes. And residence, Mr. Boyd, legal residence, for
voting, is very different. And the domicile, they call that, very different,
than the house. That they say you're living in the Vice President's house.
Therefore you don't get what every - I've got problems - what every other
taxpayer gets. I got problems with the I.R.S., but so do a lot of people out
there. I think I've paid too much. Nothing ethical. I'd like to get some money
back.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro, your rebuttal please.

FERRARO: Let me just say that I'd be happy to give the Vice President the name
of my accountant, but I warn you, he's expensive.

I think the question is whether or not the tax cuts and the tax system that's
currently in our Government, that our Government uses, is fair. I think the tax
system is unfair. But it's not something that we can address in the short term.
The tax cuts that Vice President Bush and I got last, three years ago, that this
President gave out, no, that's not fair. If you earn $200,000 a year, you got a
$25,000 tax cut. If you earned between $20,000 and $40,000, you may have gotten
about $1,000 between ten and twenty, close to a hundred dollars and if you made
less than $10,000 with all the budget cuts that came down the line, you suffered
a loss of $400. That's not fair. That's basically unfair and not only is it
unfair, but economically it has darn near destroyed this country. There's a $750
billion tax cut over a five-year period of time. That's one of the reasons we're
facing these enormous deficits that we have today.

MODERATOR: Mr. Vice President.

Disclosure of Assets



BUSH: No, I think I've said all I want to say. I do, I didn't fully address
myself to Mr. Boyd's question on disclosure. I led the fight, I think, in 1968,
in the House - I was in the House of Representatives for a couple of terms - and
I led the fight for disclosure. I believe in it. Before I went into this job, I
disclosed everything we had. We didn't have any private corporations, but I
disclosed absolutely everything. Arthur Anderson made out a assets and
liabilities statement that I believe went further than any other one. And then,
to protect the public interest, we went into this blind trust. I believe in the
blind trust because I believe a public official in this kind of job ought not to
know whether he's gonna benefit, directly or indirectly, by some holding he
might have or something of that nature. And, no, I support full disclosure.

MODERATOR: Thank you. That ends the part of this debate devoted to domestic
affairs. We will now turn to foreign affairs and will begin the questioning with
Mr. Mashek.


Coping With Terrorism

Q. Vice President Bush, since your Administration came to power the President
has threatened a stern response against terrorism, yet murderous attacks have
continued in Lebanon and the Middle East. Who's to blame, and you've been
director of the Central Intelligence Agency. What can be done to stop it?

BUSH: Terrorism is very, very difficult to stop. And I think everybody knows
that. We had ambassadors killed in Sudan and the Lebanon some time ago, a long
time ago. When you see the Israeli building in Lebanon after the death of our
marines you see that, hit by terrorism, the Israelis, with all their experience
fighting terrorism, you know it's difficult. When you see Khomeini with his
radical Islam resorting to government-sponsored terrorism, it's very difficult.
The intelligence business can do a good job, and I'm always one that defends the
Central Intelligence Agency. I believe we ought to strengthen it and I believe
we still have the best foreign intelligence business in the world. But it is
very difficult to get the source information that you need to go after something
as shadowy as international terror.

There was a difference between Iran and what happened in Lebanon. In Iran you
had a government holding a U.S. Embassy; the Government sanctioning the takeover
of that embassy by those students; the government negotiating with the United
States Government for their release. In Lebanon, in the terror that happened at
the embassy, you have the government there, Mr. Gemayel, that wants to help
fight against terrorism. But because of the melee in the Middle East, it's there
today and has been there yesterday and the day before, and everyone that's had
experience in that area knows, it is a very different thing. So what we've got
to do is use absolutely the best security possible. I don't think you can go
assigning blame. The President, of course, is the best I've ever seen at
accepting that. He's been wonderful about it in absolutely everything that
happens. But I think fair-minded people that really understand international
terror knows that it's very hard to guard against. And the answer then really
lies in the Middle East and terrorism happening all over the world, is a
solution to the Palestine question, the follow-on to Camp David under the
umbrella of the Reagan September of 1982 initiatve. That will reduce terror, it
won't eliminate it.

Q. You mention Khomeini, some Republicans charge the previous Administration
with being almost helpless against Khoemini and Libya's Quaddafi. Why hasn't
your Administration done something to take action against Arab states that
foment this kind of terrorism?

BUSH: What we've done is to support Arab states that want to stand up against
international terror, quite different. We believe in supporting, without
jeopardizing the security of Israel in any way, because they are our one
strategic ally in the area, they are the one democracy in the area and our
relations with them has never been better. But we do believe in reaching out to
the, what they call the G.C.C., those Gulf Cooperative Council states, those
moderate Arab states in that world, and helping them with defensive weapons to
guard against international terror or radical Islam perpetuated by Khomeini. And
because we've done that and because the Saudis chopped down a couple of those
intruding airplanes a while back, I think we have helped keep the peace in the
Persian Gulf.


Q: Congresswoman Ferraro, you and former Vice President Mondale have criticized
the President over the bombings in Lebanon, but what would you do to prevent
such attacks?

FERRARO: Let me first say that terrorism is a global problem, and let me say
secondly that the - Mr. Bush has referred to the embassy that was held in Iran.
Well, I was at the White House in January, I guess it was, in '81, when those
hostages, all 52 of them, came home alive. It was at that time that President
Reagan gave a speech welcoming them home - as America did, we were so excited to
see them back. But what he said was: The United States has been embarrassed for
the last time. We're going to stand tall and if this ever happens again, there's
going to be swift and immediate steps taken to address the wrong that our
country has founded - has suffered.

In April of 1983 I was in Beirut and visited the ambassador at the embassy. Two
weeks later, that embassy was bombed. At that time - take a look at the crazy
activities of terrorists, you can't blame that on anybody. They're going to do
crazy things and you just don't know what's going to happen. The following
October, there was another bombing and that bombing took place at the Marine
barracks, where there were 242 young men who were killed.

Study by Commission

Right after that bombing occurred, there was a commission set up called the Long
Commission. That commission did a study of the security arrangements around
where the Marines were sleeping and found that there was negligence, that they
did not have proper gates up, proper precautions to stop those trucks from
coming in. And so the Long Commission issued a report, and President Reagan got
up and he said: I'm Commander in Chief. I take responsibility.

And we all waited for something to be done when he took responsibility. Well,
last month we had our third bombing. The first time, the first embassy, there
was no gate up. The second time, with our Marines, the gate was open. The third
time, the gate was there but it had not been installed. And what was the
President's reaction? Well, the security arrangements were not in, our people
were placed in that embassy in an unsecured time, and the Marines who were
guarding it were left to go away and there were other people guarding the
embassy.

Again, the President said: I assume responsibility. I'd like to know what that
means. Are we going to take proper precautions before we put Americans in
situations where they're in danger, or are we just going to walk away, throwing
our arms up in the air now - quite a reversal from the first time, from the
first time when he said he was going to do something? Or is this President going
to take some action?


Covert Activity Abroad

Q. Some Democrats cringe at the words ''spying'' and ''covert activity.'' Do you
believe both of them have a legitimate role in countering terrorist activity
around the world.

FERRARO: I think they have a legitimate role in gathering information. And what
had happened was the C.I.A., in the last bombing, had given information to our
Administration with reference to the actual threats that that embassy was going
to be bombed. So it wasn't the C.I.A. that was at fault. There's legitimate
reason for the C.I.A. to be in existence, and that's to gather intelligence
information for our security. But when I see the C.I.A. doing things like
they're doing down in Central America - supporting a covert war - no, I don's
support that kind of activity. The C.I.A. is there, it's meant to protect our
government; not there to subvert other governments.



MODERATOR: Vice President Bush.

BUSH: Well, I'm surprised. I think I just heard Mrs. Ferraro say that she would
do away with all covert actions, and if so, that has very serious ramifications,
as the intelligence community knows. This is serious business. And sometimes
it's quiet support for a friend, and so I'll leave that one there.

But let me help you with the difference, Mrs. Ferraro, between Iran and the
Embassy in Lebanon. Iran - we were held by a foreign government. In Lebanon you
had a wanton, terrorist action where the Government opposed it. We went to
Lebanon to give peace a chance, to stop the bombing of civilians in Beirut, to
remove 13,000 terrorists from Lebanon - and we did.

We saw the formation of a government of reconciliation and for somebody to
suggest, as our two opponents have, that these men died in shame - they better
not tell the parents of those young marines. They gave peace a chance. And our
allies were with us - the British, the French and the Italians.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro.

FERRARO: Let me just say, first of all, that I almost resent, Vice President
Bush, your patronizing attitude that you have to teach me about foreign policy.
I've been a member of Congress for six years; I was there when the Embassy was
held hostage in Iran, and I have been there and I've seen what has happened in
the past several months; 17 months of your Administration.

Secondly, please don't categorize my answers, either. Leave the interpretation
of my answers to the American people who are watching this debate. And let me
say further that no one has ever said that those young men who were killed
through the negligence of this Administration and others ever died in shame. No
one who has a child who is 19 or 20 years old, a son, would ever say that at the
loss of anybody else's child.

MODERATOR: Mr. White.



Intervention in Central America

Q: Congresswoman Ferraro, you've repeatedly said that you would not want your
son to die in an undeclared war for an uncertain cause. But recently your
running mate, Mr. Mondale, has suggested that it may become necessary to erect a
military quarantine or blockade of Nicaragua. Under what circumstances would you
advocate the use of military force, American combat forces, in Central America?

FERRARO: I would advocate the use of force when it was necessary to protect the
security of our country, protect our security interest or protect our people or
protect the interests of our friends and neighbors. When President - I'm jumping
the gun a bit, aren't I? - when Mr. Mondale, Mr. Mondale referred to the
quarantine of Central America, a country in Central America, what he is
referring to is a last resort after all other means of attempting to settle the
situation down in that region of the world had been exhausted.

Quite frankly now what is being done by this Administration is an Americanizing
of a regional conflict. They're moving in militarily instead of promoting the
Contadora process, which, as you know, is the process that is in place with the
support of Mexico and Colombia and Panama and Venezuela.

Instead of supporting the process, our Administration has in Nicaragua been
supporting covert activities to keep that revolution going in order to overthrow
the Sandinista Government; in El Salvador was not pushing the head of the
Government to move toward correction of the civil rights, human rights problems
that existed there, and now this Administration seems almost befuddled by the
fact that Nicaragua is moving to participate in the Contadora process, and El
Salvador is, through its President Duarte, is reaching out to the guerrillas in
order to negotiate a peace.

What Fritz Mondale and I feel about the situation down there is that what you do
is you deal first through negotiation. That force is not a first resort, but
certainly a last resort in any instance.

MODERATOR: A follow-up, please.

Q: Many times in its history the United States has gone to war in order to
defend freedom in other lands. Does your answer mean that you would be willing
to forgo the use of military force even if it meant the establishment of a
Soviet-backed dictatorship so close to our own borders?

FERRARO: No, I think what you have to do is work with the Government - I assume
you're speaking about the Government of Nicaragua - work with that Government to
achieve a pluralistic society. I mean they do have elections that are coming up
on Nov. 4. I think we have to work with them to achieve a peaceful solution to
bring about a pluralistic country.

No, I'm not willing to live with a force that could be a danger to our country.
Certainly, I would see that our country would be there putting all kinds of
pressure on the neighboring countries of Honduras, of Costa Rica, of El
Salvador, to promote the kind of society that we can all live with and security
in this country.





Force in Central America

Q: Vice President Bush, both Cuba and Nicaragua are reported to be making
extensive preparations to defend themselves against an American invasion, which
they claim could come this fall. And even some of your Democratic opponents in
Congress have suggested that the Administration may be planning a December
surprise invasion. Can you tell us under what circumstances a re- elected Reagan
Administration would consider the use of force in Central America or the
Caribbean?

BUSH: We don't think we're to be required to use force. Let me point out that
there are 2,000 Cuban military and 7,500 so-called Cuban advisers in Nicaragua.
There are 55 American military in El Salvador.

I went down, on the instructions of the President, to speak to the commandants
in El Salvador and told them that they had to move with Mr. Magana, then the
President of El Salvador, to respect human rights. They have done that. They're
moving well. I'm not saying it's perfect, but the difference between El Salvador
and Nicaragua is like the difference between night and day.

El Salvador went to the polls. Mr. Duarte was elected by 70 percent of the
people in 70 percent voting in a certifiably free election. In Nicaragua, you
have something very different. You have a Marxist-Leninist group, the
Sandinistas, that came into power talking democracy. They have aborted their
democracy. They have humiliated the Holy Father. They have cracked down on the
only press organ there, La Prensa, censoring the press, something that should
concern every American.

They have not had any human rights at all. They will not permit free elections.
Mr. Cruz, who was to be the only viable challenger to Nicaragua, the
Sandinistas, to the junta, to Mr. Ortega, went down there and found that the
ground rules were so unfair that he couldn't even wage a campaign. One country
is devoid of human rights. The other is struggling to perfect their democracy.

We don't like it, frankly, when Nicaragua exports its revolution or serves as a
conduit for supplies coming in from such ''democracies'' as North Korea,
Bulgaria the Soviet Union and Cuba, to try to destabilize El Salvador.

Yes, we're concerned about that. Because we want to see this trend toward
democracy continue. There have been something like 13 countries since we've come
in move toward the democratic route, and let me say that Grenada is not
unrelated. And I have a big difference with Mrs. Ferraro on that one. We gave
those four tiny Caribbean countries a chance. We saved the lives, and most of
those thousand students said that they were in jeopardy. Grenada was a proud
moment because we did stand up for democracy.

But in terms of threat of these countries, nuclear, I mean, weapons, no. There's
not that kind of a threat. It's Mr. Mondale that proposed the quarantine, not
Ronald Reagan.

Mining Nicaragua's Harbors


Q: Considering this country's long respect for the rule of international law,
was it right for the United States to be involved in mining the harbors of
Nicaragua, a country we're not at war with, and to subsequently refuse to allow
the World Court to adjudicate that dispute and the complaint from Nicaragua?

BUSH: I support what we're doing. It was supported to the Congress and under the
law. I support it. My only regret is that the aid for the contras, those people
that are fighting, we call them freedom fighters. They want to see the democracy
perfected in Nicaragua. Am I to understand from this assault on covert action
that nowhere in the world would we do something that was considered just off
base when Mrs. Ferraro said she'd never support it? Would she never support it
if the violation of human rights was so great and quiet support was necessary
for freedom fighters?

Yes, we're for the contras. And let me tell you another fact about the contras.
Everyone that's not for this, everyone who wants to let that Sandinista
Government prevail, just like that Castro did, all of that, the contras are not
Somozistas. Less than 5 percent of the contras supported Somoza. These were
people that wanted a revolution. These are people that felt the revolution was
betrayed. These are people that support human rights. Yes, we should support
them.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro.



FERRARO: I spent time in Central America in January and had an opportunity to
speak to the contras after the incident in Nicaragua and in El Salvador. Let me
just say that the situation as it exists now, because of this Administration's
policies, are not getting better. We're not moving towards a more secure area of
the world. As a matter of fact the number of troops that the Sandinistas have
accumulated since the Administration started its covert activities has risen
from 12,000 to 50,000, and of course the number of Soviet and Cuban advisors has
also increased. I did not support the mining of the harbors in Nicaragua; it is
a violation of international law. Congress did not support it and as a matter of
fact, just this week, the Congress voted to cut off covert aid to Nicaragua
unless and until a request is made and there is evidence of need for it, and the
Congress approves it again in March. So if Congress doesn't get laid on, the
covert activities which I opposed in Nicaragua, those C.I.A. covert activities
in that specific country, are not supported by the Congress. And believe it or
not, not supported by the majority of people throughout the country.

MODERATOR: Vice President Bush.

BUSH: Well, I would simply like to make the distinction again between those
countries that are searching for democracy and the handful of countries that
have totally violated human rights and are going the Marxist route. Ortega, the
commandante who is head of the Nicaraguan Sandinistas, is an avowed Marxist.
They don't believe in the church. They don't believe in free elections. They
don't believe in all of the values that we believe in. So it is our policy to
support the democracy there, and when you have freedom fighters that want to
protect that revolution, and go the democratic route, we believe in giving them
support. We are for democracy in the hemisphere. We are for negotiations. $3 out
of every $4 that we sent down there has been for economic aid to support the
people's chance to eat and live and be happy and enjoy life. And one-fourth only
was military. You wouldn't get that from listening to Mr. Mondale.


Meeting With Soviets

MODERATOR: Miss Quarles.

Q. Vice President Bush, the last three Republican administrations, Eisenhower,
Nixon and Ford, none of them soft on Communism, met with the Soviets and got
agreements on arms control. The Soviets haven't changed that much. Can you tell
us why President Reagan has not met with the Soviet ministers at all and only
met with Prime Minister Gromyko less than a month ago?

BUSH: Yes I can. The, you mentioned the Gromyko meeting, those were broken off
under the Carter- Mondale days. There had been three separate Soviet leaders.
Mr. Brezhnev, Mr. Andropov, and now Chernenko. During their, that, in three and
a half years, three separate leaders. The Soviets have not been willing to talk.
We are the ones that went to the table in I.N.F. We had a good proposal, a moral
proposal. Ban an entire generation of intermediate nuclear force weapons and if
you won't do that, don't leave your allies in Europe in a monopoly position. The
Soviets with 1,200 of these things, and the alliance with none. We didn't think
that's the way you deter aggression and keep the peace. The President went, the
first thing he did when he came into office was make a proposal on the most
destabilizing weapons of all, Start.

Chemical Weapons ProposalAnd when the the strategic weapon and when the Soviets
said, well, we don't like that proposal, we said all right, we'll be more
flexible. I at the urging of the President went to Geneva and laid on the table
a treaty to ban all chemical weapons. We don't want them to have a monopoly. We
said look, let's come together. You come over here and see what we're doing;
we'll go over there and see what you're doing. But let's save the kids of this
world from chemical weapons. A brilliant proposal to get rid of all of them. And
the Soviets nyet, nyet nyet. In the mutual balance force reduction to reduce
conventional forces, they're not even willing to tell us the base. Mrs. Ferraro
knows that, and how many troops they have. There's four sessions. We have had an
agreement with them on the hot line. But the Carter-Mondale made an agreement,
the Salt II agreement, but the Democratic Senate, they were a Democratic
Administration, the Democratic Senate wouldn't even ratify that agreement. It
was flawed, it was unverifiable and it was not good. Our President wants to
reduce, not just to stop, he wants to reduce dramatically nuclear weapons. And
when the Soviets know they're going to have this strong President to deal with,
and when this new Administration, Mr. Chernenko, given more than a few months in
office can solidify its position, then they'll talk. But if they think the
opposition, before they sit down, are going to give up the MX, give up the B1,
go for a freeze that locks in inferiority in Europe, all of these things,
unilaterally, before they're willing to talk, they may just sweat it out for
four more weeks. Who knows.

Q. You were once quoted as saying that a nuclear war is winnable. Is that still
your belief, and if not, under what circumstances would you use nuclear weapons
if you were President?

BUSH: No, I don't think it's winnable. I was quoted wrong, obviously, 'cause I
never thought that. The Soviet planning, I did learn that when I was Director of
Central Intelligence, and I don't think there'd be any disagreement, is based on
that ugly concept. But I agree with the President: It should never be fought.

Nuclear weapons should never be fought with, and that's our approach. So
therefore, let's encourage the Soviets to come to the table as we did at the
Gromyko meeting. I wish everybody could have seen that one - the President,
giving the facts to Gromyko in all of these nuclear meetings - excellent, right
on top of that subject matter. And I'll bet you that Gromyko went back to the
Soviet Union saying, ''Hey, listen, this President is calling the shots; we'd
better move.''

But do you know why I think we'll get an agreement? Because I think it is in the
interest of the Soviet Union to make it, just as it is in the United States.
They're not deterred by rhetoric. I listened to the rhetoric for two years at
the United Nations. I've lived in a Communist country. It's not rhetoric that
decides agreements, it's self-interest of those countries.

A Verifiable Nuclear Freeze


Q. Congresswoman Ferraro, you and Mr. Mondale are for a verifiable nuclear
freeze. Some Democrats have said that verification may not be possible. How
would you verify such an agreement and make sure that the Soviets are not
cheating?

FERRARO: Let me say first of all that I don't think there is any issue that is
more important in this campaign, in this election, than the issue of war and
peace. And since today's is Eleanor Roosevelt's 100th birthday, let me quote
her. She said, ''It is not enough to want peace, you must believe in it. And it
is not enough to believe in it, you must work for it.'' This Administration's
policies have indicated quite the opposite.

The last time I heard Vice President Bush blame the fact that they didn't meet
with the Soviet leader, and this is the first President in 40 years not to meet
with a Soviet counterpart. He said the reason was because there are three Soviet
leaders in the past three and a half years. I went and got a computer printout.
It's five pages of the leaders, world leaders, that the Soviet leaders have met
with, and they're not little people. They're people like Mitterrand of France
and Krohl of Germany and President Kiprianou of Cyprus - you go down the line,
five pages of people that the Soviet leaders have managed to meet with and
somehow they couldn't meet with the President of the United States.

In addition to not meeting with his Soviet counterpart, this it the first
President - and you're right - since the start of negotiating arms control
agreements who have not negotiated an arms control agreement. But not only has
he not negotiated one, he's been opposed to every single one that every other
President has negotiated, including Eisenhower, including Ford and including
Nixon.

Now, let me just say that with reference to the Vice President's comments about
the intent and the desire of the United States and this Administration, the
Soviet Union did walk out of the talks. I agree. But it seems to me that 1982,
when the Administration presented its Start proposal, that it wasn't a realistic
proposal. And that is the comment that was made by Secretary Haig after he left
office, because what it dealt with was that it dealt just with land-based
nuclear missiles, which is where the Soviets had the bulk of their missiles.

But that aside, in 1982, I believe it was, their own negotiator, Nitze, came out
with a proposal called the ''walk-in-the-woods proposal'' which would have
limited the number of nuclear arms in Europe. That proposal was turned down by
the Administration - a proposal presented by its own administrator.

Now I'm delighted that they met with Mr. Gromyko, but they could have had that
opportunity to meet with him in 1981 when he came to the U.N., which he had done
with every other President before, and in 1982 as well. I guess my -

MODERATOR: Congresswoman, I'm sorry. Speaking of limits, I have to impose a
limit on you. Vice President Bush?



BUSH: Well, I think there's quite a difference between Mr. Kyprianou in Cyprus
and the leader of the free world, Ronald Reagan, in terms of meeting. And the
Soviet Union - the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union will meet with a lot of
different people. We've been in very close touch with Mr. Mitterrand, Mr. Kohl
and others that have met with the leaders of the Soviet Union. But that's quite
different than meeting with the President of the United States. The Soviets say
we'll have a meeting when we think there can be progress and yet they left those
talks.

I'd like to correct my opponent on the walk in the woods. It was the Soviet
Union that was unwilling to discuss the walk in the woods. They were the ones
that gunned it down first and the record is very, very clear on that.

Miss Ferraro mentioned the inflexibility of our position on strategic arms. Yes,
we offered first to get rid of all those - we tried to reduce the SS-18's and
those weapons. But then we said if that's not good enough, there is flexibility,
let's talk about the bombers and the planes. So that's a very important point in
terms of negotiation.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman, he that taketh away has to give back. I robbed you of
your rebuttal. Therefore, you will have two minutes to rebut. Forgive me.

FERRARO: I - You robbed me of my follow-up, that's what you robbed me, so why
don't I let her give me the follow-up,

MODERATOR: All right, and then give your rebuttal.



A Mondale Administration

Q. Congresswoman Ferraro, most polls show that the American - Americans feel
that the Republicans, more than the Democrats are better able to keep the U.S.
out of war. We've had four years of relative peace under President Reagan. How
can you convince the American public that the world would be a safer place under
Carter-Mondale?



FERRARO: I think first of all, you have to take a look at the current situation.
We now have 50,000 nuclear warheads; we are building at the rate of five or six
a day between us and we have been doing that since this Administration came into
office. I think what you can do is look at what they've done and recognize that
they're not going to do very much in the future. And so, since they've done
nothing, do we continue to build be

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vice President Bush and Geraldine A. Ferraro at debate; Photos
of Vice President Bush's family and Geraldine Ferraro's family waiting for
debate

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Diner's Journal

BYLINE: By Bryan Miller

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 513 words


SUSHI bars have become nearly as commonplace as pizzerias around town in recent
years. Another Japanese-style restaurant that is not so well represented is the
tempura bar, at which diners sit at a counter and order various kinds of meat,
fish and vegetables that are dipped in egg batter and flash fried in oil. When
prepared properly, tempura is greaseless, light and with a slightly puffed and
brittle crust.

One good spot to try the whole spectrum of well- made tempura is at Inagiku, the
Japanese restaurant in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel (the restaurant entrance is at
111 East 49th Street between Park and Lexington Avenues). Inagiku is a sprawling
full-service restaurant with many dining areas, but the room that is the most
fun - and with the best food - is the large circular tempura bar. Chefs wearing
traditional Japanese outfits work in the middle of the circle tending to giant,
oil-filled woks. The bar is comfortable and congenial; chances are you will
strike up a conversation with diners next to you as you examine one another's
selections.

There are two tempura dinner entrees: the tempura Inagiku, featuring a variety
of seafood ($19.50), and the tempura and kushiage, which includes vegetables and
meats ($20). One can also order individual items. All of the selections sampled
recently were exceptional.

The seafood tempura includes large shrimp, smelts, fluke and an invigorating
combination of ground white fish wrapped in a vaguely mint-like Oriental leaf.
Because the tempura entrees are prepared in front of the customer and served
sizzling hot from the wok, they are superbly crisp and fresh. They can be dipped
in a radish-flavored soy sauce or simply in lemon juice and salt. All foods are
fried in a combination of sesame, camellia and olive oils.

The tempura style of cooking does wonderful things for vegetables, whether they
are chunks of green pepper, whole mushrooms, slices of onions or stalks of
zucchini. Meat, too, is a special treat. The best version is bite-size chunks of
beef with onion slices that are served on skewers.



Another type of Oriental cuisine that is not widely available in New York is
Vietnamese. Only in the last two or three years has this refined Oriental
cuisine made inroads into the land of sushi and Sichuan, and much of it is far
from authentic.

Cuisine de Saigon is a stylish year-old restaurant at 154 West 13th Street
(between the Avenue of the Americas and Seventh Avenue). While much of the food
sampled recently was undistinguished, there is one outstanding dish that makes a
visit worthwhile.

Called shrimp wrap with sugar cane ($12.95), it features a puree of shrimp
wrapped around a large stalk of sugar cane and broiled. The shrimp is served
with translucent circles of rice paper, mint, bean sprouts, lettuce, tomatoes,
pickled carrots and a hoisin-peanut sauce.

One makes a little rolled sandwich with the rice paper, shrimp and condiments
and dips everything in the sauce. The flavor and texture are sparklingly fresh.
Better yet, when finished you can chew on the sugar cane.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 12, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE CANDIDATES DEBATE;
 TRANSCRIPT OF PHILADELPHIA DEBATE BETWEEN BUSH AND FERRARO PARTICIPANTS IN THE
DEBATE

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 13637 words


The following people participated in last night's Vice-Presidential debate in
Philadelphia: CANDIDATES: Vice President Bush, Republican, and Representative
Geraldine A. Ferraro, Democrat.

MODERATOR: Sander Vanocur, senior political correspondent, ABC News.

PANELISTS: Robert S. Boyd, Washington bureau chief, Knight-Ridder Newspapers;
John Mashek, national correspondent, U.S. News & World Report; Jack White,
correspondent, Time, and Norma Quarles, correspondent, NBC News. Following is a
transcript of the televised debate between Vice President Bush and
Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro sponsored by the League of Women Voters in
Philadelphia last night, as recorded by The New York Times:

DOROTHY S. RIDINGS: Good evening from the Civic Center in Philadelphia, Pa. I'm
Dorothy Ridings, president of the League of Women Voters, the sponsor of
tonight's Vice- Presidential debate between Republican George Bush and Democrat
Geraldine Ferraro. Our panelists for tonight's debate are John Mashek, national
correspondent for U.S. News & World Report; Jack White, correspondent for Time
Magazine; Norma Quarles, correspondent for NBC News; and Robert Boyd, Washington
bureau chief for Knight-Ridder Newspapers. Sander Vanocur, senior political
correspondent for ABC News, is our moderator tonight. Sandy.

MODERATOR: Thank you, Dorothy. A few words about the order of our format
tonight. The order of questioning was determined by a toss of the coin.
Congresswoman Ferraro won the toss. She elected to speak last. Therefore Vice
President Bush will get the first question. The debate will be built upon a
series of questions from the four reporters on the panel. A reporter will ask a
candidate a question, a followup question and then the same to the other
candidate, then each candidate will get to rebut the other. The debate will be
divided into two parts. There'll be a section, the first one, on domestic
affairs; the second on foreign affairs. Now the manner of address was decided by
the candidates. Therefore it will be Vice President Bush, Congresswoman Ferraro.
And we begin our questioning with Mr. Mashek.

RELATIONS WITH PRESIDENT

Q: John Adams, our nation's first President, once said: ''Today I am nothing.
Tomorrow I may be everything.'' With that in mind, I'd like to ask the following
question: Vice President Bush, four years ago, you ran against Mr. Reagan for
the Republican nomination. You disagreed with him on such issues as the equal
rights amendment, abortion and you even labeled his economic policies as voodoo.
Now you apparently agree with him on every issue. If you should be called upon
to assume the Presidency, would you follow Mr. Reagan's policies down the line
or would you revert to some of your own ideas.  BUSH: Well, I don't think
there's a great difference, Mr. Mashek, between my ideas and President Reagan's.
One of the reasons I think we're an effective team is that I believe firmly in
his leadership. He's really turned this country around. We agree on the economic
program. When we came into office, why, inflation was 21, 12 1/2 percent
interest rates wiping out every single American were 21 1/2 percent if you can
believe it. Productivity was down. Savings was down. There was despair. In fact,
the leadership of the country told the people that there was a malaise out
there. And this President turned it around and I've been with him every step of
the way. And of course I would continue those kinds of programs because it's
brought America back. America's better off. People are going back to work. And
why Mr. Mondale can't understand that there's a new enthusiasm in this country,
that America is back, there's new strong leadership, I don't know. He has one
answer to the problem. Raise everybody's taxes. He looked right into that lens
and he said out there in San Francisco, he said, ''I'm gonna raise your taxes.''
Well he's had a lot of experience in that and he's sure gonna go ahead and do
it. But I remember a statement of Lyndon Johnson's when he was looking around,
why his party people weren't supporting him, and he said, ''Hey, they painted
their tails white and they ran with the antelopes.'' There's a lot of Democratic
white tails running with the antelopes. Not one single Democrat has introduced
the Mondale tax bill into the Congress. Of course I support the President's
economic program and I support him in everything else. And I'm not sure, because
of my concept of the Vice Presidency, that if I didn't, I'd go doing what Mr.
Mondale has done with Jimmy Carter; jump away from him. I couldn't do that to
Ronald Reagan, now, next year or any other time. I have too much trust in him. I
have too much friendship for him. And I'd feel very uncomfortable doing that. Q.
Well some Republicans have criticized Mr. Mondale for now claiming he disagreed
privately with Jimmy Carter's decision to impose the grain embargo. Have you
ever disagreed with any decision of the Reagan Administration and its inner
circles? And in following that up, where in your judgment does loyalty end and
principle begin?

BUSH: I owe my President my judgment and then I owe him loyalty. You can't have
the President of the United States out there looking over his shoulder wondering
whether his Vice President is going to be supporting him. Mrs. Ferraro has quite
a few differences with Vice President Mondale and I understood it when she
changed her position on tuition tax credits. They're different on busing; she
voted to extend the grain embargo; he now says that he was against it. If they
win - and I hope they don't - but if they win, she'll have to accommodate some
views.  But she'll give him the same kind of loyalty that I'm giving President
Reagan. One, we're not far apart on anything. Two, I can walk into that Oval
Office anytime and give him my judgment and he might agree or he might not. But
he also knows I won't be talking about it to the press or I won't be knifing in
the back by leaking to make me look good and complicate the problems of the
President of the United States.  Issue of Experience Q. Congresswoman Ferraro,
your opponent has served in the House of Representatives, he's been Ambassador
to the United Nations, Ambassador to China, Director of the Central Intelligence
Agency and now he's been Vice President for four years. How does your three
terms in the House of Representatives stack up against experience like that?

FERRARO: Well, let me first say that I wasn't born at the age of 43 when I
entered Congress. I did have a life before that as well. I was a prosecutor for
almost five years in the District Attorney's office in Queens County and I was a
teacher. There's not only what is on your paper resume that makes you qualified
to run for or to hold office.  It's how you approach problems and what your
values are. I think if one is taking a look at my career they'll that I level
with the people; that I approach problems analytically; that I am able to assess
the various facts with reference to a problem, and I can make the hard
decisions. I'm intrigued when I hear Vice President Bush talk about his support
of the President's economic program and how everything is just going so
beautifully. I, too, recall when Vice President Bush was running in the primary
against President Reagan and he called the program voodoo economics, and it was
and it is. We are facing absolutely massive deficits; this Administration has
chosen to ignore it; the President has failed to put forth a plan to deal with
those deficits and if everything believes that everything is coming up roses,
perhaps the Vice President should join me as I travel around the country and
speak to people.

'ECONOMY IS NOT DOING WELL'

People in Johnstown, Pennsylvania, are not terribly thrilled with what's
happening in the economy because they're standing in the light of a closed plant
because they've lost their jobs. The people in Youngstown, Ohio, have stores
that are boarded up because the economy is not doing well. It's not only the old
industries that are failing, it's also the new ones. In San Jose, California,
they're complaining because they can't export their high-tech qualities - goods
- to Japan and other countries. The people in the Northwest - in the State of
Washington and Oregon - are complaining about what's happening to the timber
industry and to the agriculture industry. So, so things are not as great as the
Administration is wanting us to believe in their television commercials. My
feeling, quite frankly, is that I have enough experience to see the problems,
address them and make the tough decisions and level with people with reference
to those problems. Q. Despite the historic aspects of your candidacy, how do you
account for the fact that a majority of women - at least according to the polls
- favor the Reagan-Bush ticket over the Mondale-Ferraro ticket?

FERRARO: I don't. Let me say that I'm not a believer in polls and let me say
further that what we are talking about are problems that are facing the entire
nation. They're not just problems facing women. The issues in this campaign are
the war-peace issues; the problems of deficits; the problems of trade deficits.
We are now facing a $120 billion trade deficit in this country. We're facing
problems of the environment. I think what we're going to be doing over the next
several weeks - and I'm absolutely delighted that the League is sponsoring these
debates and that we are, we are able to now speak to the American public and
address the issues in a way such as this. I think you're going to see a change
in those polls.

MODERATOR: Vice President Bush, you have one minute to rebuttal.

BUSH: Well, I was glad to get that vote of confidence from Mrs.  Ferraro in my
economic judgment. So let me make a statement on the economy. The other day she
was in a plant and she said to the workers why are you all voting for, why are
so many of you voting for the Reagan-Bush ticket? And there was a long deathly
silence and she said come on, we delivered. That's the problem. And I'm not
blaming her except for the liberal voting record in the House. They delivered.
They delivered 21 1/2 percent interest rates. They delivered what they called
malaise. They delivered interest rates that were right off the charts. They
delivered take-home pay, checks that were shrinking, and we've delivered
optimism. People are going back to work; six million of them. And 300,000 jobs a
month being created. That's why there was that deathly silence out there in that
plant. They delivered the wrong thing. Ronald Reagan is delivering leadership.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro, one minute rebuttal.

FERRARO: I, I think what I'm going to have to do is I'm going to start
correcting the Vice President's statistics. There are six million more people
who have jobs and that's supposed to happen in a growing economy. In fact in the
prior administration, with all their problems, they created 10 million jobs. The
housing interest rates during this Administration, for housing for middle-class
Americans, was 14.5 percent. Under the prior Administration with all their
problems, the average rate was 10.6 percent. If you take a look at the number of
people living in poverty as a result of this Administration, six million people,
500,000 people knocked off disability rolls. You know, it's, you can walk around
saying things are great and that's what we're going to be hearing, we've been
hearing that on those commercials for the past couple of months. I expect they
expect the American people to believe that. I'll become a one- woman truth squad
and we'll start tonight.  MODERATOR: Mr. White.

CIVIL RIGHTS AND EDUCATION

Q: Congresswoman Ferraro, I would like to ask you about civil rights. You have
in the past been a supporter of tuition tax credits for private parochial
schools. And also of a constitutional amendment to ban busing. Both these
measures are opposed not only by your running mate but by just about every
educational and civil rights organization in the country. Now that you're Mr.
Mondale's running mate have you changed your position on either of those?

FERRARO: With reference to the busing vote that I cast in 1979, both Fritz
Mondale and I agree on the same goal and that is non-discrimination. I just
don't agree on the same direction he does on how to achieve it. But I don't find
any problem with that. I think that's been something that's been handled by the
courts, and not being handled by Congress and will not be handled by the White
House. But we both support non-discrimination in housing and integration of
neighborhoods. The goals we both set forth. With reference to tuition tax
credits, I have represented a district in Queens which is 70 percent Catholic. I
represented my district. Let me say as well that I have also been a great
supporter of public school education and that is something that Fritz and I feel
very, very strongly about for the future of this country. And this
Administration over the past several years has gutted the educational programs
available to our young people. It has attempted to knock out Pell Grants which
are monies to young individuals who are poor and who cannot afford to go to
college. It has reduced by 25 percent the amount of monies going into college
education and by a third those going into secondary and primary schools. But
Fritz Mondale and I feel very strongly that if you educate your children that
that's an effort and the way that you build up and make a stronger America.

CITES CIVIL RIGHTS RECORD

With reference to civil rights I think you've got to go beyond that and if you
take a look, also, at my record in the Congress and Fritz Mondale's record, both
in the Senate and as Vice President, we both have extremely strong civil rights
records. This Administration does not. It has come in in the Bob Jones on the
side of segregated academies. It came in in the Grove City case on the side of
discrimination against women, the handicapped, and the elderly. As a matter of
fact, in the Congress we just passed overwhelmingly the Civil Rights Bill of
1984 and this Administration, the Republican-controlled Senate, just killed it
in the last week or two in Congress. So there is a real difference between how
the Mondale- Ferraro Administration will address the problems of civil rights
and the failure of this Administration specifically in that particular area. Q:
In the area of affirmative action, what steps do you think government can take
to increase the representation of minorities and women in the work force, and in
colleges and universities, and specifically, would you support the use of quotas
to achieve those goals?

FERRARO: I do not support the use of quotas. Both Mr. Mondale and I feel very
strongly about affirmative action to correct inequities, and we believe that
steps should be taken both through government - for instance, the Small Business
Administration. We have supported set-asides for minority and women's
businesses. That's a positive thing. We don't feel that you're in any way
hurting anybody else by reaching out with affirmative action to help those
who've been disenfranchised. On the contrary, if you have a growing economy, if
you create the jobs, if you allow for small business the opportunity with lower
interest rates to reach out and grow, there will be more than enough space for
everybody. And affirmative action is a very positive way to deal with the
problems of discrimination. Q: Vice President Bush, many critics of your
Administration say that it is the most hostile to minorities in recent memory.
Have you inadvertenly perhaps encouraged that view by supporting tuition tax
credits, the antibusing amendment and siding with Bob Jones University in a case
before the Supreme Court, your original opposition to the Voting Rights Act
extension and so forth?

BUSH: No, Mr. White, I think our record on civil rights is a good record. You
mentioned the Voting Rights extension; it was extended for the longest period of
time by President Reagan. But we have some problems in attracting the black
vote, and I think our record deserves better. We have done more for black
colleges than any previous Administration. We favor enterprise zones to give -
and it's been blocked by Tip O'Neill and that House of Representatives, those
liberals in that House blocked a new idea to bring jobs into the black
communities across this country. And because it's not an old handout, special
Federal spending program, it's blocked there - a good idea. And I'd like to see
that tried.  THE YOUNG, JOBS, TRAINING We've brought more civil rights cases in
the Justice Department than the previous Administration by far. We believe in
trying something new to help these black teen-age kids; the minimum wage
differential that says, ''Look,'' to an employer, ''hire these guys. And, yes,
they're willing to work for slightly less than the minimum wage.  Give'em a
training job in a private sector.'' We threw out that old CETA that didn't train
people for jobs that existed, simply rammed them onto the government payroll,
and we put in a thing called the Job Training Partnership Act. Wonderful, new
legislation that's helping blacks more and more. We think of civil rights as
something like crime in your neighborhoods. And, for example, when crime figures
are going in the right direction that's good, that's a civil right. Similarly,
we think of it in terms of quality of life, and that means interest rates. You
know, it's funny, Mr. Mondale talks about real interest rates.  The real
interest rate is what you pay when you go down and try to buy a TV set or buy a
car, or do whatever it is. The interest rates when we left office were 21 1/2
percent. Inflation! Is it a civil right to have that going right off the chart
so you're busting every American family, those who can afford it the less?

AN ECONOMY OFFERING HOPE No, we've got a good record. We've got it on civil
rights legislation, minority set-asides, more help for black colleges, and we've
got it in terms of an economy that's offering people opportunity and hope
instead of despair.

Q: Along those lines, sir, many recent studies have indicated that the poor and
minorities have not really shared in the new prosperity generated by the current
economic recovery. Was it right for your Administration to pursue policies,
economic policies, that required those at the bottom of the economic ladder to
wait for prosperity to trickle down from people who are much better off than
they?

BUSH: Mr. White, it's not trickling down. And I'm not suggesting there's no
poverty, but I am suggesting the way to work out of poverty is through real
opportunity. And in the meantime, the needy are getting more help. Human
resource spending is way, way up. Aid for Dependent Children spending is up.
Immunization programs are up. Almost every place you can point, contrary to Mr.
Mondale's - I gotta be careful - but contrary of how he goes around just saying
everyhing bad. If somebody sees a silver lining, he finds a big black cloud out
there.  Whine on harvest moon! I mean, there's a lot going on, a lotta
opportunty.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro, your rebuttal.

FERRARO: The Vice President indicates that the President signed the Voting
Rights Act. That was after he was - he did not support it while it was in the
Congress, in the Senate, it was passed despite his opposition, and he did sign
it because he was required to do so. In the civil rights cases that he
mentioned, the great number of cases that they have enforced, the reason they
enforced them because under the law they're required to do that. And I'm
delighted that the Administration is following the law. With reference . . .

MODERATOR: Excuse me - this will be out of my time, not yours - knowing and
cherishing the people of this city and knowing their restraint and diffidence
about emotion especially of athletic contexts of which this is not one, I
beseech you, try to hold your applause please. I'm sorry.

FERRARO: I just have to correct in my 30 seconds that are left the comment that
the Vice President made with reference specifically to a program like A.F.D.C.
If you take A.F.D.C., if you take food stamps, if you take - oh, go down the
line on poor people's programs, those are the programs that suffered
considerably under this Administration's first budget cuts and those are the
ones that in the second part of their part of their term, we were able to
restore some of those terribly, terribly unfair cuts to the poor people of this
country.

MODERATOR: Vice President Bush.

BUSH: Well, maybe we have a factual - maybe we can ask the experts to go to the
books. They'll do it anyway. Spending for food stamps is way, way up under the
Reagan Administration. A.F.D.C. is up under the Reagan Administration, and I am
not going to be found wrong on that. I am sure of my facts, and we are trying to
help and I think we're doing a reasonable job. But we are not going to rest
until every single American that wants a job gets a job and until this
prosperity and this recovery that's benefiting many Americans, benefits all
Americans.

MODERATOR: Miss Quarles.

SEPARATION OF CHURCH AND STATE

Q. Vice President Bush, one of the most emotional issues in this campaign has
been the separation of church and state. What are your views on the separation
of church and state specificlly with regard to abortion, and do you believe it
was right for the Archbishop of Philadelphia to have a letter read in 305
churches urging Catholics to fight abortion with their votes?  BUSH: I do
believe in pluralism. I do believe in separation of church and state. I don't
consider abortion a religious issue. I consider it a moral issue. I believe the
archbishop has every right to do everything he wants in that direction just as I
never faulted Jesse Jackson from taking his message to the black pulpits all
across this country, just as I never objected when the nuclear arms, the nuclear
freeze or the anti-nuclear people - many of those movements were led by priests.
Suddenly, because a Catholic bishop or an evangelist feels strongly on a
political issue, people are saying it's merging of church and state. We favor -
and I speak confidently for the President - we favor separation of church and
state. We favor pluralism. Now somebody says you ought to restore prayer in
schools. You don't think it's right to prohibit a kid from praying in schools.
For years kids were allowed to pray in schools. We don't think that's a merger
of church and state to have non-mandatory, volutary, non-Government-ordered
prayer. And yet some are accusing us of injecting religion into politics. I have
no problem with what the archbishop does, and I have no problem with what the
evangelists on the right do and I have no problem what the priests on the left
do. And it didn't bother me when during the Vietnam War much of the opposition
to the Government - Democrat and Republican Governments - was led by priests,
encouraging people to break the law and the adage of the - you know - the civil
disobedience thing. So our position, separation of church and state, pluralism,
so no little kid with a minority religion of some sort is going to feel offended
or feel left out or feel uncomfortable. But yes prayer in school on a voluntary
basis worked for many, many years until the Supreme Court ruled differently. And
I'm glad we got this question because I think there's been too much said about
religion and politics. We don't believe in denominationally moving in. It wasn't
our side that raised the question about our President whether he was a good
Christian or not and so I, so that's our position - separation of church and
state, pluralism, respect for all. Q. Vice President Bush, four years ago you
would have allowed Federal financing of abortions in cases of rape and incest as
well as when the mother's life was threatened. Does your position now agree with
that of President Reagan who in Sunday's debate came very close to saying that
abortion is murder?

BUSH: You know, there has been - I have to make a confession - an evolution in
my position. There's been 15 million abortions since 1973, and I don't take that
lightly. There's been a million and a half this year. The President and I do
favor a human rights amendment. I favor one that would have an exception for
incest and rape, and he doesn't, but we both - only for the life of the mother.
And I agree with him on that. So, yes, my position's evolved, but I'd like to
see the American who faced with 15 million abortions isn't re-thinking his or
her position and I'll just stand with the answer. I support the President's
position - and comfortably - from a moral standpoint. Q. So you believe it's
akin to murder?.  BUSH: No, I support the President's position. Q: Fine.
Congresswoman Ferraro, what are your views on the separation of church and state
with regard to abortions, and do you believe it was right for the Archbishop of
Philadelphia to have those letters read in the pulpits and urged the voters to
fight abortion with their vote?

PURPOSES OF IMMIGRATION NOTED

FERRARO: Let me say first of all I believe very, very sincerely in the
separation of church and state. I'm taking it from the historical viewpoint, if
you go back to the 1600's when people came here, the reason they came to this
country was to escape religious persecution, and that's the same reason why
people are coming here today in the 1940's to escape Nazism, now in the 1980's
and 1984 when they can get out of the country to escape Communism so they can
come here and practice their relgion. Our country is founded on the principle
that our Government should be neutral as far as religion is concerned. Now
what's happened over the past several years, and quite frankly I'm not going to
let you lay on me the intrusion of state politics into religion or religion into
politics by my comments with reference to the President's policies, because it
started in 1980 when this Administration was running for office and the Rev.
Jerry Falwell became very, very involved in the campaign. What has happened over
the past four years has been I think a real fudging of that line with the
separation of church and state. The actions of the Archbishops let me say to you
I feel that they have not only a right but a responsibility to speak up, and
even though I've been the person that they're speaking up about, I feel that
they do have the responsibility to do so, and I have no problem with it, no more
than I did priest who marched at the time of Vietnam and no more than I did at
the time when Martin Luther King marched at the time of the civil rights
marches. I have absolutely no problem with them speaking up, I think they have
an obligation as well as a right. Falwell and High CourtBut what I do have a
problem with is when the President of the United States gets up in Dallas and
addresses a group of individuals and said to them that anybody who doesn't
support his Constitutional amendment for prayer in the schools is intolerant of
religion. Now there are numerous groups who don't support that prayer in the
school, numerous religious groups. Are they intolerant of religion? Is that what
the President is saying? I also object, when I am told, that the Reverend
Falwell has been told that he would pick two of our Supreme Court Justices.
That's going a little bit far. In that instance, let me say to you it is more
than a fudging at the line: it is a total intrusion, and I think that it's in
violation of our Constitution. Q. Congresswoman Ferraro, as a devout Catholic,
does it trouble you that so many of the leaders of your church disagree with
you, and do you think that you're being treated unfairly in any way by the
Catholic Church?

FERRARO: Let me tell you that I did not come to my position on abortion very
lightly. I am a devout Catholic. When I was running for Congress in 1978 I sat
and met with a person I felt very close to, a monsignor currently a bishop. I
spoke to him about my personal feelings that I would never have an abortion, but
I was not quite sure if I were ever to become pregnant as a result of a rape if
I would be that self-righteous. I then spoke to him; he said, Gerry, that's not
good enough. There you can't support that position. I said, O.K. That's my
religious view; I will accept the teaching of the church, but I cannot impose my
religious views on someone else. I truly take an oath as a public official to
represent all the people in my district, not only the Catholics. If there comes
a time where I cannot practice my religion and do my job properly, I will resign
my job.

MODERATOR: Vice President Bush, your rebuttal.

BUSH: Well I respect that statement, I really and truly do. We have a difference
on a moral question here on abortion. I notice that Mr.  Mondale keeps talking
in the debate and now it's come here about Mr.  Falwell. And I don't know where
this canard could have come from about Mr. Falwell picking the Supreme Court
Justices. Ronald Reagan has made one superb, outstanding, the only one he's
made, appointment to the Supreme Court, and that was Sandra Day O'Connor, and
Mr. Falwell opposed her nomination. We still have respect for him, but he
opposed it. and so I hope this lays to rest this slander against the President.
We want Justices who will interpret the Constitution, not legislate it.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro, your rebuttal?

FERRARO: Yes, I still find it very difficult to believe because in the platform
which this Republican Party passed in Dallas - one of the things they did was
they said that this position on abortion would be a litmus test, not only for
Supreme Court Justices but for other Federal justices. That, again, seems to me
a blurring of the line of the separation between church and state.

MODERATOR: The next questioning from Mr. Boyd.

THE CANDIDATES' FINANCES

Q. Like many Americans, each of you has recently had an unhappy experience with
the Internal Revenue Service. I'm going to prolong your ordeal. Congresswoman
Ferraro, you disagree with the rule that says that a candidate must report the
income or assets of his or her spouse if you get any benefit from them. Your
husband's tax return showed that you did benefit because he paid the mortgage
and the property taxes on your home. Now the ethics committee is examining this
question, but it won't report its findings until after the election. Would you
be willing to ask that committee, which is controlled by Democrats, to hurry up
its work and report before the election.

FERRARO: Let me say to you that I already did that. I wanted them to move ahead.
If you recall, I spent about an hour and 45 minutes speaking to 200 reporters on
Aug. 21, which is the day after I was required to file my financial statement,
and I sat for as long as they had questions on the issue, and I believe that
they were satisfied. I filed more information than any other candidate for a
national office in the history of this country. Not only did I agree to file my
tax returns, after a little bit of prodding my husband also agreed to file his
with the - not only the ethics committee but the F.E.C. But the action that
you're speaking about with the ethics committee was started by a right-wing
legal organization - foundation - knowing that I would have to - that there
would be an automatic inquiry. We have filed the necessary papers, I have asked
them to move along. Unfortunately, the House, I believe, went out of session
today, so I don't know if they will move. But quite frankly, I would like that
to be taken care of anyway, because I just want it cleared up. Q. Since that
famous Aug. 21 press conference on your family finances, you filed a new report
with the ethics committee, and this showed that your previous reports were full
of mistakes and omissions.  For example, you failed to report about 12 trips
that were paid for by special interest groups. In at least 18 cases your
holdings were misstated. Do you think it showed good leadership or attention to
duty to blame all this on sloppy work by your accountant?

FERRARO: Well, what it showed was that - and it was truly that I hired an
accountant who had been with our family for well over 40 years. He was filling
out those ethics forms. I did not spend the time with him - I just gave him my
tax information and he did it. I have to tell you what we have done since I have
hired a marvelous accountant.  I've spent a lot of money having him go through
all those ethics forms and he will be doing my taxes over the next eight years
while we're in the White House so that the American public can be sure it's all
been taken care of. Q. Vice President Bush, last year you paid less than 13
percent of your income in Federal taxes. According to the I.R.S., someone in
your bracket normally pays about 28 percent of his income. Now what you did was
perfectly legal, but do you think it was fair, and is there something wrong with
our tax laws that allows such large deductions for wealthy taxpayers?

BUSH: What that figure - and I kind of like the way Mrs. Ferraro and Mr. Zaccaro
reported - because they reported Federal taxes, state and local taxes - gives
people a clearer picture. That year I happened to pay a lot of state and local
taxes, which as you know are deducted from the other, and so I looked it up the
other day, and we had paid - I think it's 42 percent - of our gross income in
taxes. Now Mr. Mondale the other night took what I - I'll be honest - I think it
was a cheap shot - at me, and we did a little looking around to see about his.
We can't find his 1981 tax return - it may have been released. Maybe my opponent
knows whether Mr. Mondale released it. But we did find estimates that his income
for those three years is a million, four-hundred-thousand dollars, and I think
he paid about the same percentage as I did in total taxes. He also made a
reference that troubled me very much, Mr. Boyd. He started talking about my
chauffeur, and you know, I'm driven to work by the Secret Service - so is Mrs.
Ferraro - so is Mr. Mondale - they protected his life for four years and now
they've done a beautiful job for Barbara and mine. They saved the life of the
President of the United States. I think that was a cheap shot - telling the
American people to try to divide class - rich and poor. But the big question
isn't whether Mrs. Ferraro is doing well. I think they're doing pretty well, and
I know Barbara and I are doing well. And it's darn sure that Mr. Mondale is
doing well, with a million-four in income, but the question really is - after we
get through this disclosure - is the tax cut fair? Are people getting a fair
break, and the answer is the rich are paying 6 percent more on taxes and the
poor are getting a better break. Those lower- and middle-income people that have
borne the burden for a long time. So yes, I favor disclosure. I've always
disclosed. This year I had my taxes and everything I own in a blind trust - so
blind - blinder than the President's, so I didn't even sign my tax return. But
there seemed to be an interest in it so we went to the Government ethics
committee - they agreed to change the trust. The trust has been revealed, and I
was sure glad to see that I had paid 42 percent of my gross income in taxes. Q.
Mr. Vice President, how can you claim that your home is in Maine for tax
purposes and at the same time claim that your home is in Texas for voting
purposes? Are you really a Texan or a New Englander?  BUSH: I'm really a Texan.
But I got one house. And under the law, every taxpayer is allowed, when he sells
a house, and buys another house, to get the rollover. Everybody, if it turns
out, and I may hire, I notice she said she has a new good accountant. I'd like
to get his name and phone number because I think I've paid too much in the way
of taxes.  And residence, Mr. Boyd, legal residence, for voting, is very
different. And the domicile, they call that, very different, than the house.
That they say you're living in the Vice President's house.  Therefore you don't
get what every - I've got problems - what every other taxpayer gets. I got
problems with the I.R.S., but so do a lot of people out there. I think I've paid
too much. Nothing ethical. I'd like to get some money back.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro, your rebuttal please.

FERRARO: Let me just say that I'd be happy to give the Vice President the name
of my accountant, but I warn you, he's expensive. I think the question is
whether or not the tax cuts and the tax system that's currently in our
Government, that our Government uses, is fair. I think the tax system is unfair.
But it's not something that we can address in the short term. The tax cuts that
Vice President Bush and I got last, three years ago, that this President gave
out, no, that's not fair. If you earn $200,000 a year, you got a $25,000 tax
cut. If you earned between $20,000 and $40,000, you may have gotten about $1,000
between ten and twenty, close to a hundred dollars and if you made less than
$10,000 with all the budget cuts that came down the line, you suffered a loss of
$400. That's not fair. That's basically unfair and not only is it unfair, but
economically it has darn near destroyed this country. There's a $750 billion tax
cut over a five-year period of time. That's one of the reasons we're facing
these enormous deficits that we have today.

MODERATOR: Mr. Vice President.

DISCLOSURE OF ASSETS

BUSH: No, I think I've said all I want to say. I do, I didn't fully address
myself to Mr. Boyd's question on disclosure. I led the fight, I think, in 1968,
in the House - I was in the House of Representatives for a couple of terms - and
I led the fight for disclosure. I believe in it. Before I went into this job, I
disclosed everything we had. We didn't have any private corporations, but I
disclosed absolutely everything. Arthur Anderson made out a assets and
liabilities statement that I believe went further than any other one. And then,
to protect the public interest, we went into this blind trust. I believe in the
blind trust because I believe a public official in this kind of job ought not to
know whether he's gonna benefit, directly or indirectly, by some holding he
might have or something of that nature. And, no, I support full disclosure.

MODERATOR: Thank you. That ends the part of this debate devoted to domestic
affairs. We will now turn to foreign affairs and will begin the questioning with
Mr. Mashek.

COPING WITH TERRORISM

Q. Vice President Bush, since your Administration came to power the President
has threatened a stern response against terrorism, yet murderous attacks have
continued in Lebanon and the Middle East. Who's to blame, and you've been
director of the Central Intelligence Agency.  What can be done to stop it?

BUSH: Terrorism is very, very difficult to stop. And I think everybody knows
that. We had ambassadors killed in Sudan and the Lebanon some time ago, a long
time ago. When you see the Israeli building in Lebanon after the death of our
marines you see that, hit by terrorism, the Israelis, with all their experience
fighting terrorism, you know it's difficult. When you see Khomeini with his
radical Islam resorting to government-sponsored terrorism, it's very difficult.
The intelligence business can do a good job, and I'm always one that defends the
Central Intelligence Agency. I believe we ought to strengthen it and I believe
we still have the best foreign intelligence business in the world. But it is
very difficult to get the source information that you need to go after something
as shadowy as international terror. There was a difference between Iran and what
happened in Lebanon.  In Iran you had a government holding a U.S. Embassy; the
Government sanctioning the takeover of that embassy by those students; the
government negotiating with the United States Government for their release. In
Lebanon, in the terror that happened at the embassy, you have the government
there, Mr. Gemayel, that wants to help fight against terrorism. But because of
the melee in the Middle East, it's there today and has been there yesterday and
the day before, and everyone that's had experience in that area knows, it is a
very different thing. So what we've got to do is use absolutely the best
security possible. I don't think you can go assigning blame. The President, of
course, is the best I've ever seen at accepting that.  He's been wonderful about
it in absolutely everything that happens. But I think fair-minded people that
really understand international terror knows that it's very hard to guard
against. And the answer then really lies in the Middle East and terrorism
happening all over the world, is a solution to the Palestine question, the
follow-on to Camp David under the umbrella of the Reagan September of 1982
initiatve. That will reduce terror, it won't eliminate it. Q. You mention
Khomeini, some Republicans charge the previous Administration with being almost
helpless against Khoemini and Libya's Quaddafi. Why hasn't your Administration
done something to take action against Arab states that foment this kind of
terrorism?  BUSH: What we've done is to support Arab states that want to stand
up against international terror, quite different. We believe in supporting,
without jeopardizing the security of Israel in any way, because they are our one
strategic ally in the area, they are the one democracy in the area and our
relations with them has never been better. But we do believe in reaching out to
the, what they call the G.C.C., those Gulf Cooperative Council states, those
moderate Arab states in that world, and helping them with defensive weapons to
guard against international terror or radical Islam perpetuated by Khomeini. And
because we've done that and because the Saudis chopped down a couple of those
intruding airplanes a while back, I think we have helped keep the peace in the
Persian Gulf.

Q: Congresswoman Ferraro, you and former Vice President Mondale have criticized
the President over the bombings in Lebanon, but what would you do to prevent
such attacks?

FERRARO: Let me first say that terrorism is a global problem, and let me say
secondly that the - Mr. Bush has referred to the embassy that was held in Iran.
Well, I was at the White House in January, I guess it was, in '81, when those
hostages, all 52 of them, came home alive. It was at that time that President
Reagan gave a speech welcoming them home - as America did, we were so excited to
see them back. But what he said was: The United States has been embarrassed for
the last time. We're going to stand tall and if this ever happens again, there's
going to be swift and immediate steps taken to address the wrong that our
country has founded - has suffered. In April of 1983 I was in Beirut and visited
the ambassador at the embassy. Two weeks later, that embassy was bombed. At that
time - take a look at the crazy activities of terrorists, you can't blame that
on anybody. They're going to do crazy things and you just don't know what's
going to happen. The following October, there was another bombing and that
bombing took place at the Marine barracks, where there were 242 young men who
were killed.  STUDY BY COMMISSION Right after that bombing occurred, there was a
commission set up called the Long Commission. That commission did a study of the
security arrangements around where the Marines were sleeping and found that
there was negligence, that they did not have proper gates up, proper precautions
to stop those trucks from coming in. And so the Long Commission issued a report,
and President Reagan got up and he said: I'm Commander in Chief. I take
responsibility. And we all waited for something to be done when he took
responsibility. Well, last month we had our third bombing. The first time, the
first embassy, there was no gate up. The second time, with our Marines, the gate
was open. The third time, the gate was there but it had not been installed. And
what was the President's reaction? Well, the security arrangements were not in,
our people were placed in that embassy in an unsecured time, and the Marines who
were guarding it were left to go away and there were other people guarding the
embassy. Again, the President said: I assume responsibility. I'd like to know
what that means. Are we going to take proper precautions before we put Americans
in situations where they're in danger, or are we just going to walk away,
throwing our arms up in the air now - quite a reversal from the first time, from
the first time when he said he was going to do something? Or is this President
going to take some action?

COVERT ACTIVITY ABROAD

Q. Some Democrats cringe at the words ''spying'' and ''covert activity.'' Do you
believe both of them have a legitimate role in countering terrorist activity
around the world.

FERRARO: I think they have a legitimate role in gathering information. And what
had happened was the C.I.A., in the last bombing, had given information to our
Administration with reference to the actual threats that that embassy was going
to be bombed. So it wasn't the C.I.A. that was at fault. There's legitimate
reason for the C.I.A.  to be in existence, and that's to gather intelligence
information for our security. But when I see the C.I.A. doing things like
they're doing down in Central America - supporting a covert war - no, I don's
support that kind of activity. The C.I.A. is there, it's meant to protect our
government; not there to subvert other governments.

MODERATOR: Vice President Bush.

BUSH: Well, I'm surprised. I think I just heard Mrs. Ferraro say that she would
do away with all covert actions, and if so, that has very serious ramifications,
as the intelligence community knows. This is serious business. And sometimes
it's quiet support for a friend, and so I'll leave that one there. But let me
help you with the difference, Mrs. Ferraro, between Iran and the Embassy in
Lebanon. Iran - we were held by a foreign government. In Lebanon you had a
wanton, terrorist action where the Government opposed it. We went to Lebanon to
give peace a chance, to stop the bombing of civilians in Beirut, to remove
13,000 terrorists from Lebanon - and we did. We saw the formation of a
government of reconciliation and for somebody to suggest, as our two opponents
have, that these men died in shame - they better not tell the parents of those
young marines. They gave peace a chance. And our allies were with us - the
British, the French and the Italians.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro.

FERRARO: Let me just say, first of all, that I almost resent, Vice President
Bush, your patronizing attitude that you have to teach me about foreign policy.
I've been a member of Congress for six years; I was there when the Embassy was
held hostage in Iran, and I have been there and I've seen what has happened in
the past several months; 17 months of your Administration. Secondly, please
don't categorize my answers, either. Leave the interpretation of my answers to
the American people who are watching this debate. And let me say further that no
one has ever said that those young men who were killed through the negligence of
this Administration and others ever died in shame. No one who has a child who is
19 or 20 years old, a son, would ever say that at the loss of anybody else's
child.

MODERATOR: Mr. White.

INTERVENTION IN CENTRAL AMERICA

Q: Congresswoman Ferraro, you've repeatedly said that you would not want your
son to die in an undeclared war for an uncertain cause. But recently your
running mate, Mr. Mondale, has suggested that it may become necessary to erect a
military quarantine or blockade of Nicaragua. Under what circumstances would you
advocate the use of military force, American combat forces, in Central America?

FERRARO: I would advocate the use of force when it was necessary to protect the
security of our country, protect our security interest or protect our people or
protect the interests of our friends and neighbors. When President - I'm jumping
the gun a bit, aren't I? - when Mr. Mondale, Mr. Mondale referred to the
quarantine of Central America, a country in Central America, what he is
referring to is a last resort after all other means of attempting to settle the
situation down in that region of the world had been exhausted. Quite frankly now
what is being done by this Administration is an Americanizing of a regional
conflict. They're moving in militarily instead of promoting the Contadora
process, which, as you know, is the process that is in place with the support of
Mexico and Colombia and Panama and Venezuela. Instead of supporting the process,
our Administration has in Nicaragua been supporting covert activities to keep
that revolution going in order to overthrow the Sandinista Government; in El
Salvador was not pushing the head of the Government to move toward correction of
the civil rights, human rights problems that existed there, and now this
Administration seems almost befuddled by the fact that Nicaragua is moving to
participate in the Contadora process, and El Salvador is, through its President
Duarte, is reaching out to the guerrillas in order to negotiate a peace. What
Fritz Mondale and I feel about the situation down there is that what you do is
you deal first through negotiation. That force is not a first resort, but
certainly a last resort in any instance.

MODERATOR: A follow-up, please. Q: Many times in its history the United States
has gone to war in order to defend freedom in other lands. Does your answer mean
that you would be willing to forgo the use of military force even if it meant
the establishment of a Soviet-backed dictatorship so close to our own borders?

FERRARO: No, I think what you have to do is work with the Government - I assume
you're speaking about the Government of Nicaragua - work with that Government to
achieve a pluralistic society. I mean they do have elections that are coming up
on Nov. 4. I think we have to work with them to achieve a peaceful solution to
bring about a pluralistic country. No, I'm not willing to live with a force that
could be a danger to our country. Certainly, I would see that our country would
be there putting all kinds of pressure on the neighboring countries of Honduras,
of Costa Rica, of El Salvador, to promote the kind of society that we can all
live with and security in this country.

FORCE IN CENTRAL AMERICA

Q: Vice President Bush, both Cuba and Nicaragua are reported to be making
extensive preparations to defend themselves against an American invasion, which
they claim could come this fall. And even some of your Democratic opponents in
Congress have suggested that the Administration may be planning a December
surprise invasion. Can you tell us under what circumstances a re- elected Reagan
Administration would consider the use of force in Central America or the
Caribbean?  BUSH: We don't think we're to be required to use force. Let me point
out that there are 2,000 Cuban military and 7,500 so-called Cuban advisers in
Nicaragua. There are 55 American military in El Salvador. I went down, on the
instructions of the President, to speak to the commandants in El Salvador and
told them that they had to move with Mr. Magana, then the President of El
Salvador, to respect human rights.  They have done that. They're moving well.
I'm not saying it's perfect, but the difference between El Salvador and
Nicaragua is like the difference between night and day. El Salvador went to the
polls. Mr. Duarte was elected by 70 percent of the people in 70 percent voting
in a certifiably free election. In Nicaragua, you have something very different.
You have a Marxist-Leninist group, the Sandinistas, that came into power talking
democracy. They have aborted their democracy. They have humiliated the Holy
Father. They have cracked down on the only press organ there, La Prensa,
censoring the press, something that should concern every American. They have not
had any human rights at all. They will not permit free elections. Mr. Cruz, who
was to be the only viable challenger to Nicaragua, the Sandinistas, to the
junta, to Mr. Ortega, went down there and found that the ground rules were so
unfair that he couldn't even wage a campaign. One country is devoid of human
rights. The other is struggling to perfect their democracy. We don't like it,
frankly, when Nicaragua exports its revolution or serves as a conduit for
supplies coming in from such ''democracies'' as North Korea, Bulgaria the Soviet
Union and Cuba, to try to destabilize El Salvador. Yes, we're concerned about
that. Because we want to see this trend toward democracy continue. There have
been something like 13 countries since we've come in move toward the democratic
route, and let me say that Grenada is not unrelated. And I have a big difference
with Mrs.  Ferraro on that one. We gave those four tiny Caribbean countries a
chance. We saved the lives, and most of those thousand students said that they
were in jeopardy. Grenada was a proud moment because we did stand up for
democracy. But in terms of threat of these countries, nuclear, I mean, weapons,
no. There's not that kind of a threat. It's Mr. Mondale that proposed the
quarantine, not Ronald Reagan.

MINING NICARAGUA'S HARBORS

Q: Considering this country's long respect for the rule of international law,
was it right for the United States to be involved in mining the harbors of
Nicaragua, a country we're not at war with, and to subsequently refuse to allow
the World Court to adjudicate that dispute and the complaint from Nicaragua?
BUSH: I support what we're doing. It was supported to the Congress and under the
law. I support it. My only regret is that the aid for the contras, those people
that are fighting, we call them freedom fighters. They want to see the democracy
perfected in Nicaragua. Am I to understand from this assault on covert action
that nowhere in the world would we do something that was considered just off
base when Mrs.  Ferraro said she'd never support it? Would she never support it
if the violation of human rights was so great and quiet support was necessary
for freedom fighters? Yes, we're for the contras. And let me tell you another
fact about the contras. Everyone that's not for this, everyone who wants to let
that Sandinista Government prevail, just like that Castro did, all of that, the
contras are not Somozistas. Less than 5 percent of the contras supported Somoza.
These were people that wanted a revolution.  These are people that felt the
revolution was betrayed. These are people that support human rights. Yes, we
should support them.

MODERATOR: Congresswoman Ferraro.

FERRARO: I spent time in Central America in January and had an opportunity to
speak to the contras after the incident in Nicaragua and in El Salvador. Let me
just say that the situation as it exists now, because of this Administration's
policies, are not getting better.  We're not moving towards a more secure area
of the world. As a matter of fact the number of troops that the Sandinistas have
accumulated since the Administration started its covert activities has risen
from 12,000 to 50,000, and of course the number of Soviet and Cuban advisors has
also increased. I did not support the mining of the harbors in Nicaragua; it is
a violation of international law. Congress did not support it and as a matter of
fact, just this week, the Congress voted to cut off covert aid to Nicaragua
unless and until a request is made and there is evidence of need for it, and the
Congress approves it again in March. So if Congress doesn't get laid on, the
covert activities which I opposed in Nicaragua, those C.I.A. covert activities
in that specific country, are not supported by the Congress. And believe it or
not, not supported by the majority of people throughout the country.

MODERATOR: Vice President Bush.

BUSH: Well, I would simply like to make the distinction again between those
countries that are searching for democracy and the handful of countries that
have totally violated human rights and are going the Marxist route. Ortega, the
commandante who is head of the Nicaraguan Sandinistas, is an avowed Marxist.
They don't believe in the church.  They don't believe in free elections. They
don't believe in all of the values that we believe in. So it is our policy to
support the democracy there, and when you have freedom fighters that want to
protect that revolution, and go the democratic route, we believe in giving them
support. We are for democracy in the hemisphere. We are for negotiations. $3 out
of every $4 that we sent down there has been for economic aid to support the
people's chance to eat and live and be happy and enjoy life. And one-fourth only
was military. You wouldn't get that from listening to Mr. Mondale.

MEETING WITH SOVIETS

MODERATOR: Miss Quarles. Q. Vice President Bush, the last three Republican
administrations, Eisenhower, Nixon and Ford, none of them soft on Communism, met
with the Soviets and got agreements on arms control. The Soviets haven't changed
that much. Can you tell us why President Reagan has not met with the Soviet
ministers at all and only met with Prime Minister Gromyko less than a month ago?

BUSH: Yes I can. The, you mentioned the Gromyko meeting, those were broken off
under the Carter- Mondale days. There had been three separate Soviet leaders.
Mr. Brezhnev, Mr. Andropov, and now Chernenko. During their, that, in three and
a half years, three separate leaders.  The Soviets have not been willing to
talk. We are the ones that went to the table in I.N.F. We had a good proposal, a
moral proposal. Ban an entire generation of intermediate nuclear force weapons
and if you won't do that, don't leave your allies in Europe in a monopoly
position. The Soviets with 1,200 of these things, and the alliance with none. We
didn't think that's the way you deter aggression and keep the peace. The
President went, the first thing he did when he came into office was make a
proposal on the most destabilizing weapons of all, Start. CHEMICAL WEAPONS
PROPOSAL

And when the the strategic weapon and when the Soviets said, well, we don't like
that proposal, we said all right, we'll be more flexible. I at the urging of the
President went to Geneva and laid on the table a treaty to ban all chemical
weapons. We don't want them to have a monopoly. We said look, let's come
together. You come over here and see what we're doing; we'll go over there and
see what you're doing. But let's save the kids of this world from chemical
weapons. A brilliant proposal to get rid of all of them. And the Soviets nyet,
nyet nyet. In the mutual balance force reduction to reduce conventional forces,
they're not even willing to tell us the base. Mrs. Ferraro knows that, and how
many troops they have. There's four sessions. We have had an agreement with them
on the hot line. But the Carter-Mondale made an agreement, the Salt II
agreement, but the Democratic Senate, they were a Democratic Administration, the
Democratic Senate wouldn't even ratify that agreement. It was flawed, it was
unverifiable and it was not good. Our President wants to reduce, not just to
stop, he wants to reduce dramatically nuclear weapons. And when the Soviets know
they're going to have this strong President to deal with, and when this new
Administration, Mr. Chernenko, given more than a few months in office can
solidify its position, then they'll talk. But if they think the opposition,
before they sit down, are going to give up the MX, give up the B1, go for a
freeze that locks in inferiority in Europe, all of these things, unilaterally,
before they're willing to talk, they may just sweat it out for four more weeks.
Who knows. Q. You were once quoted as saying that a nuclear war is winnable.  Is
that still your belief, and if not, under what circumstances would you use
nuclear weapons if you were President?

BUSH: No, I don't think it's winnable. I was quoted wrong, obviously, 'cause I
never thought that. The Soviet planning, I did learn that when I was Director of
Central Intelligence, and I don't think there'd be any disagreement, is based on
that ugly concept. But I agree with the President: It should never be fought.
Nuclear weapons should never be fought with, and that's our approach. So
therefore, let's encourage the Soviets to come to the table as we did at the
Gromyko meeting. I wish everybody could have seen that one - the President,
giving the facts to Gromyko in all of these nuclear meetings - excellent, right
on top of that subject matter. And I'll bet you that Gromyko went back to the
Soviet Union saying, ''Hey, listen, this President is calling the shots; we'd
better move.'' But do you know why I think we'll get an agreement? Because I
think it is in the interest of the Soviet Union to make it, just as it is in the
United States. They're not deterred by rhetoric. I listened to the rhetoric for
two years at the United Nations. I've lived in a Communist country. It's not
rhetoric that decides agreements, it's self-interest of those countries.

A VERIFIABLE NUCLEAR FREEZE

Q. Congresswoman Ferraro, you and Mr. Mondale are for a verifiable nuclear
freeze. Some Democrats have said that verification may not be possible. How
would you verify such an agreement and make sure that the Soviets are not
cheating?

FERRARO: Let me say first of all that I don't think there is any issue that is
more important in this campaign, in this election, than the issue of war and
peace. And since today's is Eleanor Roosevelt's 100th birthday, let me quote
her. She said, ''It is not enough to want peace, you must believe in it. And it
is not enough to believe in it, you must work for it.'' This Administration's
policies have indicated quite the opposite. The last time I heard Vice President
Bush blame the fact that they didn't meet with the Soviet leader, and this is
the first President in 40 years not to meet with a Soviet counterpart. He said
the reason was because there are three Soviet leaders in the past three and a
half years. I went and got a computer printout. It's five pages of the leaders,
world leaders, that the Soviet leaders have met with, and they're not little
people. They're people like Mitterrand of France and Krohl of Germany and
President Kiprianou of Cyprus - you go down the line, five pages of people that
the Soviet leaders have managed to meet with and somehow they couldn't meet with
the President of the United States. In addition to not meeting with his Soviet
counterpart, this it the first President - and you're right - since the start of
negotiating arms control agreements who have not negotiated an arms control
agreement. But not only has he not negotiated one, he's been opposed to every
single one that every other President has negotiated, including Eisenhower,
including Ford and including Nixon. Now, let me just say that with reference to
the Vice President's comments about the intent and the desire of the United
States and this Administration, the Soviet Union did walk out of the talks. I
agree.  But it seems to me that 1982, when the Administration presented its
Start proposal, that it wasn't a realistic proposal. And that is the comment
that was made by Secretary Haig after he left office, because what it dealt with
was that it dealt just with land-based nuclear missiles, which is where the
Soviets had the bulk of their missiles. But that aside, in 1982, I believe it
was, their own negotiator, Nitze, came out with a proposal called the
''walk-in-the-woods proposal'' which would have limited the number of nuclear
arms in Europe. That proposal was turned down by the Administration - a proposal
presented by its own administrator. Now I'm delighted that they met with Mr.
Gromyko, but they could have had that opportunity to meet with him in 1981 when
he came to the U.N., which he had done with every other President before, and in
1982 as well. I guess my -

MODERATOR: Congresswoman, I'm sorry. Speaking of limits, I have to impose a
limit on you. Vice President Bush?  BUSH: Well, I think there's quite a
difference between Mr. Kyprianou in Cyprus and the leader of the free world,
Ronald Reagan, in terms of meeting. And the Soviet Union - the Soviet Union, the
Soviet Union will meet with a lot of different people. We've been in very close
touch with Mr.  Mitterrand, Mr. Kohl and others that have met with the leaders
of the Soviet Union. But that's quite different than meeting with the President
of the United States. The Soviets say we'll have a meeting when we think there
can be progress and yet they left those talks. I'd like to correct my opponent
on the walk in the woods. It was the Soviet Union that was unwilling to discuss
the walk in the woods.  They were the ones that gunned it down first and the
record is very, very clear on that. Miss Ferraro mentioned the inflexibility of
our position on strategic arms. Yes, we offered first to get rid of all those -
we tried to reduce the SS-18's and those weapons. But then we said if that's not
good enough, there is flexibility, let's talk about the bombers and the planes.
So that's a very important point in terms of negotiation.  MODERATOR:
Congresswoman, he that taketh away has to give back. I robbed you of your
rebuttal. Therefore, you will have two minutes to rebut. Forgive me.

FERRARO: I - You robbed me of my follow-up, that's what you robbed me, so why
don't I let her give me the follow-up,

MODERATOR: All right, and then give your rebuttal. Q. Congresswoman Ferraro,
most polls show that the American - Americans feel that the Republicans, more
than the Democrats are better able to keep the U.S. out of war. We've had four
years of relative peace under President Reagan. How can you convince the
American public that the world would be a safer place under Carter-Mondale?

FERRARO: I think first of all, you have to take a look at the current situation.
We now have 50,000 nuclear warheads; we are building at the rate of five or six
a day between us and we have been doing that since this Administration came into
office. I think what you can do is look at what they've done and recognize that
they're not going to do very much in the future. And so, since they've done
nothing, do we continue to build be

FERRARO: I think first of all, you have to take a look at the current situation.
We now have 50,000 nuclaer warheads; we are building at the rate of five or six
a day between us and we have been doing that since this administration came into
office.  I think what you can do is look at what they've done and recongnize
that they're not going to do very much in the future.  And so, since they've
done nothing, do we continue to build because an arms race doesn't lead to
anything, it leads to another arms race and that's that.

Vice President Mondale has indicated that what he would do, first of all, as
soon as he gets into office, is contact his Soviet counterpart and set up an
annual summit meeting.  That's No. 1. I don't think you can start negotiating
until you start talking.  Secondly, he would issue a challenge, and the
challenge would be in the nature of temporary, mutual, verifiable, moratoria to
halt testing in the air, in the atmosphere, that would respond with a challenge
from the Soviet Union, we hope, to sit down and negotiate a treaty.  That was
done in 1960.

I don't know what your lights are doing, Sander.

MODERATOR: You have another minute.

Ferraro: O.K. I'm watching them blinking.  So I have another minute.  What that
would do is it would give us the opportunity to sit down and negotiate a treaty.
That was done in 1960 by President Kennedy - in 1963.  What he did was he issued
a challenge to the Soviet Union.  He said we will not test in space - in the
atmosphere, if you will not.  They did not.  In two nomths they sat down and
they negotiated a treaty.  We do not now have to worry about that type of
testing.  It can be done; it will be done, if only you have the will to do it.
Again remember it is mutual; it is verifiable and it is a challenge that once
that challenge is not met, if testing were to resume then we would continue
testing as well.

MODERATOR: Our last series of questions on foreign affairs from Mr.  Boyd.

Q.  Congress woman Feraro, you have had little or no experience in military
matters and yet you might some day find yourself Commander in Chief of the Armed
Forces.  How can you convince the American people and the potential enemy that
you would know what to do to protect this nation's security, and do you think in
any way that the Soviets might be tempted to try to take advantage of you simply
because you are a women.

FERRARO: Are you saying that I would have to have fought in the war in order to
love peace?

Q.  I'm not saying that, I'm asking you - you know what I asked.

FERRARO: All right.  I think what happens is when you try to equate whether or
not I have had military experience, that's the natural conclusion.  It's about
as valid as saying that you would have to be black in order to despise racism,
that you'd have to be female in order to be terribly offended by sexism.  And
that's just not so.

I think if you take a look at where I've been, both in the Congress and where I
intend to do, the type of person I am - I think that the people of this country
can rely upon the fact that I well be a leader.  I don't think the Soviet Union
for one minute can sit down amd make a determination on what I will do if I'm
ever in a position to have to do something with reference to the Soviet Union.
Quite frankly I'm prepared to do what ever is necessary in order to secure this
country and make sure that security is maintained.

Secondly, if the Soveit Union were to ever believe that they could challenge the
United States with any sort of nuclear forces or otherwise, if I were in a
position of leadership in this country, they would be assured that they would be
met with swift, concise and certain retaliation.

Let me just say one other thing now.  The most important thing, though I think
is a leader that what one has to do is get the point where you're not put into
the position.  And the way you get to the position of moving away from having to
make a decision - armed force or anything else - is by moving toward arms
control.  And that's not what's been done over the past four years.  I think
that if you were to take a look at the failures of this Administration that
would have to be number one.  I will not put myself in that position as a leader
in this country.  I will move immediately toward arms control negotiations.

A QUESTION FOR YOUR FOE?

Q: For my follow, I'm going to borrow a leaf from the Sunday night debate
between your principals and ask you what is the single question you would most
like to ask your opponent here on foreign policy?

FERRARO: Oh, I don't have a single most question.  I guess the concern that I
have is a concern not only as a Vice Presidential coandidate but as a citizen in
this country.  My concern is that we are not doing anything to stop the arms
race, and it seems to me that if we keep talking about millitary inferiority -
which we do not have, we are a comparable level with the Soviet Union; our Joint
Chiefs of Staff have said they'd never exchange our military power for theirs.
I guess the thing that I'd want is a commitment that pretty soon they're going
to do something about making this a safer world for all of us.

Q: Vice President Bush, four years ago President Reagan insisted that a military
build up would bring the Soviets to negotiate seriously.  Since then, we have
spent almost a trillion dollars on defense but the Soviets are still building
their military forces as rapidly as we are, and there are no negotiations.  Was
the President's original premise, his whole strategy, wrong?

BUSH: No, I think his strategy not only, was correct but is correct.  You've got
to go bak where we were.  Clearly, when we came into office, the American people
recognized that we had slipped into positions of inferiority on various things.
Some of our planes, as the President points out, were older than the pilots;
ships that couldn'to go out to sea.  And you had a major problem with the
military.  Actually, the morale wasn't very good either.

So we have had to strengthen the military and we're well on the way to
leadership, and yet with demonstrable flexibility on arms control.

MODERATOR: And now, I'll give you a chance, Mr. Vice President, to ask the
question you'd most like to ask of your opponent.

BUSH: I have none I'd like to ask of her, but I'd sure like to use the time, to
talk about the World Series of something of that nature.  Let me put it this way
- I don't have any questions, but we are so different from - the Reagan Bush
Administration is so different from the Carter Mondale Administration that the
American people are going to have the clearest choice.

It's a question of going back to the failed ideas of the past, where we came in
21 1/2 percent on those interest rates, inflation, despair, malaise, no
leadership, blaming the American people for failed leadership.  Or another
option - keep this recovery going until it benefits absolutely everybody.  Peace
at home - peace abroad - prosperity - opportunity.  I'd like to hear her talk on
those things, but I think the yellow light is flashing and so we'll leave it
there.

MODERATOR: Nothing on the World Series?  Congresswoman Ferraro?

FERRARO: I think the Vice President's comment about the Carter-Mondale
Administration really typifies this Administration.  It's an Administration that
looks backwards, not forwards and into the future.  I must say that I'm also
tickled by their comments on human rights.  The people to emigrate, because, in
large measure, this Administration's policies over the past four years, 1,313
people got out of the Soviet Union in 1983 and 1984.

That's not a great record on human rights and certainly not a record on human
rights achievements.  This Administration spent a trillion dollars on defense,
but it hasn't gotten a trillion dollars of national security.

MODERATOR: Vice President Bush, your rebuttal?

BUSH: No rebuttal.

MODERATOR: Well, we then can go to the closing statements.  Each statement will
be four minutes in length and we'll begin with the Vice President.

CLOSING STATEMENTS

BUSH: Well, in a couple of weeks, you , the American people, will be faced,
three weeks, with a choice.  It's the clearest choice in some 50 years.  And the
choice is, do we move forward with strenght and with prosperity or do we go back
to weakness despair, disrespect.

Ronald Reagan and I have put our trust in the American people. We've moved some
of the power away from Washington, D.C., and put it back with the people.  We're
pulling together.  The neighborhoods are safer 'cause crime is going down.  Your
sons and daughters are doing better in school.  Test scores are going up.
There's a new opportunity liying out there in the future.  Science, technology
and space offering opportunity that, to everybody, all the young ones coming up.
And abroad there's new leadership and respect.  And Ronald Reagan is clearly the
strong leader of the free world.  And I'll be honest with you It's a joy to
serve with a President who does not apologize for the United States of America.

Mr. Mondale, on the other hand has one idea.  Go out and tax the American
people.  And then he wants to repeal indexing, to wipe out the one protection
that those at the lowest end of the economic scale have protecting them against
being rammed into higher and higher tax brackets.  We just owe our country too
much to go back to that kind of an approach.

I'd like to say something to the young people.  I started a business.  I know
what it is to have a dream and have a job and work hard to employ others and
really to participate in the American dream.  Some of you out there are
finishing high school or college and some of you are starting out in the working
place.  And we want for you America's greatest gift.  And that is opportunity.

And then, peace.  Yes, I did serve in combat.  I was shot down when I was a
young kid, scared to death.  And all that did, saw friends die, but that
heightened my convictions about peace.  It is absolutely essential that we
guarantee the young people that they will not know the agony of war.  America's
gift, opportunity and peace.

Now we do have some unfinished business.  We must continue to go back to
cacillation and weakness.  We've too much going on to go back to the failed
policies of the last.  The future is too bright not to give it our best shot.
Together we can go forward and lift America up to meet her greatest dream.
Thank you very much.

MODERATOR: Thank you very much I must say now in matters of equity you will be
allowed applause at the end of your closing statement, so if you begin now
please.

FERRARO: I hope somebody wants to applaud.  Being the candidate for Vice
President of my party is the greatest honor I have ever had.  But it's not only
a personal achievement for Geraldine Ferraro - and certainly not only the bond
that I feel as I go across this country with women throughout the country.  I
wouldn't be standing here if Fritz Mondale didn't stand for the values that it
does - the values of fairness and equal opportunity.  Those values make our
country strong and the future of this country and how strong it will be is what
this election is all about

Over the last two months I've been traveling all over the country talking to the
people about the future.  I was in Kentucky and I spoke to the Dyhouse family.
He works for the car dealer and he's worried about the deficits and how high
interest rates are going to affect his job.  Every place I go I see young
parents with their children and they say to me what are we going to do to stop
this nuclear arms race.  I was in Dayton, ohio, a week and a half ago and I sat
with the Allen family who live next door to the toxic dump and they're very,
very concerned about the fact that those toxics are seeping into the water that
they and their neighbors drink.

A VIEW OF PATRIOTISM

Now those people love this country and they're patriotic.  But it's not the
partiotism that you're seeing in the commercials as you watch television these
days.  Their partiotism is not only a pride in this country that is strong
enough to meet the challenges of the future.

Do you know when we find jobs for the eight and a half million people who are
unemployed in this country, you know we'll make our economy stronger and that
will be a patriotic act.  When we reduce the deficits and we cut interest rates,
and I know the President doesn't believe that, but it's so - we cut those
interest rates young people can buy houses, that's pro-family and that will be a
patriotic act.  When we educate our children - good Lord, they're going to be
able to compete in a world economy and that makes us stronger and that's a
patrotic act.  When we stop the arms race, we make this a safer, saner world,
and that's patriotic act, and when we keep the peace young men don't die and
that's a patriotic act.

Those are the key to the future and who can be a leader for the future?  When
Walter Mondale was Attorney General of Minnesota, he led the fight for a man who
could not afford to get justic because he couldn't afford a lawyer; when he was
in the Senate he fought for child nutrition programs, he worte the Fair Housing
Act, he even investigated the concerns and the abuses of migrant workers.  And
why did he do that?  Those weren't popular causes.  You know, no one had ever
heard of Clarence Gideon, the man without a lawyer.  Children don't vote and
migrant workers aren't exactly a powerful lobby in this country, but he did it
because it was right.  Fritz Mondale has said that he would rather lose a battle
for decency than win one over self-interest.  Now I agree with him.

This campaign is not over.  For our country, for our future, for the principles
we beleive in Walter Mondale and I have just begun to fight.

MODERATOR: Thank you very much.  I'd like to thank Vice President Bush,
Congresswomen Ferraro, the members of our panel for joining us in this League of
Women Voters debate.  I'd like to join you in thanking them, the City of
Philadelphia and the league of Women Voters.  The League of Women Voters' next
debate, the Presidential debate, will take place in Kansas City on Oct. 21.  The
subject will be foreign affairs and it will begin at 8 P.M. Eastern time.  Again
our thanks.  We hope you'll join us on the 21st.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of Vice President Bush and Representative Geraldine Ferraro

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 13, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN WRITES JINLES FOR THAI TV



BYLINE:
By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1127 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand


What does a 37-year-old avant-garde composer from southern California do for a
living in Thailand?

Bruce Gaston writes advertising jingles for Thai television. What's more, he
does it so successfully that he and his company of Thai musicians are now
Bangkok's most sought-after team - getting paid about $1,200 for each 30-second
spot.

''We sell banks, beer, all kinds of food, soft drinks, cars, perfumes, soaps and
dishes - I'd say we have the majority of the market in Thailand,'' Mr. Gaston
said as he and a jingle-writing partner took a brief pause in their studio
control room at the Butterfly Sound and Film Service Company. In the background,
a tape of Thai music was being readied for shipment to an Asian music festival
in Hong Kong.

''Making commercials here is a little different than in the West,'' Mr. Gaston
said. ''Here they use the music in generating the movie. The agency may come to
us with a story board and an idea, but they won't make the movie till we make
the music; they cut the tape around it.''

''Another difference,'' he added, ''is that because Thai is a tonal language,
you can't write the music until you've written the words.'' Thai words, in
essence, have their own built-in music, he said, ''and you can't just write a
jingle and put catchy words around it.''

Four TV Channels


Thailand, which prides itself on being the first nation on the Asian mainland to
start regular television service (in 1955), now has four lively channels heavily
reliant on commercial advertising as well as on American (and Japanese)
programs.

''They don't even wait for an appropriate moment in a film to break for a
commercial,'' Mr. Gaston said. ''There are many more of them than on American
TV.''

Thailand is a young society: census figures show at least 40 percent of the
population still in their teens or early adulthood. Thus, Mr. Gaston said,
advertising jingles are aimed at the younger sector.

''The equivalent here of the Michael Jackson following in the States would be
kids of 10 or 11,'' he said.

An example is the company's extremely successful Chiclets jingle, which has only
four words: ''Say 'Hi' with Chiclets.'' The idea was the creation of Jirapan
Ansvananda, a Thai musician with whom Mr. Gaston has worked closely in
jingle-writing. Mr. Jirapan is famous for a number of commercials.

European Children in Demand


''You have all these bright-faced little children walking through the park,''
Mr. Gaston said, acting out the commercial clip. ''All you do is make a funny
little 'Hi!' and you smile, and everyone smiles back. It is so hopelessly stupid
when you think about it. But it is something little children get into.''

The children and young people in a number of the videotaped commercials made by
Butterfly Sound are surprisingly Nordic in appearance. This reflects the need to
appeal to city consumers, who frequently choose a product to appear to be more
Western, according to Mr. Gaston and his colleagues. European children are in
demand as models by advertising agencies.

Jingles are composed mostly in what Mr. Gaston described as international
''techno-pop music,'' eschewing traditional Thai folk themes, which are staging
a comeback among local pop groups as more and more country people come to
Bangkok to join in the city's boom.

When traditional Thai music and Thai instruments are used, Mr. Gaston said, a
seller of goods has deliberately chosen to appeal to a Thai sense of
nationalism. One of Butterfly's lushest video clips was made for Singha
(pronounced Sing) beer. In that spot, Thai classical music formed a background
for film of the traditional procession of lavish Thai Royal Barges. The message
again was short: ''Beer Thai. Beer Singha.''

Intense Brewery Rivalries


''There is an interesting story in that one,'' Mr. Gaston said. ''The country
has only two major breweries left: Kloster and Singha, and the competition
between them has been intense. Over the last three years, Singha with its
traditional commercials has convinced people that they are the real Thai beer.

''Kloster now has to go for the German beer image aimed at the new rising super
jet set,'' he said. ''They spent a great deal of money getting Western stars for
commercials, built around the slogan: 'Happiness you can drink.' The lines
between beer drinkers are now demarcated; it has become a social reality.''

Mr. Gaston's romance with Thailand goes back to the days of the Vietnam War.
Raised in Hollywood and a student of classical music since fifth grade when he
was handed a bass violin ''because I was the tallest in the class,'' Mr. Gaston
earned a master's degree in music from the University of Southern California
just as American military involvement in Vietnam had begun to increase.

A conscientious objector from a Pentecostal background (he once lived in Jamaica
playing piano in a mountain village church), Mr. Gaston decided to go to
Southeast Asia to demonstrate that there were Americans willing to come in
peace. In 1969 he began alternative service as a music teacher in Thailand. He
stayed, became an expert in Thai music, married and had a son who will be
getting his first look at southern California this Christmas.

Performer and Composer


Mr. Gaston is still a performer and composer, as well as a lecturer at Bangkok's
most distinguished university and a distributor of classical Western music. In
his spare time he experiments with blending Eastern and Western music, writes
award- winning scores for Thai films, and makes records.

Unruly hair flying, he is a wiry creativity machine, talking, thinking aloud or
tossing out theories about his craft when he isn't actually making music.

Mr. Gaston was teaching in the northern city of Chiangmai when a group of
Bangkok musicians asked him to join Butterfly Sound about six years ago.

The company, now a cooperative of 11 owners, 5 of them composers, fields several
musical groups, among them a highly regarded jazz band. Jazz has a noble, even
royal tradition in Thailand. The present King, Phumiphol Aduldet, is a jazz
musician who once took lessons from Benny Goodman.

''This company was originally a rock-and-roll band made up of five or six people
who became disillusioned with playing in bars,'' Mr. Gaston said. ''In those
days, to play in Bangkok bars you could only do imitations of Western pop music.
You had to make it sound exactly the same as the records.

''This group wanted to branch out and have more opportunity for creativity in
composing, in making their own music,'' he said. ''But there was no place for
that. So they decided they could at least have freedom composing jingles. This
became the first outlet for modern Thai musicians.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Bruce Gaston

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 13, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON IS PROPOSING RULES FOR THE PRESS AT BATTLEFIELDS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 12


The Defense Department has proposed a set of ground rules, based on those of the
Vietnam era, that would permit coverage of United States military operations by
reporters accredited to the Pentagon without the imposition of censorship.

The proposed ground rules, which are circulating among news organizations in
draft form, state, ''The basic principle governing the public release of
military information is that the maximum amount of information will be made
available, consistent with operational security and the safety of U.S. or
friendly nation personnel.''

The primary obligation the proposed rules would place on a correspondent would
be not to publish information that would jeopardize American forces and lives.
Deliberate violation of that rule would cause the correspondent's accreditation
to be rescinded.

The proposed ground rules, which are not yet final, have been drawn almost word
for word from a memorandum titled ''Rules Governing Public Release of Military
Information in Vietnam,'' dated Oct. 31, 1966.

Censorship in World War II


The Pentagon has not proposed any form of censorship such as existed in World
War II, when news reports were submitted to military censors for clearance.

Nor would the rules give military commanders authority to control information
other than that directly relating to future or current military operations and
intelligence about enemy forces.

The main change from the Vietnam rules is a proposal that would give
correspondents an avenue of appeal on the battlefield to rulings they thought
constrained their coverage. News organizations could also appeal to higher
authorities in Washington.

The rules under which correspondents reported in Vietnam were widely accepted,
according to reporters who covered that war. Military officers who served as
public affairs officers there said the rules were rarely violated.

The new rules that have been proposed would apply not only to the coverage of
the initial stages of a military operation but also to ensuing action. News
organizations have been asked for comments that Pentagon officials said would be
incorporated into the ground rules.

Not All Moves Open to Coverage


The officials said, however, that not all military operations would be open to
coverage. A rescue mission, such as that dispatched in an effort to free
American hostages in Iran in 1980, would most likely be attempted without news
coverage.

The current discussions between Defense Department officials and news executives
arose out of the decision by Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger to
prevent correspondents from first-hand reporting on the invasion of Grenada a
year ago until the fighting was nearly over. That brought vigorous protests from
the press.

In response, the Pentagon is planning to establish a national press pool of
journalists from television, radio, news agencies, magazines and newspapers to
cover the early stages of military operations before the battlefield is opened
to general coverage.

Reporters in that pool, which Pentagon officials said could include up to 12
people, depending on the circumstances of the military operation, would be
expected to share all information gathered on the battlefield with other
reporters away from the scene.

Meeting With the Press


At a meeting on Oct. 3, the Assistant Secretary of Defense, Michael I. Burch,
set before the Washington bureau chiefs of the television networks, news
magazines and news agencies his decision on the composition of the press pool
and a proposed set of ground rules.

No newspaper news executive was present as Mr. Burch's original plan was to
exclude newspapers from the press pool, contending that news agencies would
provide dispatches for newspapers. He reversed that decision this week, after
protests from newspaper executives, and agreed to permit one newspaper reporter
to join the pool.

Pentagon officials said the proposed ground rules were discussed and modified at
the meeting Oct. 3 and would be modified further after more suggestions have
been received from the news executives at the meeting. Newspapers have so far
not been given the chance to comment.

As the draft of the proposed rules stands, information that could not be made
public ''under any circumstances'' would include ''future plans, operations or
strikes.'' In addition, information on the rules of engagement, which guide
military operations, would be off limits.

Information on Casualties


Further, the size of units engaged in an operation, their tactical deployment
and their names could not be made public, nor could the exact numbers of
casualties the unit has suffered until announced by military authorities.

''Casualty information, as it relates to the notification of the next of kin, is
extremely sensitive,'' the draft said. ''There have been instances in which
next-of-kin have first learned of the death or wounding of a loved one through
the news media.''

Specific Military Weaknesses


Similar restrictions would apply to air, naval and intelligence operations. In
addition, information on specific military weaknesses, such as shortages of
personnel or excessive damage to communications, would be proscribed if that was
deemed to be helpful to an enemy.

The proposed rules noted that enterprising reporters might gather information
about military operations that is not handed out by officials but that, if
published, could endanger the operation or the lives of American soldiers.

In that case, the proposal states that ''such information is not to be
transmitted or released to the public until officially released by U.S. or
allied commanders or their representatives,'' the draft said. ''Accreditation of
correspondents to the area of operations is contingent upon agreement to adhere
to this and other ground rules.''

''Deliberate violation of these conditions or ground rules by a news media
representative will be regarded as a basis for suspension or cancellation of
accreditation,'' the proposal said.

The draft said that complaints about the ground rules could be made to the
commander at the scene of the action through his public affairs officer. If not
satisfied, the correspondent could then ask his home office to lodge a complaint
with the Pentagon itself.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 13, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Maryland Prison Guards Walk Out Over Security

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 164 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, Oct. 12


State troopers today replaced 48 prison guards who staged a walkout, saying they
were sick, at the Maryland Penitentiary. The guards said they wanted to
dramatize their claims of lax security that led to the death of a guard.

Only 27 of 75 guards reported for the 8 A.M. shift at the penitentiary,
beginning the job action called just hours after funeral services Thursday for
Herman Toulson Jr., a guard who had been a decorated Vietnam War veteran. He was
stabbed to death by an inmate last Saturday.

A state prison spokesman said all 1,435 inmates remained locked in their cells
today, but that essential services would be maintained. She said it was ''tense
and quiet'' inside the 173-year- old institution.

Joseph Adler, executive director of the Maryland Classified Employees
Association, which represents many of the guards, said they planned to continue
their walkout.

''There are no negotiations,'' Mr. Adler said. ''There is no change in the
guards' position.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Says It Would Like Better Ties to U.S. and China

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 13


Vietnam reaffirmed today that it wanted improved relations with China and the
United States.

The Communist Party newspaper Nhan Dan, in a commentary carried by the Vietnam
News Agency and monitored in Bangkok, said, ''We want to restore our traditional
friendship with the Chinese people and to normalize relations.''

It added: ''We have always considered the American people our friends and are
ready to solve together with the United States all pending questions if the U.S.
is sincere in its desire to contribute to peace.''

Vietnam's border with China has remained tense since the two countries fought a
border war in 1979. The United States has said it will not normalize relations
until Vietnam withdraws from Cambodia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PLAN FOR A DAM STIRS FEARS FOR MAINE'S PENOBSCOT

BYLINE: By Fox Butterfield

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 892 words

DATELINE: BIG AMBEJACKMOCKAMUS FALLS, Me.


With the first snow falling, Nick Albans, a fishing guide, packed up his trailer
and hauled in his canoe from the riverbank where it had been since the ice broke
last May.

Mr. Albans was loath to leave because, like many other fishermen, he believes
this stretch of the West Branch of the Penobscot River in north-central Maine
has the best fishing for landlocked salmon in North America. It also has the
most challenging white-water rafting east of the Mississippi, experts say, and
as the Penobscot charges its way past Mount Katahdin, the highest peak in Maine,
it offers spectacular scenery: deep gorges, rapids and waterfalls, with frequent
sightings of moose, bear, beaver and bald eagles.

But a four-mile stretch of the river, with prime fishing and boating, may
disappear under a lake if the Great Northern Paper Company proceeds with plans
to build a $100 million hydroelectric dam across the falls here.

Great Northern, which owns 10 percent of all the land in Maine and is the
state's second-largest employer, says it needs electricity from the dam to
compete with Canadian paper companies that get cheap government power.
Otherwise, Great Northern has asserted in applying for a Federal license to
build the dam, ''the present and future productivity of Great Northern's entire
operation in the state of Maine'' may be endangered.

Company Employs 4,200

Great Northern's plan for the dam has touched off a bitter fight in this
isolated area of forest, lakes, rivers and mountains 75 miles north of Bangor.
On one side is a coalition of such unlikely bedfellows as the Maine Audubon
Society, the hunter-oriented Sportsman's Alliance of Maine and Trout Unlimited.
On the other is the paper company and most of its 4,200 employees, who live in
Millinocket, the nearest town.

''There ain't no doubt this is the best landlocked salmon fishing grounds in the
country,'' said Mr. Albans, a muscular, bearded 55-year-old retired Marine
officer who served in Korea and Vietnam. ''The bottom line is, Great Northern
has alternatives, we don't. The dam will destroy the river.''

But Robert Bernier, a union official at Great Northern's paper mill in
Millinocket, argued, ''If we don't build the dam, it will cost us jobs all over
this part of Maine.''

''I cherish the environment too,'' said Mr. Bernier, who had taken his 11-
year-old son hunting in the woods near the river the day before. ''But if we
don't get a cheap source of power, there will be no future here for my son and
grandsons.''

Permits Seldom Denied

Whether the opponents of the dam can stop it is unclear.

Great Northern applied to the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission for a permit
to build last March and now has until the middle of October to provide
additional information that the commission requested. In the past the commission
has turned down very few requests for dam permits.

The company, which owns the land on both sides of the West Branch but not the
river itself, must also get approval from the state's Land Use Regulation
Commission. That task was made easier when Gov. Joseph E. Brennan, a Democrat,
pledged his neutrality in the battle after Great Northern promised not to
disturb the environment along 78 other miles of the river that it owns.

But Charles E. Hewett, the executive director of Maine Audubon, said the
opposition coalition would press its case, including lawsuits against Great
Northern, until the state acted to stop the dam or the company tired of the
fight.

Mr. Hewett, like the other opponents, feels Great Northern does not appreciate
the extraordinary features of the West Branch of the Penobscot that would be
submerged under a 50-foot- deep lake created by the dam.

Steep Fall in the River

For fishermen, it would destroy ''the most productive landlocked salmon fishery
in America,'' he said. The landlocked salmon is a natural adaptation of the sea
salmon that spends its entire life cycle in rivers. Great Northern says fishing
could continue below the dam, and that it will stock the new lake with salmon.
But fishermen argue that lake fishing is a far different sport and that
conditions are not so good below the dam as in the threatened stretch, where the
river falls 70 feet a mile, enriching the water with oxygen the fish need.

Damming that sharply dropping section would also put an end to white- water
rafting, kayaking and canoeing on the river, said John Connelly, head of Eastern
River Expeditions in Greenville, a small town 40 miles southwest of the falls.

''East of the Mississippi there is nothing like this river,'' added Mr.
Connelly. White-water enthusiasts rank rapids on a scale of 1 to 6, with 6 being
only for experts at risk of death, and the West Branch above Ambejackmockamus
Falls has Class 4 and 5 water.

''It's quality adrenalin,'' Mr. Connelly said of the series of falls, holes,
chutes, boils and hydraulics, all the ''water features'' prized by wild-water
lovers.

135,000 Visitors Last Year

Opponents of the dam point out that rafting and fishing on the river are growing
rapidly in popularity, while the timber business, faced with a shrinking forest,
may be coming to an end in Maine. This summer Mr. Connelly's company alone took
19,000 people on the river, up from 12,000 in 1983, and it has become the
largest employer.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of rafters above Big Ambejackmockamus Falls

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
A QUESTION FOR VOTERS

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


WASHINGTON The argument goes on in Washington about President Reagan's

age, health and performance in the Louisville debate with Walter Mondale. And it
has been prolonged by the Administration's mystifying explanations of what went
wrong.

The President kissed the criticism off with the suggestion that maybe the reason
was a cosmetic flaw: ''If I'd had as much makeup as he did,'' the President
said, ''I'd have looked younger, too.''

His personal friend and campaign director, Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada, said
Mr. Reagan merely had ''an off night . . . but it wasn't because of any physical
or mental deficiency. He was brutalized by a briefing process that didn't make
any sense.''

There are three ways in Washington to deal with embarrassing political
situations. The best way is to admit them. ''When I make a mistake, it's a
beaut!'' Fiorello La Guardia, former Mayor of New York, once said, disarming his
critics.

The next best way is to proclaim that your blunders were really triumphs. That
wonderful old former Republican Senator from Vermont, George Aiken, advised
President Johnson during the Vietnam War, ''Say you won and get out!'' Mr.
Johnson ignored him and regretted it till the end of his days.

The worst way is to pretend and blame everything that goes wrong on somebody
else - the deficits on Messrs. Mondale and Carter, the Central American tangles
on Castro, the tragedies in Beirut on intelligence budget cuts years ago, the
lack of nuclear arms control on the three sick old men in the Kremlin, and
Louisville on the powder puff and briefing crews before the debate.

It's not a new idea around here, and a President may get away with it at the
beginning of his term, but after he has been in charge for four years, it's not
so easy.

President Reagan has one alibi. He can blame his parents for his age. But his
wandering answers and confusion over the facts of domestic policy and even the
control of nuclear weapons - not for the first time in Louisville - are not
private matters that can be blamed on somebody else.

They are legitimate public questions that arise when the oldest President in the
history of the Republic is seeking re-election to a term that would last from
the end of his 73rd year to the end of his 77th.

In private life, it is clearly insensitive, and even cruel, to make an issue
within a family about the frailties of the old folk when their energies and
responsibilities are dwindling.

But in public life, where problems, tensions and responsibilities never end -
and these days even seem to increase - the issue of aging and its effects cannot
be avoided.

In fairness, when you watch Ronald Reagan jumping up on Harry Truman's
whistle-stop train in Ohio, two steps at a time, he seems as strong as a horse,
maybe because he has paid more attention to horses than to politics. Even his
hair, which at his age looks false, is real. The only thing new about his
intellectual fumbles in Louisville was that many of the close to 100 million
Americans tuning in saw them for the first time.

But also in fairness, there's little evidence that advancing years improve
memory or remove mental confusion. And nobody knows, not our doctors or our
wives or our children, when in the 70's things will begin to change.

What we do know - and this may have nothing to do with Ronald Reagan - is that
some Presidents in the past drifted into the shadows without knowing so, and
their weaknesses were covered up by their families, their political associates
and by a sympathetic or indifferent press.

The record is in the books but is usually ignored by every new generation. In
1881, when President Garfield was shot, he loitered in and out of consciousness
for 80 days, leaving the nation without effective Presidential leadership.

Chester Arthur, his successor, Grover Cleveland, Woodrow Wilson, and even
Franklin Roosevelt all suffered and covered up the ailments of advancing age,
usually without the knowledge of the American people, even when, as in l944,
they were voting Mr. Roosevelt to a fourth term.

The point is not to suggest that Mr. Reagan is not in good physical health, but
that at his age neither he nor anybody else can be sure about the next four
years. This is a question the serious voter must take into account.

One of the odd things about the controversy over Louisville and the President's
age is that it is being presented as a partisan issue that is not fair, and
maybe even vicious to raise.

But there is a more important question of fairness for the voters: Fair to whom
- to the President at his age or to the nation?B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEXT GRENADA MAY MAKE EARLY EDITIONS

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 757 words


The announcement early last week by the Pentagon that a pool of journalists
organized to cover the early stages of a surprise, Grenada-style military
operation would not include newspaper reporters was greeted by a flurry of
protests from newspaper executives.

Albert R. Hunt, Washington bureau chief of The Wall Street Journal, said the
decision was ''outrageous and unacceptable.'' Richard J.V. Johnson, president of
The Houston Chronicle and the chairman of the American Newspaper Publishers
Association, noted that he was pleased with the creation of such a pool, which
would include representatives of news agencies, radio, television and news
magazines. But he added: ''Obviously, a pool of 11 must include at least one
experienced daily newspaper reporter.''

''The Defense Department's plan to ban newspaper reporters from selected
military operations is incredible,'' Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, publisher of The
New York Times, said in a statement. ''It reveals the Administration to be out
of touch with journalism, reality and the First Amendment.''

By the end of the week, the Pentagon - which had maintained that newspapers
didn't need representation because they could draw on reports provided by The
Associated Press and United Press International, the news agencies - had
reversed itself.

The press pool, officials said, would be expanded to 12 and would after all
include a newspaper reporter. That correspondent, like the others in the pool,
would share his accounts with other news organizations not represented in the
group.

The formation of the pool was recommended by a commission appointed by the
Defense Department after news-gathering organizations sharply protested the
decision made by Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger a year ago to exclude
reporters from the early phases of the invasion of Grenada.

Behind the initial protests by newspapers was a widely held view that while
Americans get much of their first glimpse of the news from television or radio,
newspapers still play a vital role in providing a complete story. A newspaper
reporter does not have to worry about the seven o'clock news. If he must wait an
hour for a talk with the divisional commander, he can wait. A minute or two on
television or radio cannot fully capture the complexities of the tides of
battle.

To cite an instance from World War II: Early in August 1944, General Omar
Bradley briefed a group of newspaper correspondents on an imminent German
attack. He provided, among other information, details on the units and tactics
the Germans would probably use. The reporters took to their jeeps and headed
toward the battle area. Their reports on that now half-forgotten action gave the
American public detailed, thoughtful accounts which, despite improvements in
electronic technology, could not be duplicated today by any other branch of the
media.

Fewer DeadlinesAt the same time, most experienced combat reporters would agree,
a gap exists between the activities of a daily newspaper reporter and his
colleagues at the Associated Press and United Press International.

The newspaper reporter usually can count on considerable space being devoted to
his account. By comparison, a news agency reporter's dispatches are likely to be
short - 200 to 250 words is the norm - often brilliantly written but by their
nature intended to meet the immediacy of constant deadlines thousands of miles
away. During the Allied advances after the Normandy invasion during World War
II, the agencies vied in trumpeting the distance covered by the spearheads. If
The Associated Press said six miles, United Press said eight and International
News Service might say ten.

The newspapers' records - and those of their reporters on the ground - in Korea
and Vietnam seem balanced. Contrary to an opinion that appears to be widely held
in the military, it was not the newspapers that proclaimed the Tet offensive in
Vietnam a disaster for the United States. Most newspapers said at the time that
Tet was a defeat for North Vietnam and the Viet Cong, the interpretation
validated by history.

The department has also proposed ground rules that would govern the activities
of all news organizations in military operations.

The rules don't call for censorship by the military - that hasn't been the
procedure since World War II - but they note that a correspondent who publishes
information that puts American forces and lives at risk could lose his
accreditation. These are roughly the rules that applied during the Vietnam War.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS ;
General BringsHis Case to Court

BYLINE: By Richard Levine and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 313 words


For Gen. William C. Westmoreland, it is a battle to restore honor and
reputation. For CBS, it is an assault on freedom of the press - and its
corporate treasury.

For the public, there is talk that the $120 million libel suit that General
Westmoreland is pressing against a 1982 ''CBS Reports'' documentary will be a
courtroom re- creation of the Vietnam War. As the trial opened last week in
Federal District Court in Manhattan, Judge Pierre N. Leval attempted to put such
speculation to rest. ''We are not trying Lyndon Johnson and how good his sources
of intelligence were,'' he said.

At issue is whether General Westmoreland deceived President Johnson in his
assessment of enemy strength in South Vietnam in the mid-1960's and whether CBS
distorted the facts it obtained in putting together ''The Uncounted Enemy: A
Vietnam Deception.''

The general, now 70 and retired, says the documentary's narrator, Mike Wallace,
and the producer, George C. Crile, defamed him and acted in ''reckless
disregard'' of the truth by turning an ''honest debate'' over the size and
nature of the enemy into a ''conspiracy.'' ''I'll show you how it was cut,
spliced and put together to make a spurious reality that never occurred,'' said
Dan M. Burt, Mr. Westmoreland's attorney, of the CBS interview with the general.

The network's lawyers, however, said they would prove that the report was
''truthful and accurate.''

Testimony is expected from several top officials of the Johnson Administration,
including former Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara and former Secretary of
State Dean Rusk, as well as from several military officers and intelligence
analysts. Thousands of pages of CBS internal documents will be made public along
with secret cables and other Government files that will offer a rare glimpse
into the workings of wartime intelligence and military leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of General William C. Westmoreland

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK'S CONTROVERSIAL ARCHBISHOP

BYLINE: By Ari L. Goldman; Ari L. Goldman is a reporter who covers religion for
the metropolitan desk of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5605 words


THE ROMAN CATHOLIC MASS HAD ended and the Archbishop of New York, John J.
O'Connor, joined the procession of priests, deacons and altar boys filing out of
St. Andrew's Church in Lower Manhattan as the organist played ''The Battle Hymn
of the Republic.'' As the Archbishop approached the door, a worried aide rushed
up and whispered to him that a group of reporters had gathered on the church
steps. Without even breaking his stride, the Archbishop, wearing a flowing
bright red chasuble and his bishop's miter, marched out the 14 church door and
up to the waiting microphones.

Clutching the wooden shepherd's crook that is a symbol of his office and flanked
by his fellow celebrants in the mass, Archbishop O'Connor said in answer to a
question, ''Geraldine Ferraro has misrepresented Catholic teaching on
abortion.''

It was the third day of attacks by the Archbishop against Representative
Ferraro, the 9 Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate, who along with several
other Catholic members of Congress had signed a letter in 1982 which stated that
the Catholic position on abortion was ''not monolitic.''

It was one of the more graphic examples of politics and religion mixing in the
current Presidential campaign, and it demonstrated how Archbishop O'Connor has
become the catalyst for much of the current debate. Tomorrow afternoon, he will
step into the commotion over the issue yet again when he delivers what he
describes as a ''major address'' on abortion and politics at Cathedral High
School in Manhattan.

The speech is, in part, a rebuttal to an address given by Governor Cuomo, a
Catholic, at the University of Notre Dame on Sept. 13. In his na17 tionally
televised address, the New York Governor, who emphasized that he was personally
against abortion, said that Catholics should practice their religion by setting
an example for other Americans, not by seeking to pass laws that impose their
views on the rest of the country. But, in a larger sense, the Archbishop's
speech will be an appeal to the nation's 53 million Catholics, 66 percent of
whom, according to a 1983 New York Times poll, have reservations about their
church's blanket condemnation of abortion.

The repeated emphasis on abortion by Archbishop O'Connor and several other newly
appointed bishops, notably Archbishop Bernard F. Law of Boston, has worried some
church observers. It appears to be a departure from the recent well-publicized
work of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops in releasing their religious
reflections on nuclear war and their forthcoming letter on the American economy.

The 1983 pastoral letter on nuclear war was drafted by a committee headed by
Joseph Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago, who outlined an agenda for the Church in
the United States that called for concern about a cluster of issues - abortion,
nuclear warfare, poverty - that he said formed a ''seamless garment.''

''By talking abortion and only abortion, O'Connor has shredded the seamless
garment,'' says Jim Castelli, the author of ''The Bishops and the Bomb,'' an
account of the writing of the pastoral letter. A recurring theme in the book is
the attempts by Archbishop O'Connor, a member of the five-man committee that
wrote the letter, to blunt the pastoral's pacifist tone.

''There is danger in the seamless garment,'' Archbishop O'Connor explained in a
recent interview. ''The danger is in losing the focus. We are all concerned
about nuclear war, but it is a potential slaughter. Abortion is the slaughter
that is taking place all around us.''

Later, when questioned about the substance of tomorrow's speech, the Archbishop
added, ''I want to give substantial support to the basic proposition that has
been spelled out by Cardinal Bernardin and many other bishops of what we call
'consistent ethic of life' - that we are very deeply concerned about life at
every point on the spectrum.''

But, he added: ''It is unfair and unconstructive to argue that anyone who
repeatedly articulates concern over the unborn therefore demonstrates
automatically a callousness to the born. That is simply not the case.''

In tomorrow's speech, he said, he will ''try to demonstrate that the future
seems to be inevitable, if we can judge from the past, that we will move very
rapidly from abortion to infanticide, to ridding ourselves of the retarded, of
the weak, the cancer ridden, the elderly, and so on.''

IN THE EIGHT AND A HALF MONTHS since he was appointed by Pope John Paul II as
the Archbishop of New York, John O'Connor, now 64 years old, has emerged as the

most visible and outspoken Roman Catholic

Bishop in the nation. Archbishop O'Connor's

present prominence is a far cry from the relative obscurity of the Scranton,
Pa., diocese

where he had been a bishop for seven months,

and of the United States Navy, where he served as a chaplain for 27 years. In
both those roles, he had been saying many of the same things about abortion and
other issues such as homosexuality and military superiority, but they drew scant
attention then.

Mrs. Ferraro is only the latest of a long list of public figures and
constituencies with whom Archbishop O'Connor has sparred since coming to New
York. He has taken on two of the state's most popular political figures -
Governor Cuomo and New York's Mayor Koch - offended several Jewish leaders,
battled with the city's homosexual community and found himself at odds with the
neighboring Catholic Diocese of Brooklyn.

At the same time, with his bright blue eyes and quick smile he has won the
hearts of many of the 1.8 million Catholics who live in the archdiocese, the
fourth largest in the nation. ''He's wonderful,'' said 68-year-old Agnes
Anderus, who had traveled from her home on Long Island one recent Sunday to be
at St. Patrick's Cathedral for the 10 A.M. mass at which the Archbishop
officiates. ''As a Roman Catholic leader, he's out to do God's work and not let
everyone else twist it around,'' she said. ''I'm on his side.''

Archbishop O'Connor has attracted attention not only with an orthodox theology
that closely follows that of the Pope, but with his unorthodox behavior as well.
He put on a Mets cap during his installation in St. Patrick's Cathedral, joked
with President Reagan at a dinner that he would trade residences with him if
Nancy Reagan came with the exchange, and spent five weeks at a New York
seminary, followed by 11 days in Puerto Rico, learning to speak Spanish, so as
to better communicate with the large number of Hispanic people in his flock.

But he has made virtually no changes in the running of the New York Archdiocese,
which operates the 12th-largest school system in the country, 11 colleges and
universities, 13 general hospitals, 5 special hospitals, 2 schools for nurses,
15 homes for dependent children and 11 homes for the invalid and aged.

According to official figures, the archdiocese holds $811 million worth of land,
buildings and equipment. But that figure reveals only a fraction of the real
value because it represents the amount originally paid, not its current value.
St. Patrick's, for example, sits on some of the most expensive property in the
world.

The day-to-day archdiocesan operations have been delegated to Bishop Joseph T.
O'Keefe, the vicar general, and to Monsignor Joseph P. Murphy, the chancellor.
The two had also been in charge during the five-month period between the death
of Terence Cardinal Cooke and the installation of his successor.

One instance involving the internal workings of the archdiocese on which the
Archbishop did speak out won him the praise of labor leaders in the city. During
the recent 47- day hospital strike, Archbishop O'Connor told Catholic hospitals
not to hire permanent replacements for striking workers - as many hospitals had
threatened to do - because it would be ''union busting.''

The Archdiocese of New York covers the boroughs of Manhattan, Staten Island and
the Bronx and the counties of Westchester, Putnam, Dutchess, Rockland, Orange,
Sullivan and Ulster. Though it is not the largest archdiocese in the United
States - it ranks fourth, after Los Angeles, Chicago and Boston - it is by many
accounts the most influential.

Archbishop O'Connor likes to tell of his first meeting with the Pope in Rome
after being appointed Archbishop of New York. As he walked in, John Paul II
greeted him with, ''Welcome to the Archbishop of the Capital of the World.''

JUST ABOUT EVERY one, including the Archbishop himself, says that John O'Connor
shoots from the hip. ''I've done some dumb things,'' he told inmates during a
mass at Taconic State Prison over the Labor Day weekend. ''You'd be amazed at
the dumb things I do every day.''

Even one of his admirers, Russell Shaw, the communications director of the
bishops' conference, says: ''I do hope he learns a little couth. But at the same
time, I hope he doesn't back down. There is something authentic about a man who
stands up for something that he believes in and that others believe in as
well.''

The contrast with his predecessor is striking. Cardinal Cooke, a shy, thoughtful
man who suffered silently with cancer for many years before his death last
October, at the age of 62, was rarely involved in controversy and concerned
himself with the day-to-day workings of the archdiocese.

''The Cardinal thought of himself as the chairman of the board,'' says Msgr.
Florence D. Cohalan, a retired pastor from Staten Island and the author of a
recent history of the archdiocese. ''This man is the captain of the ship. This,
I think is communicated immediately to the passengers.''

The analogy works particularly well in Archbishop O'Connor's case. Much of his
27 years in the Navy were spent at sea, and he rose to the rank of rear admiral
by the time he retired in 1979. His military background is a clue to his
management style. His conception is that authority flows from the top rather
than being arrived at through consensus. This notion of consensus, or
''collegiality,'' was central to the reforms adopted by the Second Vatican
Council some 20 years ago. At the Archdiocese of New York these days, he is
known simply as ''the boss.''

According to some professional church watchers, the actions of the new
Archbishop have brought cheers both at the White House and at the Vatican. The
Reagan re-election campaign felt so good about his conservative pronouncements,
in fact, that it invited him to give the invocation one night at the Republican
National Convention in Dallas.

Though the Archbishop declined the invitation, Daniel C. Maguire, a professor of
moral theology at Marquette University in Milwaukee, who is a leader of
Catholics for a Free Choice, a group that Archbishop O'Connor has denounced as
being outside church teaching, says, ''He's implicity endorsed Reagan, even
though he says he's not.''

It is only a matter of time, most church observers agree, until Archbishop
O'Connor is called to Rome and made a Cardinal, as was the case with the last
four of his immediate predecessors.

''The story I heard from a priest who was living in Rome before the selection,''
says Monsignor Cohalan, ''was that the Pope said, 'I want a man like me in New
York.' With John O'Connor, the Pope's got him.''

ARCHBISHOP O'CONNOR is flattered by the notion that some think he is in the
image of the Pope. Both of them, the Archbishop notes, have a facility with
languages and a background in philosophy and psychology. (''Of course I am in no
way in his class intellectually,'' he quickly adds.) But the Archbishop bristles
at the suggestion that he, or any of the nation's bishops, is politically
partisan.




''No. Absolutely not,'' he said in the recent interview, which took place aboard
a flight from Washington, where he had attended a meeting at the headquarters of
the bishops' conference. ''In total integrity. I would stake my life on it. The
bishops are not trying to elect anybody. The bishops are trying to address the
issues. This is what we believe to be the moral issues. You, the electorate,
will have to decide.''

Yes, the Archbishop said, he did praise President Reagan as a ''friend of the
unborn'' when the two men appeared together at a dinner in April given by a
Catholic school organization in New York. And yes, he did criticize Mrs. Ferraro
in September for ''misrepresenting Catholic teaching on abortion.''

But speaking out about abortion, he says, is his responsibility as a leader of
the Catholic Church. ''I would abdicate as Archbishop of New York before I would
abdicate my right and responsibility to elucidate Catholic teaching.''

''If political leaders would suspend all abortions during the political
campaign,'' he adds, knowing full well the impracticality of the suggestion, ''I
would stop talking about the subject.''

Several people at the bishops' conference headquarters are concerned at what
they consider Archbishop O'Connor's support for the Reagan campaign. The
leadership of the conference did its best not to take sides between the
President, who supports a constitutional amendment banning abortion, and his
Democratic opponent, Walter F. Mondale, who supports the current laws that
provide for freedom of choice.

For example, the bishops' conference, headed by Bishop James W. Malone of
Youngstown, Ohio, presented identical and nonpartisan testimony before the
Democratic and Republican platform committees. ''Malone has tried to play it
right down the middle,'' says one former staff member. ''But he was undermined
by Krol, Head and, most of all, O'Connor.'' Unlike Archbishop O'Connor, however,
John Cardinal Krol of Philadelphia accepted the Republican Party's invitation to
deliver an invocation at its convention in Dallas. And in recent weeks, Cardinal
Krol and Bishop Edward D. Head of Buffalo have both appeared at Reagan
re-election rallies in their cities.

Archbishop O'Connor refuses to attach any political significance to the Bishops'
appearances. ''The bishop of a large diocese is very often expected to host
highly prestigious visitors,'' the Archbishop says. ''Courtesy demands it.''

The Archbishop was flying back from a bishops' meeting aboard New York Air, an
airline whose flight attendants recognize him and make sure he gets a seat
toward the front of the aircraft. Like the other passengers, he was given a
small ''Flying Nosh'' bag containing some French bread and two kinds of cheeses.
He ate them as if he had forgotten lunch and someone had just reminded him that
there was such a thing as food. He jokingly complained about the French bread.
''There were bagels on the way down,'' he said.

Several passengers recognized the Archbishop, who wore the red rose pin of the
right-to-life movement on the lapel of his black clerical suit, and shook his
hand as they passed his seat. ''I'm not a member of your church,'' said a
middle-aged man, ''but thank you for raising the abortion issue.''

''Just six months ago, people were saying abortion was a dead issue,'' the
Archbishop said after the well-wisher left. ''Politicians told each other, 'You
don't have to worry about it. Nobody will take it seriously.' But there is a
deep, deep uneasiness within us. Maybe it is emerging and giving voice.''

The Archbishop later said that life begins at the time of conception. He often
speaks of babies, rather than fetuses, in the womb, and once asked a reporter,
whose wife was pregnant with the couple's first child, ''How is the young
mother?''

Abortion, he believes, is an act of violence. ''Violence never corrects
violence,'' he said. ''A woman has been raped. I can understand the desire for
an abortion, but then she is inflicting violence on the unborn and she's
inflicting further violence on herself. And the violence is never dissipated.''

''Do I think it is easy?'' he continued. ''I think it is enormously difficult.
Do I think we have provided enough support? I don't think we've scratched the
surface. Have I done enough? I haven't done a billionth of enough.''

THE REV. JAMES F. MC-Carthy, one of the Archbishop's two personal secretaries,
met the plane from Washington and reached out to take the Archbishop's brown
leather briefcase as he greeted him at the gate. ''Are you having a good time,
James?'' the Archbishop asked him.

''Nobody even noticed you were gone,'' Father McCarthy joked.

''Then you're not having a good time, James.''

The Archbishop got into the front seat of his dark blue Mercury sedan and Father
McCarthy, in the driver's seat, handed him a box full of correspondence. He told
him that the 83-year-old mother of a priest in the archdiocese, the Rev. Jordan
Sullivan, had died and that the wake was under way in Yonkers. The Archbishop
checked his schedule and his watch and decided to detour to Yonkers before
returning to Manhattan.

At the funeral home, Archbishop O'Connor embraced Father Sullivan, and waved
with both hands, in a kind of blessing-greeting, to other family members. He
then knelt and prayed before the open casket.

The deceased was dressed in a simple light green dress that she had sewn
herself, and in her hands there was a set of rosary beads and an embroidered
cloth known as a manutergium.

''That's how my mother was buried,'' the Archbishop said when he was back in the
car. The manutergium, he explained, was the cloth given to a priest after oil
was poured in his hands during the ordination rite used before Vatican II.
Traditionally, the cloth was given to the priest's mother.



The Archbishop's mother, Dorothy Gomple O'Connor, died in 1971, a few years
after the death of his father, Thomas J. O'Connor, a skilled craftsman.
''Peculiar things happen to a priest at his mother's death,'' the Archbishop
said. There is a feeling of profound loneliness, he explained, because the
priest, with no wife and no children, then feels cut off from a relationship
with someone who had depended solely on him. Archbishop O'Connor said that he
has been sustained by his three surviving siblings and 20 nieces and nephews.

THE ARCHBISHOP WAS born in Philadelphia on Jan. 15, 1920. He came under the
influence of the Christian Brothers who were his teachers at West Philadelphia
Catholic High School for Boys. He entered St. Charles Borromeo Seminary in the
Overbrook section of Philadelphia and was ordained on Dec. 15, 1945, one month
before his 26th birthday.

After a few years of working in religious schools and parishes, he volunteered
as a chaplain during the Korean War. He signed up for two years and served 27.
During his military career, he earned a master's degree in clinical psychology
at the Catholic University of America and a doctorate in political science at
Georgetown University.

He served in the North Atlantic, the Mediterranean and the Caribbean, as well as
in Vietnam and Okinawa. He recalls celebrating mass in foxholes, in submarines
and aboard aircraft carriers.

His book ''A Chaplain Looks at Vietnam,'' published in 1968, describes the
Vietnam conflict as a ''just war'' on moral grounds and defends President Lyndon
B. Johnson's handling of the conflict:

''I must confess a feeling of revulsion for those who chant, 'L.B.J., L.B.J.,
how many babies have you killed today?' Such a charge is an assumption that the
Administration actually wants war. Nothing in my experience warrants such an
assumption. On the contrary, I am convinced that the Administration has opted to
accept the tragedy of war as the only available road to meaningful peace.''

His ministry in Vietnam, he wrote, involved him in ''the unglamorous, dirty
business of survival, in digging a hole in a sun-baked hill in the boiling dust
of a 120-degree heat, in slogging through knee-high mud, in fighting insects,
tripping over jungle growth, sleeping night after night with one eye open, alert
to the whisper of every breeze, the snapping of every twig.''

''No priest can watch the blood pouring from the wounds of the dying - be they
American or Vietnamese of the North or South - without anguish and a sense of
desperate frustration and futility,'' he continued. ''The clergy back home, the
academicians in their universities, the protesters on their marches are not the
only ones who cry out, 'Why?' ''

In a March 15 interview this year in the archdiocesan weekly, Catholic New York,
the Archbishop said that he ''became part of a movement in the Navy and the
Marine Corps to assure that our fighting men of the future would be adequately
oriented in the moral dynamics of war.''

He described the ''moral dynamics'' by saying:

''The chaplain's job is to try to generate the idea that you have to teach
people to love even if you have to kill.

''I remember at Parris Island, where the recruit training for the Marines is the
very nature of hand-to-hand combat, and they try to stir up every inch of
potential aggression. . . . It's difficult to get across to the drill
instructors. They'll tell you, 'Look Father, if I don't teach that kid to kill,
he'll be killed.' ''

In 1975, after serving as the chief of chaplains at Annapolis, he was appointed
Chief of Navy Chaplains. One of the chaplains who came under his command, Rabbi
Matthew Simon, said that even then Chaplain O'Connor acted like a Bishop. ''I
always felt J. J. O'Connor was already a bishop - the bishop of the Navy - and
we chaplains were his priests,'' Rabbi Simon said. ''It was an odd position for
a rabbi to be put in.''

In 1979, Chaplain O'Connor went to Rome to be consecrated as a bishop by the
Pope. He was assigned as auxiliary bishop to the Military Vicar, which was the
other hat worn by Cardinal Cooke.

While serving as an auxiliary bishop in New York, he was given an assignment
that many say changed the course of his career. He was chosen as a member of the
bishops' committee that would draft the pastoral letter on war and peace.

From the start, and through all three drafts of the letter, the then Bishop
O'Connor was the conservative, pro-military voice on the committee. He insisted
that the testimony of Reagan Administration defense officials be considered, and
he fought vigorously for the word ''curb'' rather than ''halt'' when referring
to the spread of nuclear weapons.

On several points, he lost. In the end, the letter took a strong stand against
nuclear warfare, and the former Navy chaplain voted with his colleagues for
approval. ''I've noticed a pattern in the way he operates,'' says Jim Castelli,
the author of the book on the pastoral letter. ''He fights very, very hard for
something. And when he loses, he immediately becomes a gracious loser. But he
looks for ways to recover his loss.''

And recover he did. Almost simultaneous with the completion of the letter, he
was made Bishop of Scranton. Some considered the appointment to a relatively
minor diocese to be a form of exile, but others said that Scranton was only the
beginning. Last Jan. 31, he was named Archbishop of New York.

It was a surprise appointment. His name had not even been mentioned amid all the
speculation about who would fill the job. As is the practice, names had been
submitted to the Pope by the Apostolic Delegate to the United States, at that
time Archbishop Pio Laghi, now the Vatican's Ambassador to this country, and by
individual bishops. It was John Cardinal Krol of Philadelphia who recommended
Bishop O'Connor, a fellow conservative and a native of the City of Brotherly
Love.




Even Archbishop O'Connor says that he was surprised by the selection. ''When I
went to Scranton, I hoped I would die there,'' he said as we drove through the
streets of his archdiocese. Then he put his finger tips together, forming a
little tent, leaned back in his seat and added, ''I came to New York knowing I
would die here.''

THE RESIDENCE OF THE Archbishop of New York is a handsome century-old building
at 452 Madison Avenue, just behind St. Patrick's Cathedral, to which it is
connected by a passageway. The first floor is what Archbishop O'Connor calls
''the museum,'' with overstuffed chairs and heavy draperies. The second floor
contains offices, and on the third floor, the Archbishop sleeps.

His bedroom is small, about 12 by 14 feet. There is a full-size bed that is
covered with a brown and white bedspread that matches the draperies. Over the
head of the bed is a brightly colored modern painting of Christ on a donkey
entering Jerusalem. On the opposite wall there is a simple wooden cross.

Off one end of the bedroom, there is a sitting room with a couch, a few chairs,
a color television set and a small service bar with a few bottles of wine,
liquor and soda. The Archbishop prefers a glass of vermouth or other wine; he
saves the hard liquor for his guests, his aides say. Off the other end of the
bedroom is the Archbishop's study, a room with stained-glass windows and a
cathedral ceiling. Its centerpiece is a long conference table, piled high with
papers, that the Archbishop uses as a desk. The study opens into the
Archbishop's private chapel, a solemn room with ornate cherry-wood panelling.

The Archbishop, who often talks about how little sleep he needs, usually rises
at 5 A.M., prays in the chapel and then fixes himself a cup of Sanka and a bowl
of Raisin Bran before attacking his correspondence, which sometimes reaches
1,500 pieces of mail a day.

His penchant for ecclesiastical garb recently extended to his posing for a
newspaper photographer wearing a red and black cape, called a mantelletta, and a
gold pectoral cross over his black cassock to show how he makes coffee in his
kitchen.

The residence staff consists of a cook and three housekeepers. The two priests
who serve as his secretaries, Father McCarthy and the Rev. Edwin F. O'Brien,
also live in the residence, as does Monsignor Murphy, the chancellor of the
Archdiocese. The four, who meet for prayer both morning and night in the
Archbishop's chapel, take their meals together in the formal dining room on the
first floor. Archbishop O'Connor sits at the center of the table, beneath a
portrait of the first Archbishop of New York, John Hughes, rather than at the
head.

MSGR. JOHN TRACY Ellis, a lecturer in church history at Catholic University in
Washington, says that Archbishop O'Connor is in the mold of Archbishop Hughes,
who was known as ''Dagger John.''

Archbishop Hughes, a cantankerous sort who served from 1842 to 1864, fought
openly and bitterly with Mayor James Harper, James Gordon Bennett, Horace
Greeley and other public figures, defending his poor, immigrant flock against
the anti-Catholic sentiment that was then pervasive. The flock has changed
vastly since then - Catholics have prospered and become secularized - and so
have the battles of their Archbishop.

Shortly before he came to New York, Archbishop O'Connor drew an analogy that
angered many. The parallel, drawn in a television interview, was between
abortion and the Nazi Holocaust: ''I always compare the killing of 4,000 babies
a day in the United States, unborn babies, to the Holocaust. Now, Hitler tried
to solve a problem, the Jewish question. So kill them, shove them in the ovens,
burn them. Well, we claim that unborn babies are a problem, so kill them. To me
it really is precisely the same.''

Rabbi Balfour Brickner of the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue in Manhattan called
the analogy ''an obscenity.'' He says that ''this kind of facile, cheap-shot,
one-liner approach'' has characterized Archbishop O'Connor's positions since he
came to New York.

''Instead of being careful and thoughtful and theological and trying to advance
the image of the Church - which doesn't have much of an image as is - O'Connor
acts like he's at a Kiwanis Club meeting,'' says Rabbi Brickner.

Archbishop O'Connor later offended the city's homosexual community by refusing
to comply with an executive order issued by Mayor Koch that barred agencies
doing business with the city from discrimination in hiring based on ''sexual
orientation or affectional preference.'' At issue were more than $60 million in
child-care and other social- service contracts that were up for renewal between
the archdiocese and the city. Archbishop O'Connor said it was against Church
teaching to comply, even though officials in the neighboring Brooklyn Diocese -
as well as his predecessor Cardinal Cooke - had raised no objections to the
order.

The Archbishop took the city of New York to the State Supreme Court. The court,
which did not deal with the substance of the order, ruled in the Church's favor,
saying that the Mayor had exceeded his authority in issuing it. The city is
appealing.

In the heat of the fight over the Mayor's order, Catholic New York reported from
Rome that the Pope had met with Archbishop O'Connor and had given a ''supporting
voice'' to the Archbishop's refusal to comply with the executive order. Someone
in the Vatican was obviously not pleased with the implications of the article. A
week later, the Rev. Peter G. Finn, the archdiocesean spokesman, issued a
''clarification.'' The Pope did not meet with Archbishop O'Connor individually,
as the article implied, and there was no mention of New York City. The Pope had
simply reiterated the Church's position against homosexual activity.

THE ARCHBISHOP found himself in another controversy on June 24 when, in answer
to a question at a televised news conference, he said, ''I don't see how a
Catholic in good conscience can vote for a candidate who explicitly supports
abortion.''

In an interview a few weeks later, Governor Cuomo, who, though he is personally
opposed to abortion, supports freedom-of-choice, said: ''You have an Archbishop
of New York saying that no Catholic can vote for Ed Koch, no Catholic can vote
for Jay Goldin, for Carol Bellamy, nor for Pat Moynihan or Mario Cuomo - anybody
who disagrees with him on abortion.''

Archbishop O'Connor shot back, saying that the Governor's interpretation was
''foolish'' and that he was not telling Catholics whom to vote for.

The two men met shortly thereafter for more than an hour at the Archbishop's
residence. After the talk, the Archbishop told an interviewer that he believed
the Governor ''would have a change of heart'' about abortion and public policy.

Governor Cuomo spent many days reviewing his position, and when he delivered his
53-minute lecture at Notre Dame it had been refined but not changed. The
Governor reiterated his position, in a speech on Oct. 3 at St. Francis College
in Brooklyn, in which he announced that he was estabishing a panel to study
issues of ''life and the law.'' Among the Protestant, Roman Catholic and Jewish
groups he invited to participate was the New York State Catholic Conference,
which is headed by Archbishop O'Connor.

According to public-opinion polls, the Governor's approach is the one followed
by most American Catholics. Last November, for example, a New York Times poll of
1,309 adults found that while 62 percent of the Catholic respondents agreed that
''abortion is the same thing as murdering a child,'' 66 percent agreed that
''abortion sometimes is the best course in a bad situation.'' (Among white
Protestants, 55 percent agreed with the ''murder'' statement and 71 percent with
the ''best course'' statement.)

Interest in the issue was heightened even further midway through the O'Connor-
Cuomo debate when the Archbishop was given - he did not say by whom - the letter
Mrs. Ferraro had signed, which said that the Catholic position on abortion was
''not monolithic.'' It was then that Archbishop O'Connor accused the Democratic
Vice-Presidential candidate of ''misrepresenting Church teaching'' on abortion.

Mrs. Ferraro denied the charge, saying that the reference was not to Church
doctrine, but to the position of Church members.

What is ironic in the controversy is that Archbishop O'Connor is not even Mrs.
Ferraro's bishop. As a resident of Queens, she lives in the Brooklyn Diocese,
where Church leaders do not share Archbishop O'Connor's concerns. ''Ferraro is a
very strong Catholic,'' says Auxiliary Bishop Joseph M. Sullivan of Brooklyn.
While he does not agree with her abortion stand, Bishop Sullivan says that he is
not offended by the letter signed by Mrs. Ferraro, the first woman running as a
major party candidate for Vice President. ''I'm satisfied with her
interpretation,'' he says. ''What I am concerned about is the backlash. What are
women going to think?''

Archbishop O'Connor said that the question of what women might think did not
enter his mind when he criticized Mrs. Ferraro. He was reacting to what she said
- not to who she was - he maintains. ''Integrity required me to clarify'' the
Church's position, he explained.

Nonetheless, as Archbishop, he will have to address the concerns of women in the
church, many of whom are dissatisfied with what they consider their limited
role, as well as a host of other issues. There are those who say he will soon
turn his attention inward toward the mechanics of the running of the
archdiocese. For example, the number of priests is rapidly declining and there
are few new seminarians ready to take their places. The Catholic schools are
becoming increasingly secular and facing bigger budget deficits. There is a
growing gap between the wealthy establishment Catholics and the new, largely
Hispanic, immigrants. And the city and state are putting pressure on the Church
to do more about social problems - such as the thousands of homeless who live on
the city's streets.

''I'm really just now getting started,'' Archbishop O'Connor says when asked
about the challenges ahead. ''I haven't gone to work yet. These have been the
fun months.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Archbishop John J. O'Connor

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IMAGES

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines

SECTION: Section 6; Page 57, Column 6; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1804 words


Francis X. Clines is a White House reporter for The Times.

LONG BEFORE GEORGE Tames aimed a camera, he first saw light idealized on the
face of Franklin Delano Roosevelt. As a growing boy, he was ordered by his
mother, Athena, a member of the Greek Orthodox faith, to light the night candle
by the icon stand, where images of the Virgin Mother, St. George and St. Luke
kept watch over the family. ''One night, St. Luke was gone and Roosevelt was in
his place,'' Tames recalls. ''It was the Depression, and Roosevelt had become a
saint.''

Seven years later, at the age of 21, Tames, equipped with a 10th-grade education
and a clear eye, finally saw Roosevelt's face in the flesh. For Time magazine,
Tames took his first photographs of the President, trying to spare the tired
leader some of the harshness of raw light and give him back that icon glow. ''I
had his declining years,'' Tames says, ''from 1940 until his death, and in my
mind he's still one of the saints. I always made sure he was in the right
light.''

Since that first exposure to the Oval Office more than four decades ago, George
Tames has been adjusting the lighting on Presidents; his work spans 11
Presidential terms. ''He's the champion,'' says Cornell Capa, a former Life
photographer and director of the International Center of Photography. ''He has
had the crown for 40 years, and that's a long time to remain a champion.'' Tames
joined The New York Times in 1945, and, over the years, the hallmark of his
photography has been his ability to capture the intimate, unguarded moments that
reveal the character of life in the capital. In this campaign season, so heavily
influenced by media managers and contrived spontaneity, Tames's pictures of the
powerful are refreshingly accessible. ''He earned everybody's trust,'' says
Capa, who covered Washington for a time himself. ''He could just walk into
somebody's office, say 'Hi,' and get the best picture. He beats everybody.''

Tames admits he has been kindly toward all the Presidents he has photographed.
''I owe that to the office, but I also owe that to the man,'' he says. The
notion that the artist has an obligation to both the office and the subject
summarizes Tames's method. He needs to see the humanity within the people of
power before they can be convincingly photographed.

Undoubtedly, this perspective is related to his origin in Washington as the son
of Greek-Albanian parents, one of seven children supported by a religious mother
and an industrious father who hawked wares from a pushcart.








N A CITY OF BLIMP-SIZE

egos, George Tames has remained unaffected, a natural.

This is reflected in his most dramatic pictures of politicians. The

power of his photographs, such as

the one of John F. Kennedy leaning into the White House office shadows while
working at ''The Loneliest Job in the World,'' comes from patient watching, not
melodramatic conjuring. In the case of the Kennedy picture, Tames, on duty in
the White House, had observed that the President always left the doors to his
office open and that, because of his injured back, Kennedy frequently worked
standing up.

''I looked in and saw him standing and leaning forward over the table, with his
weight on his arms while he read something,'' Tames recalls. ''I went in and
took two pictures that I deliberately underexposed. I wanted the blackness, the
mood that I saw with my eye.'' As it turned out, what Kennedy was reading was
the editorial page of Tames's own newspaper, and the President was frowning
deeply. The impact of Tames's unposed picture is stunning and complex.

''I was trained in the Speed Graphic days, when you only had one frame,'' he
says, appreciating the old knack of going after a single picture rather than
rapidly spray-shooting exposures as is done today. ''It was like the
muzzleloading gun; if you missed it, your one shot was gone.''

Working with little margin for error, Tames developed small tricks that have
survived well into the modern era. He noticed, for example, that President
Dwight D. Eisenhower had a slight hearing problem. If Tames mumbled to him,
Eisenhower would react with a scowl of curiosity that skewed his cherubic smile
into something especially revealing. ''Ike would give that great surprised look
and ask, 'What?' and, bang, I'd have the picture,'' Tames says, laughing.

During Watergate, when it was hard for many people in Washington to smile, Tames
stumbled on a foolproof line. He would sidle up and whisper conspiratorially to
a subject, ''Would you mind if I took your picture with the very same camera I
used to photograph Nixon?''

''They always smiled or laughed,'' the photographer recalls. ''It was a
ridiculous question, but it was just what they needed to hear.''

Tames has made an art of disrupting the city's craving to stage-manage events. A
1961 ''photo opportunity'' with Vice President Nixon and a birthday cake was
routine and lifeless to Tames's eye until he saw the smoke rise from the
extinguished candles. ''I popped it fast. That smoke had made something intimate
of something ordinary.''

One day every year photographers used to be invited to record the members of the
Supreme Court robed and seated like mannequins. Tames decided to take a picture
before they put on their masks, while the justices were chatting and smoking,
waiting for the official picture. The result is disarmingly human.

''You've got to have your confidence,'' he explains of such singular moments.
''You have to be on it. Otherwise you linger behind the action.''

Over the years, Tames has discovered the difference between photographing
politicians and taking pictures of his grandchildren. ''Egos,'' he says.
''You've got to bring out the egos of the powerful to make it believable, let
them be what they are.'' Tames uses his lens chivalrously; he takes particular
care with lighting when he photographs women, for example, seeking a high light
that will shadow the neck. He worries less about giving men a weathered look.
''They're human first, before anything else,'' he says.

Tames's empathy might be traced in part to President Harry S. Truman, who,
almost 40 years ago, freed the half-dozen news photographers who covered the
White House then from the cramped room, dubbed ''the doghouse,'' that served as
their office. ''There was no TV, no newsreel cameras around there then, and when
Truman toured the White House one day and saw us there he became very upset,''
Tames recalls. ''You know, he had a thing about the underdog, and he said,
'They're coming out of there and coming in my office like everyone else from now
on.' Truman made first- class citizens of us.''

Perhaps it was gratitude on the part of the photographers that caused Truman's
smiling face to appear so often before America. In turn, Truman expected abject
loyalty; he would call in ''his'' photographers to snap practically anything he
demanded. According to Tames, he even chewed them out once when they balked at
photographing an old World War I cronie who had no news value but whom Truman
hoped to sneak into the daily prints.  TAMES HAS THE ABIL

ity to reproduce the

mannerisms of his favorite subjects, and one of his most poignant depictions is
of the moment he asked Truman what he did alone in the Oval Office when things
got quiet or boring. '' 'I do this,' '' he says Truman replied, taking a stack
of photographs from a drawer and putting his signature on, one by one.

The pleasure of talking to Truman reinforced Tames's ideas about power being
revealed through the commonplace. ''Once I told him I had just come from the
United Nations,'' Tames remembers, smiling at the image of the President
suddenly treating him like the Secretary of State. ''Old Truman leans back and
says, 'Tell me, what the hell is going on up there?' '' At the United Nations,
Tames had first seen television used to cover a news event live, and he told
Truman changes were in store for politicians. ''Truman said, 'I can remember
when a good politician had to be 75 percent ability and 25 percent actor, but I
can well see the day when the reverse could be true.' ''

Kennedy had a gift for visualizing the office he held, according to Tames, who
describes Kennedy's technique for stealing the scene from a companion in a
picture: He would poke his finger at the person, giving the appearance of
stronger authority. ''I learned that trick from Nixon,'' Kennedy told Tames,
smiling.

Lyndon B. Johnson had a pharaoh's appetite for chiseling away at the edifice of
the Presidency. ''My God, his eye was on the sparrow. He knew everything that
was going on, and detail did him in.'' Johnson would use the occasion of a
handshake to get himself in position to be photographed from his best side, and
he personally gleaned from each day's batch of photographs favorable ones to put
in the Presidential archives. ''He was working on his place in history every
day, and a picture that didn't quite show him in the right way was as important
to him as whether we bombed Vietnam.''

As a photographer, Tames talks with ambivalence about controlling his emotions
when covering some news events. His own tears don't help. ''I had to stop what I
was doing at Kennedy's funeral. I could not see.'' When an entire convention,
after nominating Jimmy Carter for President, joined hands to sing ''We Shall
Overcome,'' Tames figured there was no harm in putting his camera aside to join
briefly in the chain of humanity. Another hymn, ''Jacob's Ladder,'' can make him
dizzy with the memory of a night covering Martin Luther King Jr. down South.

''You see pictures every day, all the time,'' Tames says, as if his eye roves
humanity constantly. ''You watch light as it plays on people's faces. You know
when the picture's there.''

Some politicians seem to know a photographer's business as if it were their own.
Nixon, he remembers, would take a quiet cue from the photo gallery and call over
a nervous witness during anti- Communist hearings for a conference. Thus, he
would compose that closeup picture that would make the front page. ''He wanted
to be one of the boys very badly,'' Tames says, ''but I always had the feeling
he tried too hard.'' GEORGE TAMES HAS A

way of focusing events

down to the level he

needs to see, the human scale. ''My father always told me that if you have just
a single piece of silver, you can never feel poor in this world,'' he says,
recalling the final photo he took of Vice President Spiro T. Agnew on Oct. 10,
1973, the day he resigned in disgrace. ''I stopped on the way there and got a
silver dollar, and when we shook hands I smiled and palmed it to him and he
understood. I was not forgiving him, no no. But, this was another human being,''
George Tames says.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos taken by George Tames

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CLOSE TO EVENTS

BYLINE: By Henry Giniger

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


AMERICA INSIDE OUT

By David Schoenbrun.  Illustrated. 485 pp. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company.
$17.95.

DAVID SCHOENBRUN is the latest of a long and distinguished line of journalists
who have felt the need to place a coherent and orderly frame around the jumble
of events they have covered and, incidentally or not, to settle a few personal
scores along the way. Mr. Schoenbrun's frame encloses 50 years of turbulent
change in America and the world, much of which he reported for radio and
television, and sometimes became personally involved in. The results are highly
readable and often revealing pages mixed with labored writing and trite
conclusions, such as the one he passes along to young reporters: ''There are
good guys as well as bad guys in government and other fields of human
endeavor.''

The energetic and much- traveled Mr. Schoenbrun managed to get close to a
prodigious number of events and people in Europe, the United States, the Middle
East and Vietnam. He is a caring person not above crying on occasion
(''reporters are human, not machines'') and he harbors strong convictions about
such things as Ronald Reagan's ''devolution'' of the Federal responsibilities
established by Franklin Roosevelt, the survival of Israel and the wrongness of
the Vietnam War.

He also has a high regard for his own opinions, which has often led him to go
from observing and reporting to participating, a trespass he acknowledges. Thus
he concedes using his television skills to help Dwight Eisenhower gain the
Republican Presidential nomination in 1952, arguing with the French about the
''folly'' of their colonial policies (they did not listen) and tailoring a
broadcast on the Cuban missile crisis to suit the Kennedy White House (making
''a lot of friends'' in the Oval Office).

''America Inside Out'' offers a surfeit of some things and is skimpy on others.
Thus Mr. Schoenbrun insists on a laborious rundown of the New Deal, which has
been explained better by others with greater expertise and closer connections
than the youth who licked envelopes and stamps for Roosevelt and got to ask him
a question once. There are similar compendiums of World War II and of events in
the United

Henry Giniger, who has been a correspondent for The Times in Paris and other
cities, is an editor of The Week in Review.  States that read like a
superficial, helter-skelter evening news script.

The author's accounts of France's colonial difficulties gives short shrift to
Pierre Mend es-France, one of the original movers of decolonization in Indochina
and North Africa. Similarly, France's dramatic transition from the Fourth
Republic to the Fifth is so succinct and telescoped as to create the erroneous
impression that Charles de Gaulle did not agree to be the last Prime Minister of
the Fourth (and submit to an annoying investiture debate) before becoming the
first President of the Fifth.

Mr. Schoenbrun first met de Gaulle in 1943 in North Africa where the author was
soldiering for the Office of War Information and the general was trying to
establish his claim to leadership of wartime and postwar France. The
conversations they had, even when ''manipulated'' by de Gaulle, reveal something
of the ''passionate iceberg,'' as he is aptly described. In Paris in 1946 Mr.
Schoenbrun was dinner host to Ho Chi Minh, who predicted that the Vietnamese
''tiger'' would tear huge chunks from the French ''elephant'' until it bled to
death. There are other passages that make the duller ones worth wading through,
including an absorbing account of a trip to North Vietnam when it was the
American elephant that was trying to crush the tiger.


MR. SCHOENBRUN aimed at being ''the world's greatest expert on France,'' and by
the time the Columbia Broadcasting System wanted to transfer him from Paris to
Washington in 1961, he was amply, even redundantly, satisfied that he had
achieved his goal. He was a bit skittish about the move, for Washington was
overflowing with experts, ''unlike Paris where I was the acknowledged expert
beyond challenge.'' (Not beyond challenge is his spelling of Francois Mitterrand
in six places.)

Washington was where his war with the CBS brass reached its most acute stage,
starting with ''know-nothing'' producers and moving up to ''egomaniacs'' in the
executive suites. The breaking point came more or less when he was told he could
not continue his own Sunday program. Eventually he decided no longer to be a
wage earner, however handsome the wages, but to work freelance, lecturing,
broadcasting for lesser stations, and writing. One result is this book with its
frequent references to the frustration and superficiality of radio and
television. Such disparagement may make print journalists feel better, but
broadcasting did afford Mr. Schoenbrun a full and interesting life, as so many
pages attest.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE OUTCOME WAS DOUBLY DISASTROUS

BYLINE: By Peter Grose

SECTION: Section 7; Page 12, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1519 words


ISRAEL'S LEBANON WAR

By Ze'ev Schiff and Ehud Ya'ari.  Translated by Ina Friedman.  320 pp. New York:
Simon & Schuster. $17.95.

AT the height of the fighting around Beirut in the fall of 1982, some literary
Palestinian partisans delighted in spreading the word from the Bible, from the
minor Hebrew prophet Habakkuk in 600 B.C.: ''The violence done to Lebanon will
overwhelm you.'' A more recent minor prophet, Moshe Sharett, Israel's second
Prime Minister, wrote in 1955 that schemes then brewing in Tel Aviv to ''buy''
Christian Maronite loyalties and give Israel decisive influence in Lebanese
politics were but ''a vain fantasy. . . . We'll get bogged down in a mad
adventure that will only bring

Peter Grose, author of ''Israel in the Mind of America,'' is managing editor of
Foreign Affairs.  us disgrace.'' Today's Israelis take no satisfaction in the
redemption of prophecy, ancient or modern, as they continue struggling with the
strategic, economic and political fallout of Lebanon: the first war in which
political ambition - not the security of the state - drove Israeli policy makers
to action.

Lebanon has often been called Israel's Vietnam. With the publication in the
United States of this inside history, Lebanon also emerges as Israel's
Watergate, an entanglement that caused a breakdown of political accountability,
a seamy intrigue of manipulation and personal deception at the highest levels of
a parliamentary democracy.

Ze'ev Schiff, the military correspondent for the Israeli newspaper Ha'aretz, and
Ehud Ya'ari, an Israeli television journalist, the authors of ''Israel's Lebanon
War,'' were unwitting participants in a part of the action: they acquired
information that responsible ministers of government did not have, and when they
checked it out, they started a cascade of disclosures and coverups that ended in
a judicial inquiry, the sacking of key political and military officers, and the
resignation of a prime minister. With their unparalleled access to authoritative
sources throughout the military chain of command, the authors describe what
amounts to two Israeli invasions of Lebanon, one military and audacious, the
other political and clandestine.

The military invasion began on June 6, 1982, a concerted ground, air and naval
attack declared initially as a limited operation to wipe out Palestinian
artillery that had been bombarding the northern settlements of the Galilee.
Within days these limited aims were replaced by direct engagement with Syrian
forces in Lebanon, and the Israeli advance proceeded to the outskirts of Beirut.
In September, for the first time in its history, Israeli forces occupied the
capital of an Arab state - without the authorization, or even advance knowledge,
of the Israeli Cabinet.

The political ''invasion'' had been underway far longer. In some of their most
dramatic passages, Mr. Schiff and Mr. Ya'ari date its origins to 1976, when
agents of the Maronite militia asked Israeli authorities for an alliance aimed
at expelling the Palestine Liberation Organization from Lebanese territory. The
Labor Party government of the day was skeptical, but Menachem Begin, when he
became Prime Minister in 1977, embraced the deal with fervor.The outcome of both
invasions was disastrous. The military campaign failed ultimately to force a
peace treaty with the Lebanese government, and Israel finds itself today, two
and a half years later, bogged down in an unsought occupation of alien
territory. The secret political alliance, Israel's working partnership with the
Christian Phalange, reached fateful fruition in the massacres of Palestinian
refugees in their camps at Sabra and Shatila.


WHEN first published in Hebrew last year, Messrs. Schiff and Ya'ari's book gave
Israelis factual basis for the malaise that led to the downfall of the Likud
government last spring, after eight years of power. They learned the details of
the political betrayal they had only sensed before. Ariel Sharon, the clear
villain of the book, had become Defense Minister in August 1981. At first he
spoke soothing words: ''War is not good for Israel,'' he said, and Israel would
never initiate hostilities. But within a month of saying this, Mr. Sharon was
devising war plans to expel Palestinian and even Syrian forces - not just from
southern Lebanon but from the north of the country and from Beirut itself.

At private briefings for militant activists in the Likud coalition, Mr. Sharon
declared Lebanon could not be pacified ''without taking care of the Syrians.''
It all would demand ''extreme caution and waiting for just the right moment.''
In November Mr. Sharon told the prospective Lebanese President, Bashir Gemayel,
to prepare quickly for a full-scale war in which Israeli troops would join - and
this before the Defense Minister had breathed a word of his strategy to the
Cabinet.

Prime Minister Begin summoned his ministers to his home one Sunday in December
to hear Mr. Sharon's plans. ''Must we decide today, right now?'' asked one
incredulous minister. ''Yes,'' Mr. Begin replied. ''It may be necessary to put
the plan into action at any moment.'' Mr. Sharon's Lebanese contacts were
equally incredulous: ''We'll get there,'' Mr. Sharon declared. ''Don't you
worry.'' As it happened, it was six months before the invasion finally occurred,
and Mr. Begin indirectly admitted that he was out of touch. ''I know all about
the actions,'' he blurted out at one point, ''sometimes before they are carried
out, sometimes afterward.'' The very day that Mr. Begin told the Knesset that
Israel would not attack Syria unless attacked first, Israeli forces opened an
assault on Syrian positions. As far as Mr. Begin and the cabinet knew, Israeli
forces were headed nowhere near Beirut. An Israeli newscast carried Mr. Begin's
denial of enemy reports that Israelis were already in the Lebanese capital. His
denial was followed immediately by a live report from Beirut describing the city
streets jammed with Israeli vehicles.

Messrs. Schiff and Ya'ari, assisted by their English translator, Ina Friedman,
provide the most plausible explanation yet recorded for the mystery of Mr.
Begin's personal and political collapse. Never clear on the tactics of military
operations, the aging Zionist militant had come to regard Lebanon as his own
Holy War against the enemies of the Jews. ''I feel as though I have sent an army
to Berlin to wipe out Hitler in the bunker,'' he wrote to President Reagan. Yet
when the fighting came to a halt and the costs of occupation began to mount, the
Prime Minister became strangely silent, eventually resigning and withdrawing
into a hermetic solitude. He made no move to help his successors win a close
election campaign in July 1984. At no time has he given any explanation for his
abrupt withdrawal from Israeli public life.

Gershom Schocken, venerable publisher of Israel's respected Ha'aretz newspaper,
believes that Mr. Begin's personal conclusion from the tragic miscarriage of
Israeli plans in Lebanon.'' Just before his unexpected resignation and
disappearance, we learn from the authors, Mr. Begin was engrossed in reading
minutes of the General Staff meetings held in May and June 1982, which recorded
deliberations leading up to the invasion. Only then did he learn how different
and contradictory was the picture discussed by Israel's military commanders from
the assessments provided at the same time by the Defense Minister to the Prime
Minister and the Cabinet. He was entitled to feel himself deceived by those whom
he had trusted.

In their outrage, the authors can be criticized for minimizing the relief the
Lebanon war - for all its unanticipated costs - did bring to Israel. The
destruction of the P.L.O.'s military fortress has dramatically changed Israel's
strategic posture for at least the short term. But overall, the story is a
somber one, both in its broad sweep and its fresh and illuminating detail. I
have not before seen such an intimate description of the troubled contacts
between Israelis and Maronites, their differing goals, values and operations.

The role of then-Secretary of State Alexander Haig in the planning of the
Lebanese war is reiterated here - the green or yellow, certainly not red, light
which he flashed in discussions with Mr. Sharon and other high Israelis, leading
them to believe that the United States would not cause any difficulty as they
went ahead with their war plans. We get glimpses of the nefarious drug
trafficking deals between Syrian and Lebanese politicians - bitter enemies in
public statements, partners in profiteering all the while.

The authors' conclusion about the massacres at Sabra and Shatila apply as well
to the entire ''mad adventure,'' as Israel's political leaders continue to
struggle with the legacy of Lebanon: ''And when it was all over and the terrible
truth had come out, almost everyone scrambled to pass the blame as far as it
would go rather than ask themselves what went wrong. If there is a moral to be
the painful episode,'' they conclude, ''it has yet to be acknowledged.''B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ariel Sharon and Menachem Begin in Jerusalem, 1981

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 14, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 720 words


Oct. 14, 1984

Fiction

1 THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.

2 BLOOD AND ORCHIDS, by Norman Katkov.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four Hawaiian
youths are accused of raping a Navy officer's wife.

3 MORETA: Dragonlady of Pern, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.) On
a distant planet, Humans and dragons fight a spore invasion.

4 MISTRAL'S DAUGHTER, by Judith Krantz.  (Bantam, $4.50.) The art world of the
20's and the fashion business of the 80's.

5 GRANDMASTER, by Warren Murphy and Molly Cochran. (Pinnacle, $3.95.) Two chess
prodigies in the world of espionage.

6 WHEN LOVE COMMANDS, by Jennifer Wilde.  (Avon, $3.95.) An Englishwoman in the
clutches of a sadistic Russian count.

7* FIREFOX DOWN, by Craig Thomas. (Bantam, $3.95.) A sequel about the theft of a
secret Soviet warplane.

8 THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) Three generations of a San
Francisco family.

9 HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) The struggle for money
and power in Tinseltown.

10* SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Berkley, $3.95.) The romance and ambitions of a
young man in the Old South.

11* AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Warner, $4.50.) The five-year relationship of
two women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.

12 FIRST LOVE, WILD LOVE, by Janelle Taylor.  (Zebra, $3.75.) An innocent beauty
finds rapture in the arms of a Texas cattle baron.

13 THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) King Arthur,
fulfilling a prophecy of Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.

14 SINNERS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) Sex and scandal in Hollywood.

15 THE DAYS OF ETERNITY, by Gordon Glasco.  (Bantam, $3.95.) Love survives 25
years of separation.

Nonfiction
General

1 ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) Americans flee an
Iranian prison.

2 MOTHERHOOD, THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION, by Erma Bombeck. (Dell, $3.95.)
Humor by the syndicated columnist.

3 FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of a respected
physician and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.

4 THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) The plight of men who
have never grown up: a psychologist's analysis.

5 IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from American corporations.

6 CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) A helicopter pilot's Vietnam
experiences.

7 THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.

8 INTREPID'S LAST CASE, by William Stevenson.  (Ballantine, $3.95.) How the
famous spymaster looked for a mole in British intelligence.

9* MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in
the next decade.

10 OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
autobiography.

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1 GARFIELD LOSES HIS FEET, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.

2 IN SEARCH OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson.(Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $4.95.) A
new collection of the syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.

3 NO MORE SECRETS FOR ME, by Oralee Wachter.  (Little, Brown, $4.95.) How
children can defend themselves against sexual abuse.

4 THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.

5 RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally,
$5.95.) For 1984.

The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.  *An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 15, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND TRIAL

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1111 words


In some ways, room 318 at the Federal Courthouse in Foley Square looks like the
most dignified television showroom in New York: throughout its wood-paneled
expanse - in front of the bench, to the left and right of the jury, on tables
before the defendant and the plaintiff - are video monitors.  The $120 million
libel suit that Gen. William C.  Westmoreland is bringing against CBS is all
about television, and televisions are all about.

And not only televisions, but their images, are making this one of the most
media-pervaded trials in recent memory: much of the evidence is on videotape;
videotape is interwoven, documentary-style, into the presentations of the
opposing attorneys; and the depositions taped by the two opposing lawyers with a
video crew are made available to any television source that wants them - from
the evening news broadcasts to the syndicated show- business series
''Entertainment Tonight'' - for immediate use.

This is a trial about many things, including the war in Vietnam and journalistic
techniques, but it is also a trial in which television is not only the center
but the messenger. Its face is apparent in the courtroom, where the jurors and
spectators in the gallery watch television as the attorneys present the facts of
the case, and its powerful synapses are apparent just outside the courthouse
where a broadcast truck awaits the evidence each day at the end of the session
to transmit it to the networks, to local stations, to news services, and to the
outside world.

And this week, it is likely to be even more so: on Friday, in another courtroom
in the same building, the Cable News Network, represented by Prof. Laurence H.
Tribe of the Harvard Law School, will ask a Court of Appeals panel to overturn
an earlier decision disallowing the news service from broadcasting the trial in
its entirety. A lawyer from the United States Attorney's office will argue
against him.

Using Electronic Evidence


On the day of the opening statements in the Westmoreland-CBS trial, the opposing
attorneys began finding out which electronic images they could and could not
present on the six television sets in the courtroom.

Dan M. Burt, appearing for General Westmoreland, had his technician loping
around the courtroom, checking his equipment, before summoning the videotaped
image of Dr. Walt W. Rostow, the former national security adviser under
President Johnson, in support of a complicated point; the tape, part of an
unexpurgated interview with Dr. Rostow, was not shown on the disputed 1982 ''CBS
Reports'' documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

''You will excuse me,'' said Mr. Burt, representing the adversary of one of the
pre-eminent news organizations in American broadcasting. ''As I said, we are new
at the television business.''

Freeze-Frame Images


David Boies, CBS's attorney, had a smoother time of it with his television
multi-monitored system, flashing a remote control instrument to effortlessly
freeze-frame images of electronic evidence he wanted the jury to remember. Near
the end of his first day's opening statement, Mr. Boies, coming to his close,
told the jury that in 1968 ''the same questions that were raised in the CBS
documentary were being raised by the then junior Senator of New York.''

He then primed the court television sets to present the image of Senator Robert
F. Kennedy questioning American evaluation of North Vietnamese troop estimates
in a 1968 speech. The question of North Vietnamese troop size during General
Westmoreland's tenure is an important aspect of the trial.

Judge Pierre N. Leval interrupted him; Mr. Burt objected. The judge wanted to
make sure that CBS wasn't going into an irrelevant area. Mr. Burt, however,
realized the power of the video image. ''We continue to object,'' he said, ''to
the use of Senator Kennedy, a highly emotional and well- known figure here.''
The judge, nevertheless, permitted the playing of the part of the speech he
considered germane to the case.

''I don't know whether the use of television in this trial is unprecedented,''
said Professor Tribe, ''but it certainly is unusual.''

'No Foreign Element'


The brief Professor Tribe prepared for presentation in the Court of Appeals on
Friday asserts repeatedly that this ''historic debate of pervasive national
importance'' is one for which television broadcast is particularly appropriate,
since television is, in many ways, the matter under discussion.

''Television will be no foreign element in this trial; it will pervade it,''
Professor Tribe's brief to the three- judge panel reads. ''All who are
privileged to observe the proceedings will see hours of television - its
technology, its journalism, its impact - all in the courtroom.'' Professor
Tribe, for CNN, is asking the panel for ''emergency relief'' that would lift a
ban on live television coverage from the Westmoreland-CBS courtroom.

Professor Tribe goes on to argue that ''the filming of this trial is more
important than its decision: historians and commentators on the war and on the
press will not accept the verdict of the jury and the rulings of the judge as
definitive answers.''

''They will seek lessons and conclusions by analysis of the witnesses'
testimony,'' he continues. ''The verdict may settle liability as between the
parties; but it is unlikely to settle anything for anyone else.''

Hours of Testimony Available


Those testimonies that Professor Tribe refers to are, at any rate, being
dispersed to the public already, in an almost unprecedented manner. Hours of
testimony, pre-videotaped for the trial, is available for ABC, NBC, CBS, CNN,
local stations, public television - and is showing up on the air. Evidence has
never seemed so live. Even though this case is not being broadcast, its evidence
is. ''I don't know of another example in which so much videotaped evidence has
come out,'' said Professor Tribe yesterday.

Each day, after the session, a representative for either the CBS attorneys or
General Westmoreland's walks out with the day's cassettes to a waiting video
truck. From there, the testimony is fed to any of the organizations that has
paid to join the television pool covering the trial.

''If you can imagine other trials - the Scopes trial, for example - where the
courtroom was only large enough to accommodate a small number of people,'' said
Professor Tribe. ''Before, the alternative to holding a trial in a decorous
courtroom would have been to put it in an amphitheater, make it a circus. But
now because of technology, we can choose to make it available.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

YOUNGER VOTERS TENDING TO GIVE REAGAN SUPPORT

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1658 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 15


In the late 1960's, the rallying cry for many young Americans was, ''Don't trust
anyone over 30.'' In 1984, by contrast, the youth culture appears to put its
trust in a President who is over 70.

Ronald Reagan, at the age of 73 the oldest President, is more popular with young
voters than with any other age group, according to a number of polls. Many
disagree with some of his policies, but he is coming across to young people as a
firm yet kindly grandfather figure, a leader who inspires confidence in an
uncertain world.



61-to-30 Over Mondale

According to combined figures from the two most recent New York Times/ CBS News
Polls, taken before the Presidential debate on Oct. 7, voters from the ages of
18 to 24 supported Mr. Reagan by 61 percent to 30 percent over his Democratic
challenger, Walter F. Mondale. For the rest of the electorate the margin was
narrower, 53 to 32. Polls indicated some shift in public opinion after the
Presidential and Vice- Presidential debates, but there was no indication of a
marked change in the youngest age groups.

Young people swelled the ranks of rebellious movements in the late 1960's and
early 1970's, whether the issue was civil rights or Vietnam, free speech or
student power. Their protests choked the streets, filled the headlines and left
an imprint on American political and cultural life.

In 1968, only 11 percent of 18- to 25- year-olds who were asked to state their
political preferences identified with the Republicans. In the latest Times/CBS
News poll, one-quarter of the youthful voters called themselves Republicans.

One example is Mimi Lathan, an 18- year-old freshman at Mills College in
Oakland, Calif. She parts company with the President when he advocates school
prayer and opposes the right of abortion, but she will cast her first vote for
him next month, anyway. ''I like his personality, his sense of humor, his
strength,'' she said. ''I respect the fact that he doesn't wobble.''

Rachel Schmidt, another Mills student, adds, ''The nuclear issue really scares
me, but I have faith in Reagan.''

This shift has left Democrats stunned and confused. ''We're going to introduce a
constitutional amendment making the voting age 35,'' quipped Martin D. Franks,
director of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.

His happy Republican counterpart, Representative Guy Vander Jagt, says, ''We
could be sitting on top of a historical explosion.''

Most political analysts, however, agree that both the immediate impact and the
long-term implications of this ''age gap'' are uncertain. Democrats take comfort
in the notoriously poor political participation among the young, some of whom
move frequently and lack community roots and loyalties.

But Horace Busby, a political commentator, warns his fellow Democrats, ''You
can't feel the pulse on campuses today without sensing something that was not
there before, this determination to vote.''

Personal Popularity Cited

Republicans see the trend as a harbinger of long-run gains. ''All voter studies
I've read,'' said Lee Atwater, deputy manager of Mr. Reagan's campaign,
''indicate that the first-time vote is crucial in determining voting patterns
for the rest of your life.''

Many analysts argue, however, that Mr. Reagan's popularity is based mainly on
personal traits and that young people have not formed permanent ties to the
Republican Party. They point out that many new voters, particularly women, like
Miss Lathan and Miss Schmidt, disagree sharply with the President and his party
on such issues as abortion and nuclear arms.

Moreover, many political scientists believe that today's young people are less
likely to form rigid voting patterns. More mobility, higher education levels and
weaker party organizations have all helped produce greater independence among
the young.

Sense of Strength Is Key

In more than a hundred interviews around the country, most youthful Reagan
supporters denied making a long- term commitment to the Republican Party.
Patricia Kelly, a 19-year-old sales clerk in Orlando, Fla., spoke for many when
she said: ''Allegiance to a political party? None whatsoever! I think it is
coming to the point where we don't need them.''

What is not in doubt is Mr. Reagan's extraordinary appeal to young voters, and
as the two students at Mills College indicated, the core of that appeal is the
President's ability to convey a sense of strength and confidence. This appeal is
particularly powerful to voters with limited political experience.

''If you're 25 and under, you fully visualize only two American Presidents,
Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter,'' said Ann F. Lewis, political director of the
Democratic National Committee. ''The fact is, they are told every day by the
media that Ronald Reagan is a success and Jimmy Carter was not.''

But young voters identify with more than Mr. Reagan's personal success. The
President has fulfilled one of the deepest needs of the young by giving them, in
Mrs. Lewis's phrase, ''something to root for.''

Carter 'Let Everybody Down'

Rick Johnson, a 26-year-old shipyard worker in Pascagoula, Miss., put it this
way: ''I was very discouraged with the Carter Administration. There was lack of
pride in the country. He always talked down about America. This country is not
perfect, but it's the best in the world, and I don't think Carter had anything
good to say about it. Reagan picked everybody up.''

Mr. Johnson's wife, Debbie, a technical aide at the same shipyard, added that
Mr. Carter ''let everybody down'' when he failed to rescue the American hostages
in Iran. ''If Reagan were President, he would have gotten them out somehow,''
she said. ''He showed that in Grenada.''

For many of these new voters, the only American military action they remember is
Grenada, a successful venture that posed no threat to their own security. They
have never experienced the military draft, and the Vietnam era is something they
hear about in history class.

No Memory of Rights Battles

All that many young voters know about Mr. Mondale is that he was Vice President
under Mr. Carter, which they see as a burden. The Minnesotan's long record in
the Senate is a blur, as are the battles fought by his generation for civil
rights and social programs.

''They have not seen government as the solution, they see it as a problem,''
said Mrs. Lewis, the Democratic official. ''They take for granted the government
programs that make their lives pleasant and possible. They only see government
as a source of taxes.''

Republican strategists agree that the other major motive behind the youthful
swing to Mr. Reagan is economic self- interest. As Mr. Atwater, the Reagan
campaign official, said of young voters, ''Economics is central to their whole
agenda, which is based on success.''

That view is reflected by voters like Steven Molon, an engineering student at
the Drexel Institute of Technology in Philadelphia, who said, ''Reagan hasn't
been good for students, in cutting loans and grants, but his policies will mean
more jobs in the future.''

Goal Is Financial Well-Being

Matt Andronis, a 24-year-old department store clerk in Klamath Falls, Ore.,
adds, ''I just vote for whoever I think will be best for myself.''

A continuing national survey of college freshmen by Alexander Astin of the
University of California at Los Angeles bears this out. In 1970, only 39 percent
of the entering students said being ''well-off financially'' was an important
goal. In 1983, 69 percent said it was.

Mr. Reagan does have his critics among the young. Many feel vulnerable to
economic pressures and need governmental help to get through school and assure
their eventual success. William Hall, an accounting student at the Oregon
Technical Institute, explained his vote by saying, ''I think with Mondale you
have more of a chance to work your way up.''

Less Support Among Women

The strongest dissent from the President comes from young women. Men in the
18-to-24 category favor Mr. Reagan by 69 percent to 21 percent in the two most
recent Times/CBS News Polls, but women back him by 53 percent to 38 percent.

Dotty Lynch, a Democratic poll taker, sees a ''real difference'' between the
parties on issues that matter to many young women, including the proposed equal
rights amendment and the use of government to fight discrimination. Polls, she
said, show that issues of ''fairness and compassion are definitely more
important to women.''

A good example is Lora A. Potter, a 24-year-old teacher of retarded children in
East Providence, R.I., who explained her vote for Mr. Mondale this way: ''Reagan
is the big reason, his total uncaring attitude about anyone in the lower-income
brackets. He's cutting many social services to the point where people who need
them aren't getting them.''

Opinion surveys also show that women are less prone to take risks, and while Mr.
Reagan's foreign policy swells the pride of many young men, it worries voters
like Jill Freiss, a student at the Philadelphia College of Textiles and Science.
''I don't like Reagan,'' she said. ''I'm afraid he'll get us into a war.''

Mrs. Ferraro Is a Factor

Moreover, Mr. Mondale's selection of Geraldine A. Ferraro as his running mate
clearly pulled young women like Luann Belmonte, a typist in Boston, into the
Democratic camp. ''With a woman running for Vice President, we can't go back to
a male-controlled world now,'' she said.

But for many young voters Representative Ferraro has not been able to erase the
powerful imprint of their own experience and their deep yearning for something
to feel good about.

''Reagan represents the American ideals that are most important to me, the true
American spirit,'' said Janet Patterson, 24, a nurse in Jackson, Miss. ''That
means that America always stands strong as a leader nation, that you can believe
in your nation.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of cheerleaders (page A25)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ROSTOW SAYS JOHNSON WAS INFORMED OF DISPUTE ON VIETNAM FOE'S FORCES

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1271 words


Walt W. Rostow, President Johnson's Special Assistant for National Security
Affairs, testified in Federal Court here yesterday that as early as a year
before the Tet offensive of 1968, he informed the President of an unresolved
dispute among intelligence analysts over the scope of enemy strength in South
Vietnam.

Mr. Rostow, whose long answers often amounted to a discourse on the methods used
by the Johnson White House to keep itself informed on the progress of the war,
took the stand as the first witness for the plaintiff in the $120 million libel
suit against CBS by Gen. William C. Westmoreland.

As an aide whose office was ''30 seconds'' from Mr. Johnson's - with ''a little
bit of running'' - Mr. Rostow said he had firsthand knowledge of what President
Johnson was told about such issues as the intelligence ''debate,'' statements by
General Westmoreland and the rate of North Vietnamese infiltration into South
Vietnam before the Tet offensive in January 1968. All are issues in the trial.

General Westmoreland, who was commander of United States forces in Vietnam from
1964 to 1968, contends that CBS, in a 1982 CBS Reports documentary titled ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' libeled him by saying he had deceived
President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of
enemy forces in South Vietnam in the year prior to the Tet offensive.

General Westmoreland specifically accused CBS and several other defendants of
saying that the general had arbitrarily set a ceiling of 300,000 on enemy
strength, suppressed reports from his officers of a higher enemy presence and a
higher rate of North Vietnamese infiltration than was made known, and engineered
a cover-up of the truth after the offensive.

Argue Over Evidence


Mr. Rostow, now a professor of political economy at the University of Texas,
took the stand more than two hours after court began at 10 A.M. Most of the
morning session was consumed by lawyers' arguments before Judge Pierre N. Leval
over the admissibility of various cables, memoranda and other documents.

Judge Leval, who had earlier predicted a trial of 10 weeks to four months,
warned the lawyers that it could take ''12 years'' if they did not take greater
pains, outside of court hours, to agree on potential exhibits.

The judge underscored a theme he has sounded since jury selection began last
Tuesday - that the case does not pivot on whether President Johnson was actually
deceived by General Westmoreland but whether the general ''sought to deceive''
him by providing ''bad, politically-motivated, arbitrary data.''

Although ''it may be interesting historically,'' the judge said, it was
irrelevant to the case whether the President was ''able to differentiate his
many sources.'' On those grounds, the judge ruled out several documents that, he
said, tended to establish what the White House knew rather than what General
Westmoreland's role was in furnishing the information.

Rostow Memo Excluded


The documents were offered by Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, often
over the objection of David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, who began cross-examining
Mr. Rostow late yesterday afternoon.

Among the documents excluded was a secret memorandum from Mr. Rostow to the
President on Jan. 20, 1967 that began: ''As you know, a debate continues on the
absolute size of the enemy order of battle in Viet Nam.''

The order of battle is the official military listing of enemy strength.

Before Mr. Rostow testified, Mr. Burt drew the jury's attention to several
statements made by Mike Wallace, the chief correspondent on the CBS documentary,
in his narration on the program. In one, Mr. Wallace spoke of General
Westmoreland's ''dilemma'' in having to take ''bad news'' to the President. In
another, Mr. Wallace said General Westmoreland admitted that he ''chose not to
inform the Congress, the President, not even the Joint Chiefs of Staff, of the
evidence collected by his intelligence chief, evidence which indicated a far
larger enemy.''

Mr. Rostow, a bespectacled figure in a gray pin-striped suit, testified that
General Westmoreland was under no pressure to provide good news to the
President.

1967 Meeting Recalled


Mr. Rostow recalled, under questioning by Mr. Burt, a meeting he attended at the
White House in April 1967 among General Westmoreland; President Johnson; Robert
S. McNamara, the Secretary of Defense; Dean Rusk, the Secretary of State;
Richard Helms, the Director of Central Intelligence; and Gen. Earle Wheeler, the
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Mr. Rostow, speaking in a low, measured voice, said the meeting ''focused rather
sharply'' on whether 200,000 additional United States forces, which General
Westmoreland was seeking, would shorten the war.

General Westmoreland, Mr. Rostow said, was asked for his view and explained that
''we were making slow progress'' but that he ''couldn't guarantee'' a date by
which the enemy would ''desist from aggression.'' When pressed on the subject,
perhaps by Mr. McNamara, Mr. Rostow testified, General Westmoreland said that
the war would last ''something like five years at the present level'' of United
States forces and ''something like two years'' with a large infusion of fresh
troops.

''He rather reluctantly gave in to offering a reasonably concrete time
dimension,'' Mr. Rostow testified.

Script for Documentary Read


Mr. Burt then read aloud a passage from the documentary in which Mr. Wallace
referred to that April 1967 meeting and said: ''But on this day Westmoreland had
mostly good news to offer his Commander in Chief. The Vietcong's army, he said,
had leveled off at 285,000 men. And best of all, he told the President, the
long-awaited crossover point had been reached. We were now killing or capturing
Vietcong at a rate faster than they could be put back in the field. We were
winning a war of attrition.''

Mr. Rostow said Mr. Wallace's statement did not agree with his ''memory of the
meeting or the tone of it.''

''I do not recall such a 'good news' tone,'' Mr. Rostow said.

Nor, Mr. Rostow testified, did he remember General Westmoreland saying that the
enemy forces had leveled off at 285,000, or that a ''crossover had been
reached'' or that ''we were winning a war of attrition.''

Interview Distributed


During a break in Mr. Rostow's testimony, John Scanlon, a public relations
representative for CBS, gave reporters the transcript of unused portions of an
interview CBS conducted with General Westmoreland for the broadcast. In the
excerpt, which appears to deal with the same meeting that Mr. Rostow recalled,
the general says that he advised the President that enemy forces had stabilized
at 285,000.

Mr. Rostow testified that ''home guard'' forces of Vietcong had been dropped
from the order of battle in November 1967, not to minimize the strength of the
enemy, as the documentary asserted, but because their numbers were uncertain and
they were not a major offensive threat.

He said, too, that President Johnson and other senior Government officials had
used top secret information supplied by the National Security Agency to closely
monitor North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam in the months before
the Tet offensive. The documentary maintained that General Westmoreland's
command ''systematically blocked'' reports of mounting North Vietnamese
infiltration.

Mr. Rostow, who will be further cross-examined today, was interviewed for the
CBS documentary but none of his remarks were used on the program.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 16, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ORGANIZATIONS AID OFFICIALS WHO BELIEVE THEY WERE DEFAMED

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1483 words


A number of nonprofit organizations are now offering legal and financial support
to people who believe their reputations have been unfairly damaged, adding to
the financial and editorial pressure on the nation's press from the increase in
multimillion-dollar libel suits by public officials.

Such officials have generally shied away from libel actions since a 1964 ruling
by the Supreme Court making it much more difficult for them to recover damages
for injury to their reputations. But Henry R. Kaufman of the Libel Defense
Resource Center, which monitors actions against the press, says officials seem
to be increasingly willing to tackle the legal challenge and expense, armed with
new resources.

For example, the Capital Legal Foundation, a public-interest law firm, expects
to spend $2.5 million to represent Gen. William Westmoreland in his $120 million
libel action against CBS, according to Dan M. Burt, Capital's president. General
Westmoreland contends that he was falsely accused in a 1982 ''CBS Reports''
broadcast of deceiving President Johnson and others about enemy troop strength
in the Vietnam War. CBS has not stated its defense costs, but Chad Milton, a
libel insurance executive not connected with the case, estimates that the
network will spend ''many millions.''

The high cost of defending such suits is alarming to large news organizations
and potentially devastating to smaller ones, even with the protection of libel
insurance, according to news and insurance executives.

''The cost of libel defense alone is enough to intimidate and silence many
reporters and publishers on controversial issues,'' says Gene Roberts, executive
editor of The Philadelphia Inquirer, who also cites the ''chilling effect'' on
newsrooms of the extended pretrial discovery process in which plaintiff's
attorneys sometimes question reporters and editors for days.

Unsubstantiated Charges

But the organizations devoting all or part of their resources to support of
libel actions say that news coverage of public officials has become too
aggressive, that charges damaging people's reputations are printed or broadcast
without sufficient substantiation.

''We do want to chill certain types of speech,'' said Michael McDonald, general
counsel of the Washington-based American Legal Foundation. ''We don't want
reporters to be able to engage in character assassination.''

In mid-August the foundation opened its Libel Prosecution Resource Center, which
is assembling a 50-state reference network of plaintiff libel lawyers to offer
legal assistance to people who want to pursue libel actions.

The Capital Legal Foundation, according to Mr. Burt, hopes that a victory in the
Westmoreland case will make it easier for people to bring libel actions by
prompting lawyers to take such cases with their fees contingent on winning the
suit, as is the practice in many other suits involving personal injury.

These organizations and others supporting legal actions against the press get
much of their money from politically conservative foundations and corporations,
according to Wesley McCune of Group Research, which monitors such conservative
groups. Among those supporting these organizations, whose efforts are not
limited to libel work, have been the Lilly Endowment, the Scaife Family Trust,
and the Fluor Corporation, a California construction company, Mr. McCune said.

Effort to Clear Names

Accuracy in Media, a press-monitoring group that often criticizes what it sees
as liberal bias and errors in reporting by news organizations, has raised about
$40,000 to support libel actions, according to Reed Irvine, the chairman. Mr.
Irvine has said that AIM's contributions are not intended to encourage such
suits, but to help individuals clear their names through them for lack of an
alternative.

AIM contributed about $10,000 to Dr. Carl A. Galloway in a slander suit against
CBS regarding allegations of insurance fraud, which Dr. Galloway lost and is now
appealing. AIM has also made contributions of several thousand dollars in a few
other libel cases, though Mr. Irvine says he has no immediate plans to raise
additional money to support libel plaintiffs.

But a relatively new organization, Challenge, hopes to have a strategy in place
by year's end that could mean a significant effort to raise funds for public
officials bringing libel suits, according to Richard Lansdale, the president.

Highly publicized libel actions, such as General Westmoreland's, have
contributed to a steady increase in such suits in recent years, according to
libel insurance executives. Insurance companies will not release figures on the
number of libel cases they handle each year, but Mr. Kaufman of the Libel
Defense Resource Center says hundreds are now filed annually.

Intentional Attempt to Chill

In some cases, news executives have charged that the libel actions by public
officials were calculated efforts to inhibit reporting.

Yesterday, for example, McClatchy Newspapers sued Senator Paul Laxalt of Nevada
for $6 million, charging that the $250 million libel suit he filed against the
California-based chain, involving allegations of illegal practices at a casino
he once owned, was really an effort to limit discussion about him rather than a
legitimate attempt to recover damages. C.K. McClatchy, president of the company
and editor of The Sacramento Bee, earlier charged in an editorial that the
Senator was trying to intimidate the news media.

Through an aide, Senator Laxalt has said he will seek financial aid for his
case, but has not yet done so.

Libel suits by public officials were a relative rarity until recently because of
the difficulty in meeting the standards the Supreme Court set in 1964 and later.
Public officials or others deemed to be ''public figures,'' unlike other
plaintiffs in defamation suits, must prove that a libelous statement was false
and that the defendant knew it was false or published it in ''reckless
disregard'' of the truth. Trial judges have frequently decided that this
''actual malice'' has not been evident and have dismissed suits before trial.

Juries Favor Individual

But judges have been increasingly inclined to allow libel suits to go to trial,
and juries are likely to find against news organizations. The Libel Defense
Resource Center says news organizations lost well over half of 63 libel cases
brought to trial from mid- 1982 to mid-1984.

According to Mr. Kaufman, news organizations are increasingly tempted to settle
cases out of court, to avoid heavy defense costs and the possibility of a large
judgments.

Since 1980, juries have awarded damages of over $1 million in two dozen libel
cases, according to the Libel Defense Resource Center, though all those
judgments have been reduced by post-trial decisions.

The ultimate odds, however, still heavily favor news organizations. The center
estimates that over 90 percent of libel suits are decided in favor of news
organizations, largely through dismissal before trial or judicial review.

Insurance Costs Mount

According to Mr. Kaufman, libel plaintiffs usually understand the odds against
winning in the end, but bring suit anyway. ''There is a certain public
vindication that comes from just bringing the claim,'' he said.

To win, news organizations are paying a high price.

Libel insurance rates for most of the nation's daily newspapers were doubled
this year, and as of Aug. 1, many papers are required by their insurance carrier
to shoulder 20 percent of the legal costs beyond an initial deductible.

''Policies that used to have a deductible of from $10,000 to $25,000 could go to
$50,000 per libel action and for a large daily it could go from $50,000 to
$100,000,'' said Lawrence Worrall, president of Media Professional Insurance, a
major underwriter. ''Many smaller media companies like city magazines are just
not in a financial position to get involved in heavy investigative stories
anymore, and an individual author or freelancer may have a hard time getting
libel insurance at all.''

Annual rates range from a few thousand dollars for a medium-sized daily
newspaper in a rural area to tens of thousands for large communications
companies.

Long Pretrial Process

Insurance companies and news executives are becoming particularly wary of libel
suits brought by public officials and public figures because a prolonged - and
expensive - discovery process has become almost standard. In seeking to prove
knowledge of falsity or reckless disregard of the truth, plaintiff's attorneys
are sometimes spending months probing the motives and actions of reporters and
editors.

In turn, defense lawyers are taking lengthy depositions from plaintiffs.
Attorneys for both sides must be present for the deposition process, and the
cost to both sides can be staggering.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR SHULTZ PLAN ON VIETNAM PRISONER RELEASE

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 208 words


To the Editor:


We desire to express our appreciation to Secretary of State Shultz and others in
the Administration involved in the proposal for special handling of the
resettlement from Vietnam of political prisoners confined in so-called
''re-education camps,'' as outlined in the Secretary of State's Sept. 11
statement to the Senate Judiciary Committee.

The proposal should go far to test the reported willingness of the Vietnamese
authorities to release and permit the departure of these unfortunates, who have
now been confined for more than nine years for no crime other than their
participation in the struggle for the freedom and independence of their
homeland. Those of us who served with and among these people, and came to know
and respect them, feel with special poignancy the debt that the United States
owes to itself and to these victims to do all within our power to relieve their
continued suffering.  This would be an especially fitting tribute to the memory
of Ellsworth Bunker, who for so long led our effort to preserve the freedom of
South Vietnam.

PHILIP C. HABIB MAXWELL D. TAYLOR CHARLES S. WHITEHOUSE U. ALEXIS JOHNSON ANDREW
J. GOODPASTER Washington, Oct. 2, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition


;
WHY WE NEED THE SGT. YORK AIR-DEFENSE GUN

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 667 words


To the Editor:

Your editorial ''A Lemon the Size of the Pentagon'' (Oct. 2) makes perfectly
clear The Times's views on the Sergeant York Division Air Defense Gun (Divad).

Frankly, we are frustrated by the cascade of inaccurate or misleading press
reports on the progress of the Divad program. No matter how many times the
charges are answered, they appear again and again, and seem now to be engraved
in stone. Your editorial just chisels a little deeper.

But this response is not to argue your editorial point of view. An important
defense issue and billions of dollars are involved, and we have a responsibility
to the public to set the record straight.

Let me address the specific points of misconception or inaccuracy we found in
the editorial.


* The Army did not ''get the idea'' for Divad from the Soviet Shilka. Like every
other weapons system in development, the ''idea'' is based on analysis of
threat. At present, we have no air-defense gun system adequate to address an
enemy's capability to attack our front-line maneuver forces. We urgently need
such a capability.


* It is a false conception that optically aimed air-defense weapons are more
effective than computer-aided radar. ''Kentucky windage'' is wholly inadequate
against modern, high-performance aircraft. We cannot design a gun system for the
occasional lucky shot. Short-range, optically aimed gun systems would be
overwhelmed by modern, close air-attack aircraft, according to current analyses.


* Cheap systems of proven combat effectiveness are inadequate to counter modern
Soviet air-attack capabilities. Old, proven, simple; those descriptions must
finally be put aside. They do not relate to the facts, which are that opposing
aircraft are numerous, fast, sophisticated and deadly.

* Divad can shoot down manuevering planes. Test data show Divad can successfully
engage high-performance aircraft in maneuvering turns up to 2 G's. But, more,
aircraft that are pitching and turning to avoid being targeted cannot deliver
ordnance on our troops.

* It simply is not true that ''almost anything can shoot down a helicopter,''
and the U.S. experience with downed helicopters in Vietnam provides a false and
useless comparison. Our helicopters in Vietnam were light, thin-skinned
aircraft, operating low and slow, frequently within a few hundred yards of enemy
forces. That situation has nothing to do with present capabilities or the modern
battlefield, for which we must design our weapons. Soviet attack helicopters are
heavily armored and can deliver accurate fire from thousands of yards, far
outside the range of small arms.


* In a recent limited test, a nonflyable helicopter was used in a low-altitude,
live-fire test. Reflectors were placed on the simulated hovering helicopter
target because it was inoperable and therefore could not produce the radar
signature of a real hovering helicopter. In previous tests, Divad had
successfully engaged low hovering helicopters, and we are confident further
testing will reaffirm that capability beyond question.


* Ford won the competition with General Dynamics because, in the final analysis
of many factors, the Ford system was superior.


* The Army disagrees with the Department of Defense Inspector General audit and
has so testified before Congress. The same is true of the allegation that test
data were misrepresented to the Defense Systems Acquisition Review Council.
This, too, the Army has denied explicitly in Congressional testimony.

Finally, you ask why doesn't the Pentagon care? You need not simply accept my
assertion that we care passionately about building good equipment. We have not
done a good enough job of explaining the Divad program, and we would welcome the
opportunity to do that. As a minimum, perhaps we can stop recycling the same
myths and misconceptions. Your editorial is a case in point.

(Maj. Gen.) C. D. BUSSEY Chief of Public Affairs Department of the Army
Washington, Oct. 10, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A ROLE FOR ADVOCACY AMONG THE CLERGY

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 307 words


To the Editor:


The religion and politics discussion would be helped by a distinction. It's
absence is evident in the question to Walter F. Mondale in his debate with
President Reagan as to why he seemed to object only to ''conservative
ministers'' and not to those ''involved in the civil rights movement, in the
anti-Vietnam War demonstrations'' or to ''black preachers who've been so
involved in American politics'' - as well as in the answer given (news story
Oct. 8).

In the civil rights movement, ministers and others were asking the Government to
live up to its own charter. The appeal was to consistency and to respect for the
Constitution. The aim was good government. Right-to-life ministers, by contrast,
are critical of a constitutionally protected freedom and would amend the
Constitution. The appeal is to values and definitions transcending the
Constitution.

When members of the clergy either urge a strong defense or oppose a war, so long
as the arguments are directed toward establishing what is in the nation's best
interest, the country benefits. Such advocacy is an exercise in good
citizenship, whatever the ultimate source of its motivation.

We would be poorer if persons of faith did not call upon us to recognize and to
respond to values beyond the Constitution, whether that be to uphold human
rights abroad, when to do so conflicts with our national self- interest, or to
recognize the rights of the unborn.

Of the advocates in both cases, however, we have the right to expect special
signs and assurances that they recognize and respect the values of our civil,
indeed secular, society. And in both cases we should expect an awareness of the
need for the kind of balancing of rights that is the foundation of ours and of
every civil society.

(Rev.) JOHN L. POWELL Princeton, N.J., Oct. 10, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE CALLS REAGAN NAIVE ON MILITARY MATTERS

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, Oct. 16


In a prelude to his coming debate on foreign policy with President Reagan,
Walter F. Mondale today sharply attacked Mr. Reagan as having a ''naive and
primitive notion of national strength'' for the last 30 years.

Mr. Mondale, replying in a speech to a charge by Mr. Reagan that the Democratic
Presidential candidate had been weak in his support of the military, suggested
that Mr. Reagan was so misguided that he had attacked every President since John
F. Kennedy as being weak.

Earlier, Mr. Mondale said that Vice President Bush ''should stand up like a man
and apologize'' for a remark he made about the Democrat. ''George, apologize get
it over with, stop embarrassing yourself this way and you'll feel better the
next day,'' Mr. Mondale declared.

He then described Mr. Bush as a ''political hit-and-run driver.'' ''He's hit us
with a false charge,'' Mr. Mondale said. ''He doesn't have an answer and he
doesn't have the manhood to apologize.''

Still angered over Mr. Bush's contention that Mr. Mondale had said that American
marines killed in the terrorist attack on their barracks in Beirut last year had
died ''in shame,'' the Democratic Presidential candidate rejected out of hand
Mr. Bush's justification for the charge, which include references to a
dictionary and newspaper and magazine articles.

Apparently intent on getting a public apology, Mr. Mondale said that Mr. Bush
had offered only ''lame excuses.''

In his speech at Stanford University, Mr. Mondale posed a series of rhetorical
questions to an enthusiastic audience of students that were designed to show
that Mr. Reagan's Presidential policies had not strengthened the position of the
United States.

Support From StudentsDid it strengthen America to put Americans in Lebanon, in a
vulnerable spot against the advice of the Joint Chiefs of Staff?'' Mr. Mondale
asked, as the students replied in a vigorous chorus of ''No.''

''Did it strengthen us to proclaim that American intelligence is weak -
practically an open invitation to terrorists? Did it strengthen America to
announce, as he did, that the United States was strategically inferior to the
Soviets, when we are not?''

Mr. Mondale continued: ''Does it strengthen us to have 25,000 more Soviet
warheads aimed at us than four years ago? Does it strengthen us now that there
are Soviet submarines along our coast that can nuke the White House in six
minutes?''

Mr. Mondale said that Mr. Reagan wanted to deploy the MX missile, which, he
said, would be like a ''sitting duck,'' and had spent $25 billion on the B-1
bomber that the Russians had been learning for 15 years to shoot down.

''This is a a record of profound confusion,'' Mr. Mondale concluded.

Mr. Mondale asserted on arrival here that he would carry Mr. Reagan's home
state. Several polls have shown the Democrat to be within 10 percentage points
of the President in California.

Mr. Mondale recalled that Mr. Reagan had termed President Kennedy ''weak'' for
''not taking what he called the final step'' in the Cuban missile strike. Mr.
Reagan had leveled the same criticism against Lyndon B. Johnson for not using
atomic weapons in Vietnam, Mr. Mondale said. Mr. Reagan had also criticized
Gerald R. Ford and Henry A. Kissinger, he said, as ''bowing and scraping'' to
the Soviet Union. And he had opposed Richard M. Nixon's calls for the
ratification of the SALT 1 and defensive missile treaties.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Mondale

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 17, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND DEPUTY REBUTS CBS ASSERTIONS

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1040 words


Robert W. Komer, the chief civilian deputy to Gen. William C. Westmoreland in
South Vietnam in 1967, yesterday contradicted an assertion by CBS that the
general had suppressed a report by his intelligence chief on the size of
Vietcong irregular forces.

Taking the stand in Federal District Court in Manhattan as the second witness
for the general in his $120 million libel suit against CBS, Mr. Komer said he
was present at a strategy meeting in Saigon on May 28, 1967 when General
Westmoreland ordered that the report be passed on to Ambassador Ellsworth
Bunker, other top officials and the Central Intelligence Agency.

Estimates of the size and military capability of these forces - guerrilla and
''home guard'' - are a major issue in the lawsuit brought by the general as the
result of CBS Reports documentary that was broadcast in January 1982.

Rebuts CBS Documentary


Mr. Komer also said in his testimony that he attended a briefing at which,
according to the documentary, the general was supposed to have expressed alarm
about the higher numbers in the intelligence chief's report and said: ''What am
I going to tell the press? What am I going to tell the Congress? What am I going
to tell the President?''

Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, asked Mr. Komer whether he recalled
those words being spoken.

As David Boies, the lawyer for CBS rose to object, Mr. Komer replied in a firm,
clear voice: ''No, sir.''

''Too late now,'' Judge Pierre N. Leval told Mr. Boies.

As if to underscore the importance of his witness, Mr. Burt addressed him as
''Mr. Ambassador,'' a rank given Mr. Komer by President Johnson. At one stage,
Mr. Burt asked Mr. Komer whether his license plate in Vietnam carried any
special markings.

''Four stars,'' Mr. Komer said, pausing. Then, with a glance at the smiling
plaintiff, he said:

''They weren't the same kind of stars General Westmoreland had but they were
useful when I had to go down to the presidential palace.'' The reporters and
spectators who crowded into the courtoom broke into the most sustained laughter
of the trial.

Komer Was Not Interviewed


Mr. Komer was not interviewed for the CBS documentary, titled ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

General Westmoreland, the commander of American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, charged that the broadcast libeled him by saying that he had deceived
President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of the
enemy forces in Vietnam. The documentary alleged a ''conspiracy at the highest
levels of military intelligence'' to minimize enemy strength to make it appear
that the United States was winning a ''war of attrition.''

One of the general's specific charges was that CBS and other defendants -
including Mike Wallace, the broadcast's narrator, and George Crile, its producer
- had falsely accused him of ''suppressing'' a report on enemy strength by Maj.
Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, who was his intelligence chief until June 1, 1967.
This report, which contained higher estimates than previously for Vietcong
irregulars, was the focus of Mr. Komer's testimony yesterday afternoon.

CBS based its statement about the report on interviews with intelligence
officers who served in Vietnam in 1967, and those officers are expected to
testify later.

On the broadcast, General Westmoreland said he ultimately rejected General
McChristian's report because he thought it was ''specious.''

Discounted 'Home Guard' Forces


He had also concluded, he said, that the ''home guard'' forces, perhaps
numbering more than 100,000 by various counts in 1967, no longer belonged in the
order of battle because they consisted mainly of teen-agers and old men who were
often unarmed and posed no offensive military threat. The order of battle is the
official military count of enemy strength.

General Westmoreland said, too, in the broadcast that reporters in Vietnam and
''the people in Washington'' were not ''sophisticated enough to understand''
that the larger ''home guard'' figures proposed by General McChristian
represented only a better estimate of their numbers, not a real increase in
their strength.

Mr. Komer said that from the time President Johnson made him responsible for the
so-called pacification effort in Vietnam in 1966, he was concerned about the
reliability of intelligence estimates of the Vietcong irregular forces. That
concern, he said, was shared by General McChristian, who sent him the report at
issue in late May, 1967.

In the report, which was introduced into evidence, General McChristian estimated
that the ''home guard'' forces numbered about 124,000, as opposed to the figure
in the current order of battle of about 70,000. General McChristian noted,
however, that the figures for the ''home guard'' were not as firm as the
estimates on the guerrillas and that the ''home guard'' were only ''marginally
effective'' as a combat force.

Sought Fuller Background


When General McChristian first ''briefed'' General Westmoreland and others on
the new figures on May 20, 1967, Mr. Komer said, General Westmoreland asked his
intelligence chief to ''go back and develop more fully the background on how
these figures were arrived at.''

At the next meeting, a week later, Mr. Komer testified, General Westmoreland
''accepted the results of the briefing'' and asked that they be forwarded to the
mission council headed by Ambassador Bunker, where they were eventually
discussed.

Mr. Komer referred to the official minutes of the second briefing by General
McChristian, which stated that General Westmoreland had ''directed'' a wide
distribution of the new figures with a view toward sending them to ''higher
headquarters and Washington.''

The fate of General McChristian's report is expected to be further explored
today, when Mr. Komer continues his testimony.

Yesterday morning, Walt W. Rostow, President Johnson's Special Assistant for
National Security Affairs, completed his testimony. He said the President was
aware, by August 1967, that ''home guard'' forces were then being estimated at
about 120,000, even though the category were to be dropped from the order of
battle.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 18, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE DEMOCRATS SERVE YOUNG VOTERS

BYLINE: By Gary Hart ;
Gary Hart, Democrat, is Senator from Colorado.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 998 words


People with long memories may recall that I ran for President earlier this year.
Our campaign became a cause for Americans who had given up on politics or who
had not been involved before. Many of these voters were young, some were
professionals and many came from outside the traditional constituencies of the
Democratic Party.

In the last month, disturbing news reports have indicated that younger voters
are getting interested in politics again - but planning to vote Republican. It
is said that this is in their self-interest while voting Democratic is not. I
strongly disagree with this analysis and predict a far different voting pattern
among new, younger voters this November.

I believe this group, along with others who are young in spirit, will make the
difference in the contest between Reagan-Bush and Mondale- Ferraro. The election
and the future of the Democratic Party rest with them.

What distinguishes these voters? They believe in opportunity, not hand- outs.
They believe in giving the free enterprise system a chance but want to see
polluters regulated. They have compassion for others but want a Government that
works efficiently. They are for a strong defense but are absolutely opposed to a
nuclear build- up that threatens our security.

They are also distinguished by their

experience. An earlier generation experienced the nation's great triumphs -
overcoming the Depression and defeating Fascism. Younger Americans have been
shaped more by tragedies - assassinations, Vietnam and Watergate - that have
produced a certain skepticism of Government.  Other generations have seen their
heroes immortalized after lives rich in achievement. In contrast, this
generation's heroes - the Kennedys and Martin Luther King - were cut down with
life and promise still ahead. This produced in many a reluctance to get involved
again - a sense of hopelessness about the political process.  Other generations
found economic and political influence in groups - especially trade
associations, labor unions and political parties. Many younger voters lack this
tradition of shared struggle. This makes them more independent. They also came
of age during an information explosion that provided a variety of sources from
which to draw ideas. They are less reliant on their company president, union
leader or political boss - and are more self-reliant.  These young voters care
about those in need, but they are skeptical of Government when it perpetuates
its own failures. Whether something is liberal or conservative is less important
to them than whether it works.  Most of all, these voters are attuned to the
future. They're concerned about issues that will define the quality of life in
the years ahead - the environment, the nuclear freeze and struggles for
minorities' and women's rights. They are the political vanguard and they want to
believe that our best days are still to come.  What will they do in 1984? Ronald
Reagan does not deserve their support. Walter Mondale does. He has earned it,
and our future demands it.

Consider three major issues - arms control, deficits and personal liberty.

Our arms control policy is monopolized today by hardliners who confuse diplomacy
with weakness and fundamentally reject the negotiation process. In four years,
these arms- racers have closed every opening, derailed every effort and ruined
every chance for an agreement. As new, young voters, who overwhelmingly support
a verifiable, bilateral freeze, come to understand this, they cannot help but
turn to Walter Mondale and Geraldine Ferraro, who are not afraid to negotiate
with Moscow.

On the deficit, too, policy is now imposed by a fringe group - in this case a
group that is taxing the future to pay for the past. The President thinks young
voters are so shortsighted that they will ignore these monstrous deficits - if
he can just distract them with a few extra dollars to spend now. He is wrong.
Debt may be an abstraction. Interest is not. In the last four years, the
interest payments on the debt have reached $110 billion a year. By 1989,
interest alone will soar to more than $200 billion a year - four times higher
than when Mr. Reagan took over.

In contrast, in choosing to spell out his plans to deal with the deficit, Walter
Mondale chose the path not of least resistance but of highest responsibility.
That is something every generation respects.

In a third area, religion and politics, Ronald Reagan has alarmed
independent-minded voters by inviting representatives of one small group of
Protestants to prescribe our morals and beliefs. Mr. Reagan apparently
interprets religious freedom to mean freedom for one narrow segment of the
people to impose its beliefs on the rest. That, too, young voters know, is a
threat to our future - to the elemental liberties that stand at the heart of the
American tradition.

Finally and perhaps most important, the Reagan campaign makes an entirely wrong
assumption about today's young voters - that they are self-centered and
self-indulgent, that they care nothing for others. Here, the Administration is
merely projecting its own values, and once young voters recognize this, I
believe they will reject the Republican ticket.  The youth I worked with in my
campaign understand the difference between skepticism and cynicism, between true
opportunity and sheer greed. They know our society is not made up of 250 million
greedy individuals and that we won't become ''better off'' one person at a time.
New voters have a fateful choice this November - a historic chance. They can
choose an Administration that is blatantly manipulative and contemptuous of them
- a tired Administration that conceals and compounds old problems - or they can
choose a government prepared for new solutions and new ideas. I am confident
that voters young in spirit will choose the national interest and the common
good over the narrow politics of short-term personal gratification.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 18, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EX-AIDE OF WESTMORELAND TESTIFIES IN LIBEL TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 28, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words


A former deputy to Gen. William C. Westmoreland testified yesterday that the
number of enemy troops that fought in the Tet offensive in January and February
of 1968 was well below the figure that CBS is expected to advance at its trial
for libel.

The former deputy, Robert W. Komer, who was the chief civilian aide to General
Westmoreland in South Vietnam in from May 1967 to May 1968, said in Federal
Court in Manhattan that 85,000 North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces took part in
the offensive. He said he was not sure, however, whether that number included
enemy troops around Khe Sanh, an American base in the northern part of South
Vietnam.

CBS, which is being sued by General Westmoreland over statements made in a 1982
''CBS Reports'' documentary about the Vietnam war, has said it will produce
testimony from George W. Allen, an official of the Central Intelligence Agency,
that enemy forces committed to the Tet offensive exceeded 400,000.

The size of the enemy forces in the offensive is an issue in the trial because
CBS said in the broadcast that American troops were caught ''unprepared'' for
the Tet offensive. CBS also said in the documentary, titled ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' that General Westmoreland's command had
''systematically blocked'' reports from United States officers that North
Vietnamese infiltration in late 1967 and early 1968 had increased greatly.

Second Westmoreland Witness


Mr. Komer, who was given the rank of Ambassador by President Johnson, was head
of the pacification program in South Vietnam. He is the second witness called on
behalf of General Westmoreland in the $120 million libel suit.

In his second day of questioning by Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer,
Mr. Komer said he was ''asleep in bed'' when the enemy started its offensive on
Jan. 31, 1968. But within a few days, he said, he had surveyed the countryside
by helicopter.

''Do you believe,'' Mr. Burt asked, ''that it was an attack of 500,000 troops?''

''If it had been an attack of 500,000,'' Mr. Komer replied, ''it would have been
one hell of a bigger attack than we were enduring.''

General Westmoreland, the commander of American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, charged in his suit that CBS libeled him by saying that he had deceived
President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of the
enemy's strength in Vietnam. The documentary suggested that there was a
''conspiracy at the highest levels of military intelligence'' to minimize enemy
strength to make it appear the United States and its South Vietnamese allies
were winning a ''war of attrition.''

Accusation of Suppression


One of the general's specific charges was that CBS falsely accused him of
''suppressing'' a report on the strength of Vietcong irregulars by Maj. Gen.
Joseph A. McChristian, who was his intelligence chief from 1965 to June 1, 1967.
The fate of the report, which contained higher estimates for guerrillas and for
self-defense and secret self-defense forces, was again the subject of testimony
yesterday.

The self-defense forces, according to Mr. Komer, were old women and men and
teen-agers who lived in areas controlled by the Vietcong and who helped the
Vietcong to plant pungi sticks and mines. The secret self-defense forces, he
said, were enemy sympathizers who lived in areas controlled by United States or
South Vietnamese troops. Mr. Burt has called both categories ''home guard''
forces.

Mr. Komer said he believed that, like other elements of the enemy forces, like
the armed guerrillas and the political cadre, the size of the ''home guard'' had
long been underestimated before 1967. But unlike the guerrillas, with whom ''we
had a lot of contact,'' he said, the ''home guard'' posed no real military
threat and were too ''shadowy and nebulous'' to count with accuracy.

When Mr. Burt asked if the ''home guard'' were armed, Mr. Komer rocked back in
the witness chair and broke into laughter.

''We couldn't find most of them at all,'' he said, ''much less find whether they
were armed.''

'Home Guard' Removed


Over the objection of some C.I.A. analysts, including Mr. Allen, General
Westmoreland authorized the removal of the self-defense and secret self-defense
forces from the military order of battle in the fall of 1967. The order of
battle is the official listing of enemy strength.

General McChristian's estimate of 124,000 for the ''home guard,'' which he said
he believed should have remained in the the military order of battle, was about
54,000 higher than the figure previously in use.

Mr. Komer, who testified on Tuesday that General Westmoreland had not suppressed
General McChristian's report even though the figures in it were not made public,
said yesterday that he never received orders from General Westmoreland or anyone
else to place a ''ceiling'' on enemy strength.

Under cross-examination by David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, Mr. Komer admitted
that General McChristian's figures on the ''home guard'' were more realistic
than earlier estimates, that he was ''no expert'' on the order of battle, and
that he did not ordinarily read the statistics in the listing.

Mr. Boies noted that Walt W. Rostow, the national security adviser to President
Johnson, testified on Monday that Mr. Rostow read the figures.

''I'm glad he read it,'' Mr. Komer said. ''I never had the time.''

Total Figure Drops


Mr. Komer said the deletion of the ''home guard,'' as well as 70,000 to 90,000
political cadre, from the order of battle put dropped the total figure for enemy
strength from about 285,000 in the summer of 1967 to a range of 223,000 to
248,000 in November.

When he cross-examined Mr. Rostow, Mr. Boies said that, in a briefing in
November to President Johnson, General Westmoreland estimated the enemy strength
at 242,000, a decline of 43,000. But, according to a document Mr. Rostow had
sent the President, Mr. Boies said, the deletion of the ''home guard'' was not
noted. It, like the political cadre, had been included in the figure of 285,000.

Mr. Boies also produced notes by a former Defense Department lawyer that
appeared to contradict Mr. Rostow's recollection that General Westmoreland, in a
meeting with the President in April, had not said the strength of the enemy was
leveling off.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SMITHSONIAN OFFERS THE OFFBEAT WITH A PURPOSE

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


Each day thousands of people take in what has become the hit of the year at the
Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of American History: the set where the
''M*A*S*H'' television series was filmed for 11 years.

The exhibit is so popular that on busy weekends and holiday periods, it can take
an hour to get through, and that is just what the museum's director, Roger G.
Kennedy, wants.

''We knew that everyone would want to see 'M*A*S*H' and would have to wait in
line, and while they are in line, they will have to think,'' Mr. Kennedy said.

What they will think about, he says, is not just the American experience in the
1950's in Korea, the setting of ''M*A*S*H,'' but also the social issues facing
the United States in the 1970's, when the series was made, issues that include
feminism, racism, alcoholism and antiwar activism.

One example: There is a black-and- white Government photo of Capt. Stella Basara
of Elizabeth, N.J., who was a nurse with the real 44th Mobile Army Surgical
Hospital, as she administered anesthesia in a tent on Jan. 19, 1954. Everything
is real, including the wounded patient.

Next to that is a color photo from the television series showing the fictional
Maj. Margaret Houlihan of the 4077th MASH doing the same thing. For this photo
the museum provided a caption with the message that in the Korean War era many
women serving as nurses filled such important roles, and that those roles
probably would not have been open to them in civilian life.

Nearly a Million Visitors

Since the exhibit, ''M*A*S*H: Binding Up the Wounds,'' opened in July 1983,
899,000 visitors have seen it, so many that its stay has been extended until
Jan. 2. While the exhibit is, perhaps, not grand history of the sort often found
in museums, it is nevertheless typical of what Mr. Kennedy has set out to do
with the National Museum of American History.

His aim is to attract the multitudes who do not ordinarily think of making a
visit. He is not bothered by periodic complaints that some of what he has chosen
to display is ''trivial,'' not ''official'' or ''grand'' or ''collected by the
rich.'' Once inside, he has you. The line of visitors for ''M*A*S*H'' moves so
slowly that each is compelled to read the captions on the wall displays.

Finally, the visitor reaches the operating room, authentic to the 1950's, a
reminder that real people lost limbs and real soldiers died in Korea, a reminder
that ''M*A*S*H'' achieved its greatest popularity as many Americans were
questioning the nation's role in Vietnam.

As the visitors leave the exhibit area, they come upon such pre-Columbian
artifacts as fragments from a basket dated 10,000 to 5000 B.C. (i.e., official
museum stuff) and then see a sign inviting a visit to the next hall, where the
display includes ''Judy Garland's Ruby Slippers, The Bunkers' Chairs, Charlie
McCarthy, Fonzie's Leather Jacket, Muhammad Ali's Boxing Gloves and More.'' He
has you again.

The Favorite Everywhere


To get to television's Archie Bunker (his wingback chair, his cigar, his
unopened can of Best Quality Beer/The Favorite Everywhere), visitors must walk
past displays of the more traditional: quotations from Walt Whitman (''Here is
not merely a nation but a nation of nations''), early American paintings, tools,
wagons and other art and artifacts, and a display on racism and intolerance.

There is a display of campaign buttons, including one for Henry Krajewski, a New
Jersey pig farmer who often ran for President in the 1950's (''Average
American,'' was his modest claim), the shoe that Lou (The Toe) Groza wore when
he was a kicker for the Cleveland Browns football team and three of Arturo
Toscanini's batons.

Mr. Kennedy is 58 years old and working on his 20th or so career. He was a
writer for The New Republic, correspondent for NBC News (''I was third-string
reporter at the White House in the 1950's,'' he recalled), lawyer, spokesman for
the Labor Department, chairman of a bank in St. Paul, author of books on the
architecture of the upper Middle West, administrator and teacher at the
University of Minnesota and a vice president of the Ford Foundation.

Then came an offer to run one of the Smithsonian's museums in 1979. ''It seemed
like a good idea,'' he said, so he took the job.

The Business of Revelation


''Our business here is revelation,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''Our business is to
reveal those objects Americans have kept on purpose in ways that permit them to
be freshly perceived.''

Little matter that some may find a tilt toward show business, with Mr. Kennedy
offering as an example the museum's treatment of the flag that inspired Francis
Scott Key to write ''The Star-Stangled Banner.'' The banner was in the museum,
but few people noticed it, and it was being destroyed by light and the chemicals
in the air.

''I went to the most theatrical designer I know,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''I went to
Peter Wexler, who has designed 'Un Ballo in Maschera' and 'Les Troyens' for the
Metropolitan Opera. I said, 'Help us reveal ''The Star-Spangled Banner.'' ' ''

Mr. Wexler revealed it by hiding it.

The old flag is now in a case that protects it from the light and the air. Every
hour on the half hour, it is revealed for a minute and a half, heralded by
lights, sounds and the tune on which the national anthem is based, played in its
original three-quarter waltz time.

''People turn from the 'M*A*S*H' line, the First Ladies' gowns, and their
attention is riveted to something that people had passed by for 10 years,'' Mr.
Kennedy said, also noting that Mr. Wexler's device will add 100 years to the
flag's life.

'History Changes,' He Says


All those things, especially ''M*A*S*H,'' help Mr. Kennedy to convey his
message. ''History changes, and the interpretation of history, the relationship
of events, changes,'' he said. ''History is told time and again, each time in a
different way.''

The next ambitious project at the museum, opening in the spring, is another
retelling: what American life was like in 1783, shortly after the Revolution, a
difficult time for many.

It will depict America through the lives of three American families whose tales
may be familiar (rural farmers in Delaware, wealthy merchants in Massachusetts,
plantation owners in Tidewater Virginia) and three whose lives have not been
much remarked upon (slaves in the Chesapeake region, Seneca Indians from upstate
New York and freed former slaves in Philadelphia).

''Obviously, this is not the kind of installation one would have seen a decade
ago,'' says a planning statement for the museum.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Roger Kennedy

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Student Is Held in Shooting

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 82 words

DATELINE: FULLERTON, Calif., Oct. 18


An anti-Communist Vietnamese refugee has pleaded not guilty in the killing of
his college physics professor, who had received death threats after visiting
Hanoi. Minh Van Lam, 20 years old, made his plea Wednesday in the slaying of
Prof. Edward Lee Cooperman, 49, shot to death Saturday in his office at
California State University here. Mr. Lam, who is being held in lieu of $250,000
bail, reported finding the body. A .25-caliber pistol was at the professor's
side, the police said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S.-HANOI TALKS ON AMERASIANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 291 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 18


A White House aide met this week with Vietnam's Foreign Minister to discuss
details on how to carry out the Administration's offer to accept tens of
thousands of Vietnamese immigrants, State Department officials said today.

The United States has said that it is prepared to take in all of the Asian-
American children in Vietnam and 10,000 of the current and former prisoners from
its re-education camps.

The meeting between Nguyen Co Thach, the Foreign Minister, and Richard
Childress, an Indochina specialist on the National Security Council staff, was
said to have taken place Tuesday in New York, where Mr. Thach is attending the
United Nations General Assembly session.

Details of the session were sketchy, but a State Department official said that
the meeting ''continued the progress'' made when a senior State Department
refugee official, Robert L. Funseth, met with the Vietnamese in Geneva earlier
in the month.

Last month, Secretary of State George P. Shultz announced that the United States
was ready to accept all the so-called Amerasian children in Vietnam. Most of the
children, whose number has been estimated at from 8,000 to 15,000, were fathered
by American servicemen in the Vietnam War. Mr. Shultz also said that the United
States was prepared to accept 10,000 of the re-education camp prisoners over
several years.

The Vietnamese have said that they are prepared to let all the children leave,
and want the United States to agree to accept all the re-education camp inmates.
The United States has wanted the children and the inmates to be admitted through
procedures involving the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, but the
Vietnamese have preferred to deal directly with the United States.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A STATEMENT USED BY CBS IS QUESTIONED AT LIBEL TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 944 words


Conflict arose yesterday over whether a statement attributed to Gen. William C.
Westmoreland in a 1982 ''CBS Reports'' documentary was actually made by Gen.
Earle G. Wheeler when he was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

General Westmoreland, who is suing CBS for libel, was alleged on the broadcast
to have expressed alarm in 1967 over reports of higher enemy strength in South
Vietnam, and to have said at a briefing: ''What am I going to tell the press?
What am I going to tell the Congress? What am I going to tell the President?''

The statement - used by CBS to support its thesis that there had been a
''conspiracy at the highest levels of American military intelligence'' to
suppress information about enemy strength in South Vietnam - was recalled for
CBS by Lt. Col. Gains Hawkins, chief of the order of battle section of General
Westmoreland's command in 1967.

But yesterday, Col. Edward H. Caton, chief of the joint intelligence branch of
General Westmoreland's command, testified in Federal District Court in Manhattan
that the statement was ''unlike'' anything General Westmoreland would say.

'Not Characteristic'


''It's not characteristic of him,'' said Colonel Caton, who was not interviewed
for the CBS documentary: ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

Colonel Caton was the third witness for General Westmoreland at the trial, which
deals with whether the general deceived his military superiors and President
Johnson in the year before the enemy's Tet offensive in late January 1968.

The colonel said General Wheeler, after a briefing in Saigon in the spring of
1967 about a ''highly classified'' matter, had been ''nonplussed'' and made a
remark similar to that ascribed by CBS to General Westmoreland, who was
commander of United States forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

Colonel Caton said he regularly attended General Westmoreland's intelligence
briefings before his own departure from Vietnam in June 1967 and heard such a
remark only once - from General Wheeler. The colonel told the jury he lacked
authority to reveal what had upset the general.

But in a pretrial affidavit, the colonel said he had informed General Wheeler at
one of the briefings of ''important intelligence we had developed in the
preceding day or two relating to the capabilities of the Chinese.'' General
Wheeler, he said in the affidavit, ''became concerned and said: 'What will I
tell the President?' He said he had briefed the President on the subject just
before he left Washington.''

Vietnam Was a 'Blur'


''I suspect,'' Colonel Caton continued in the affidavit, ''that Colonel Hawkins
is confusing General Westmoreland with General Wheeler.'' General Wheeler died
on Dec. 18, 1975.

Under cross-examination by David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, Colonel Caton said
he could not recall Colonel Hawkins' having briefed General Westmoreland on
enemy strength, nor the date of the briefing at which General Wheeler made his
''rhetorical'' remark.

''Vietnam,'' he said, ''is one long blur, sir.''

Mr. Boies asked Colonel Caton whether the briefing for General Wheeler could
have been related to two cables from General Wheeler to General Westmoreland, on
March 9 and 11, 1967. In the cables, General Wheeler warned that new figures
reflecting an increased number of large-scale enemy actions in Vietnam ''would,
literally, blow the lid off Washington,'' if published.

General Wheeler questioned the accuracy of the new data, which, he said,
''changed the picture drastically'' and were ''a major element in assessing the
status of the war for the President'' and Congress.

Colonel Caton said he knew nothing of the cables.

Colonel Hawkins is expected to testify for CBS on General Westmoreland's
statements, as is Capt. Kelly Robinson, another intelligence officer.

'Wondered Aloud'


In a pretrial affidavit, Captain Robinson said he had briefed the general in the
spring of 1967 about a higher estimate of the Vietcong's political cadre and
that ''far from accepting our estimate,'' General Westmoreland ''expressed shock
at its magnitude.''

The general, Captain Robinson said, ''simply wondered aloud how the public and
the press would react to such a dramatic increase.''

''He specifically mentioned The New York Times and kept saying words to the
effect of 'What am I going to tell the press?' He also observed that Secretary
of Defense Robert S. McNamara and other leaders in Washington were obsessed with
numbers,'' the captain said.

In his own pretrial deposition, General Westmoreland acknowledged that Captain
Robinson had briefed him and said the captain's recollection of the briefing was
''accurate.'' It was not clear, however, whether the general agreed with the
captain's description of his reaction.

Yesterday, Colonel Caton offered the jury a vivid picture of the stresses of
wartime intelligence work. The colonel said he and his staff had been
responsible for the daily production of ''current'' data on enemy troop
strength, whereas Colonel Hawkins was concerned with long-term intelligence.

In the first six months of his year's tour in Vietnam, he said, he worked from 3
A.M. to 11 P.M., seven days a week; in the last six months, he took only Monday
mornings off. He said a number of officers who had worked for him in ''the
vault,'' a locked enclosure on an upper floor of command headquarters in Saigon,
were hospitalized with bleeding ulcers.

Colonel Caton said that, in retrospect, he agreed with General Westmoreland's
controversial decision to delete the enemy's self-defense and secret
self-defense forces from the order of battle.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 19, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 33, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 969 words


PAYBACK: Five Marines After Vietnam. By Joe Klein. 351 pages. Alfred A. Knopf.
$17.95.

JOE KLEIN first became interested in writing about the aftermath of Vietnam in
early 1981 when he read a newspaper article with the headline ''Viet Vet Goes
Berserk over Hostage Welcome.'' Almost a footnote to the festivities celebrating
the return of the Iranian hostages, the article was about a former marine -
recently laid off and bitter about his own dissonant homecoming - who was killed
in a gunfight with the police in a small Indiana town. The marine's name was
Gary Cooper, and his story, as Mr. Klein notes, ''was, in its way, as
classically American as his name.''

As he demonstrated in his finely observed biography of Woody Guthrie, Mr. Klein
has a brisk, instinctive talent for illuminating American lives, for locating in
individual experiences our collective, national dreams. In that earlier book, he
drew a vigorous portrait of the folk singer as the perpetually adolescent
American male, always on the road, always longing for a real home - a modern-day
Huck Finn, idealistic and dispossessed. His study of five Vietnam veterans in
''Payback'' both amplifies that picture of American manhood and delineates the
dislocations that this country suffered in the wake of the noisy 1960's. It is,
quite simply, the most eloquent work of nonfiction to emerge from Vietnam since
Michael Herr's ''Dispatches.''

Although he sketches in the hallucinatory feeling of the war with a handful of
fierce images - a slow day exploding into death, bullets ''jitterbugging''
through the jungle trees - Mr. Klein is not so much interested in replaying the
war, already so familiar to us from the evening news, as he is in examining the
psychic consequences of that conflict on the grunts who fought it. Those
consequences are brought home to us, simply and passionately, through the
stories of Gary Cooper and four fellow members of Charlie Company, First
Battalion, Third Marine Regiment.

These men all happen to be white enlistees; and all, except for one, are Middle
Western, blue collar, high school graduates. By deciding not to try to select a
representative cross section of Vietnam soldiers, Mr. Klein has avoided the
artificiality - and homogenization - that mars other more inclusive studies; and
by threading the experiences of these soldiers into an anecdotal narrative, he
has produced a book that is comprehensive and resonant in the manner of good
fiction.



In fact, we come to know Mr. Klein's five marines as intimately as characters in
a novel. To begin with, there is Gary Cooper himself, who regarded the ''stoic
perfection of his name'' as ''an ever-present reminder of his failure to live up
to his own expectations.'' Disaffected and angry, Mr. Cooper comes back from the
war to a job in a local steel mill and soon joins the swelling blue collar
counterculture that had sprung up as a reaction to ''the utter dreariness of
factory life.'' Laid off during a flurry of plant shutdowns, Mr. Cooper seeks
more and more solace in heroin and speed - drugs that only accelerate the
gathering disorder in his life.

Their stories do not end with the flamboyant tragedy of Mr. Cooper's, but the
other four marines in ''Payback'' also come home to incomplete lives -
improvised with the haphazard attitude of soldiers who have been trained to live
only in the present. A consummate pro in the field, John Wakefield finds his
cool assurance congealing into cynical indifference. He drifts from one
restaurant job to another, from one girlfriend to the next, and like other
casualties of the 60's, turns to a cultlike group - in his case, Synanon - as an
outlet for his anger.

Dale Szuminski, on his part, tries to escape into boyish nostalgia and hectic
partying: he crashes a bunch of cars, earns the nickname Mr. Rent- a-Party, and
in his 30's is still booking a room in Fort Lauderdale for spring break. Afraid
of intimacy, he uses his charm to paper over his feelings, pouncing upon any
opportunity to distance himself from his family and his lovers and to flee the
responsibilities of the grown-up world.



John Steiner and Bill Taylor, too, share this difficulty in sustaining
relationships. A moody teen-ager whose dreams of dangerous heroics were shaped
by war novels like ''Battle Cry,'' Mr. Steiner would later achieve a successful
career with the Fish and Wildlife Service - the hardened soldier finds himself
leading nature walks and collecting butterflies - but it would take much longer
for him to drop his macho pose of peremptory cheerfulness and allow the women
who loved him access to his heart.

Mr. Taylor would similarly find his goals - a wife, children, a home and a shiny
Cadillac - foundering on his inability to connect. As his marriage and his
career selling insurance begins to cave in, even the poisoning he suffers from
Agent Orange takes ''a back seat to his day-to-day dramas,'' the ongoing
collapse of his dreams.

In chronicling the painful re-entry process these veterans experienced in
returning to ''the World,'' Mr. Klein wisely resists the impulse to attribute
all their difficulties to the war or to the chilly reception they received from
the country they had served. Instead, by drawing us into the family histories of
these men - who quite bravely opened up their pasts to him - Mr. Klein shows how
the war and its damaging side effects were woven into the ragged fabric of their
lives. If the book trails off a bit in the final pages - the author seems to
have been searching for a way to end it - it probably does so because the story,
as far as Gary Cooper's four colleagues are concerned, is very much unfinished.
Indeed ''Payback'' has that rare quality in a book - the visceral feel of real
life, pinned down and clarified through words.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joe Klein

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ON DEBATE EVE, FOREIGN POLICY DIVIDES VOTERS



BYLINE:
By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1444 words


As Sunday's foreign policy debate between the Presidential candidates nears,
voters who have made up their minds back President Reagan's approach, while
undecided voters are less impressed by his policies, the latest New York
Times/CBS News Poll indicates.

By a margin of 46 percent to 40 percent over all, those polled approved of the
way Mr. Reagan is ''handling foreign policy.'' Forty-eight percent of those who
said they had made up their minds on whom to vote for approved, while 41 percent
disapproved.

But those who said they had not decided whom to vote for - a key group that both
sides hope to sway - disapproved of the President's foreign policy, by 36
percent to 32 percent.



Margin of Error

There is a sampling margin of error in the poll of plus or minus 3 percentage
points, except in the case of smaller groups, such as undecided voters, in which
the margin for error is 7 points.

The undecided voters tended to be closer to Mr. Mondale's views than to Mr.
Reagan's on foreign policy issues, on the economy and on other matters, the poll
shows.

In addition, when they were asked about personal characteristics such as
leadership ability, the voters who said they were undecided seemed to view Mr.
Mondale more favorably and Mr. Reagan less favorably than did the public at
large.

Those findings provide fresh encouragement for Mr. Mondale, who has already
gained considerable ground on Mr. Reagan since their last debate. Mr.

Mondale's strategists believe that for Democratic candidate to keep his momentum
and win the election, he must attract undecided voters with his performance in
the debate on foreign policy tomorrow night. The debate will be broadcast by
major television and radio networks.

The nationwide poll of 1,809 adults, conducted by telephone last Sunday through
Wednesday, indicates that Mr. Reagan and Vice President Bush maintain a solid
lead over Mr. Mondale and his running mate, Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro.

But it indicates that the gap has narrowed significantly in the last two weeks,
a period that included the Oct. 7 debate on economic and domestic policy between
Mr. Reagan and Mr. Mondale and the Oct. 11 debate between Mr. Bush and Mrs.
Ferraro.

The new poll shows the Republican ticket with a lead of 50 percent to 37 percent
over the Democratic challengers, a spread of 13 percentage points, with 13
percent undecided. When the undecided were pressed as to how they leaned, the
margin was 54 to 41 percent. Five percent still said they did not know.

G.O.P. Lead in Earlier Poll

In the earlier poll, taken the week before the last Presidential debate, Mr.
Reagan and Mr. Bush led by 23 points, 54 percent to 31 percent. With people
leaning one way or the other included, the margin in that poll grew to 26
points, 59 percent to 33 percent.

Those percentages, like the others relating to voting and issues in both polls,
were calculated among the ''probable electorate,'' a measure of the 1,253
registered voters interviewed that was weighted to reflect the likelihood of
their voting.

Despite Mr. Reagan's recent slippage as measured by The Times/CBS News Poll, his
lead is still the largest held by a Presidential candidate at this stage of the
campaign since 1972.

Two weeks before the 1980 election the poll showed Mr. Reagan and President
Carter in a dead heat. At a similar period before the 1976 election, Mr. Carter
led Gerald R. Ford by 6 percentage points.

Sentiment on Nicaragua

On one foreign policy issue on which the candidates clearly disagree, that of
aid to the guerrillas who are trying to overthrow the Communist Government in
Nicaragua, the public appears to be clearly on Mr. Mondale's side, and undecided
voters are even more strongly in the challenger's camp.

By 50 percent to 30 percent, voters agreed with Mr. Mondale and opposed United
States assistance to the rebels. Undecided voters took that position by a margin
of 56 percent to 19 percent.

However, in another area of disagreement, over what it would take to encourage
the Soviet Union to negotiate seriously on limiting nuclear weapons, voters
agreed more with Mr. Reagan's position.

Views on Nuclear Arms Talks

By 51 percent to 30 percent, they said that if the United States stopped testing
nuclear and space weapons, the Soviet Union would be more likely to take
advantage of the situation than to begin serious arms control negotiations. Mr.
Mondale has pledged to stop testing in an effort to bring the Russians to the
bargaining table.

Even here, however, undecided voters were less likely to support the President.
They said by a margin of only 40 percent to 31 percent that the Russians would
use the break in testing to improve their own position.

Experts in voting, such as Richard M. Scammon and Prof. Richard Brody of
Stanford University, say that except when an international issue is in the
forefront of the news, as the Vietnam War was in 1968 and the Iran hostage
crisis was four years ago, foreign policy matters do not normally affect the way
people vote directly. But they said a candidate's views on foreign policy
contributed to voters' overall impressions.

Mr. Mondale is viewed much more favorably generally than he was two weeks ago,
although still not nearly so favorably as is Mr. Reagan.

Gain for Mondale Camp

In the latest poll, 41 percent said they had a favorable opinion of the
Democratic challenger and 38 percent said they had an unfavorable opinion. In
the earlier poll, 33 percent said favorable and 47 percent unfavorable.

Mr. Reagan got a favorable rating from 55 percent and an unfavorable one from 32
percent, nearly the same as in the previous poll, when the margin was 58 percent
to 29 percent.

Here, too, undecided voters leaned toward Mr. Mondale. Nearly half of them said
they were not sure what they thought of Mr. Mondale, but of those who did have
an opinion he was seen favorably by a margin of 2 to 1. On the other hand, the
undecided voters were closely divided in their opinion of Mr. Reagan, with 25
percent having a favorable view and 21 percent an unfavorable one. Before the
debate, undecided voters had a better view of Mr. reagan than of Mr. Mondale.

Shift Toward Mondale

The overall shift toward Mr. Mondale since earlier this month occurred across
all categories of voters in all regions of the country, but it was most
pronounced among men and young people.

The challenger has cut the President's lead among men to 15 percentage points
from 29 points and his lead among voters 18 through 29 years old to 17
percentage points from 43 points. The biggest shift in the poll, however, was
among independents who lean Democratic; Mr. Mondale led by 19 percentage points
among them in the earlier poll. Now he leads by 49 points.

The poll does not indicate with certainty why Mr. Mondale has gained on Mr.
Reagan. Some analysts have said the 73-year-old President appeared to show his
age in his first debate with Mr. Mondale, and nearly a third of the voters in
the new poll expressed the view that Mr. Reagan was ''getting too old to be an
effective President for the next four years.''

Of that group, 69 percent said they would vote for Mr. Mondale and 16 percent
said they would vote for Mr. Reagan. Of those who said age was not a factor, Mr.
Reagan led by 67 percent to 21 percent.

Reagan Standing Unchanged

However, most of shift seems based on improvement in Mr. Mondale's and Mrs.
Ferraro's positions, not on deterioration of Mr. Reagan's and Mr. Bush's. But
there are losses for them, too, especially on the economy.

For example, before the first debate, 37 percent thought Mr. Mondale a strong
leader and 44 percent did not. Immediately after the debate, 45 percent said he
was a strong leader and 44 percent said he was not. Now, voters call him a
strong leader by a margin of 44 percent to 38 percent.

Mr. Reagan's standing is basically unchanged, with 72 percent believing he is a
strong leader and 24 percent believing he is not. Among undecided voters,
however, only 63 percent give him strong marks on leadership, while 25 percent
do not.

The poll also reflects an improvement in the positions of the Democratic Party
generally.

Now, 52 percent say they are Democrats or lean Democratic, as against 41 percent
who say they are Republicans or lean that way. Two weeks ago, the split was 49
percent to 44 percent.

Similarly, when people are asked which party's candidate they favor for the
House of Representatives, the Democrats now lead 43 percent to 37 percent. Two
weeks ago, the lead was 39 percent to 35 percent.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NIGARAGUAN REBEL DISPUTES U.S. AIDE

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1249 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


A senior officer in the largest Nicaraguan rebel group today disputed White
House explanations of a Central Intelligence Agency manual on guerrilla warfare.
The booklet, prepared for Nicaraguan rebels, offers advice on how to kidnap and
kill Nicaraguan Government officials.

On Thursday a senior White House official told reporters that the primer, which
was made public this week, was a first draft that was later revised before
distribution.

''Once it was seen,'' the official said, ''everything that was not policy was
deleted from it.''



'Only One Draft'


But in an interview today, Edgar Chamorro, a director of the Nicaraguan
Democratic Force, who said he was in charge of publication of the primer, said:
''No, no, no. That is not true. There was only one draft.''

He added that the manual used in Nicaragua included all the material that was in
the document made public this week.

Meanwhile, classified Defense Department documents indicate the guerrillas were
involved in assassinations as early as 1982, the year after the United States
began financing their activities.

Mr. Chamorro said that when he saw the published version of the manual this
week, he was ''shocked'' by some of the contents, such as ''the things about
hiring criminals,'' and his staff began tearing pages from some of the books.
''But the manual was already being distributed, and we couldn't get all the
copies back,'' he said. ''We lost control.'' The White House official also said
Thursday, ''The fact is that it surfaced and it was caught before anything
serious happened.''

But Mr. Chamorro said the manual was used to train dozens of guerrilla leaders
for more than six months, through May of this year. ''It was used like an
instruction manual,'' he said.

The 42-page primer advises the guerrillas to hire professional criminals who can
arrange the shooting deaths of fellow rebels so they will become martyrs for the
cause. It advocates publicly executing selected Nicaraguan Government officials.
And it explains how to blackmail Nicaraguan citizens who are initially unwilling
to work for the anti-Sandinista cause.

'What You Do' in War Mr. Chamorro said he did not know how much of the advice
the Nicaraguan Democratic Force guerrillas had actually used. ''But people were
trained to do all that,'' he said, ''and we thought most of it'' was consistent
''with what you do in a guerrilla war.''

Mr. Chamorro, who left Nicaragua in July, lives in Miami but remains one of
seven directors of the Honduras- based group. The White House had no comment on
his assertions.

Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic Presidential nominee, called on President
Reagan today to dismiss the Director of Central Intelligence, William J. Casey,
before the final Presidential debate on Sunday, and he said the primer ''is a
violation of the law.''

Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said today that President Reagan had
not talked with Mr. Casey about the primer and had not asked him to resign.
Asked if Mr. Reagan had seen the C.I.A. primer, Mr. Speakes said, ''I don't
think so.''

On Thursday a White House official said Mr. Reagan had not known of the primer
until he read a newspaper account of it on Wednesday.

Mondale's Viewpoint


Today Mr. Mondale said, ''I don't know which is worse, knowing what was going on
or having a Government with no one in charge so that things like this could go
on without the knowledge of our elected President.''

On Thursday the White House announced two investigations to determine if the
C.I.A. acted improperly in preparing the primer. One investigation is to be
conducted by the agency's Inspector General, the other by the C.I.A.'s advisory
board. Today Mr. Speakes said he was not sure if either would be completed
before the election.

The House Intelligence Committee is also investigating the matter, as is the
General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress.

Today two Democratic members of the House asked Attorney General William French
Smith to conduct an inquiry to see if a special prosecutor should be appointed.
In a letter to Mr. Smith, the two Democrats, George Miller of California and
Thomas J. Downey of Long Island, wrote that the primer and a C.I.A. comic book
suggesting how to commit sabotage ''present serious questions regarding the
potential criminal liability of those Central Intelligence Agency officials
involved.''

Goldwater Wants a Report


Separately, Sam Bouchard, a staff member of the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, said the committee chairman, Barry Goldwater, Republican of
Arizona, ''has asked the director for a full and complete report.''

''He wants to know,'' Mr. Bouchard said, ''was the C.I.A. involved in writing,
preparing and distributing this manual?''

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, the deputy chairman of
the committee, sent the C.I.A. a list of 14 questions today that the agency will
answer on Monday.

Other information about rebel activities in 1982 came to light today, and also
drew Congressional criticism.

The Defense Intelligence Agency's weekly intelligence summary dated July 16,
1982, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times, says rebel activities
earlier that year included ''attacks by small guerrilla bands on individual
Sandinista soldiers and the assassination of minor Government officials and a
Cuban adviser.''

A member of the Senate Intelligence Committee said such intelligence summaries
are widely distributed among Government agencies, although it is not certain the
President would have seen a copy.

Mr. Downey, the New York Democrat, today wrote a letter to Lieut.  Gen. James A.
Williams, director of the Defense Intelligence Agency, asking for an explanation
of the 1982 report. Mr. Downey's letter also asked: ''What is the normal D.I.A.
policy with regard to briefing members of the Administration on such issues?
Were normal briefing procedures followed in the case of this assassination list?
If not, why weren't they?''

An Executive Order issued by President Reagan in December 1981 says, ''No person
employed by or acting on behalf of the United States Government shall engage in
or conspire to engage in assassination.'' It also says, ''No agency of the
intelligency community shall participate in or request any person to undertake
activities forbidden by this order.''

Mr. Chamorro said an American whom he and other guerrilla officers assumed
worked for the C.I.A. prepared the primer last October, with help from the
Nicaraguan Democratic Force staff members in Honduras.

The man, whom Mr. Chamorro would not name, was said to be friendly with other
known C.I.A. employees working with the guerrillas and often traveled to the
United States.

Mr. Chamorro said the man was ''older'' and ''had combat experience in Vietnam
and Korea.''

Mr. Chamorro said the man ''first came in September'' of 1983 ''and helped us.''

In October and November, the man began work on the manual with help from Mr.
Chamorro and other guerrillas. ''The material came from his personal notes,''
Mr. Chamorro said. ''We translated those notes for him.''

Late in the project, Mr. Chamorro said, ''I had to work on different things, and
he finished the book directly with my assistant. When I saw the final product I
was shocked'' by ''the things about hiring criminals and martyrs. We don't agree
with that. We don't practice terrorism.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Edgar Chamorro

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE IOWA-AT A GLANCE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 259 words


History The Iowa was the first of four battleships built by the United States at
the start of World War II. They were the largest ever built, except for the
Japanese Yamato and Musashi, and cost approximately $114 million each. The Iowa,
launched Aug. 27, 1942, at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, served in the war, chiefly
providing a screen for fast carriers and bombarding shore positions during
amphibious invasions.

She was put in mothballs at the end of the war, but saw service again during the
Korean War, being used for shore bombardment. Mothballed once again, she was
held in reserve during the Vietnam War at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, but
never saw action.



 Crew

The Iowa, like its sister ships, the New Jersey, the Missouri and the Wisconsin,
was designed to carry a complement of 169 officers and 2,689 enlisted men in
wartime.



 Statistics

The Iowa is 887 feet long and displaces 58,000 tons fully loaded. She has 9
16-inch guns, 20 5-inch guns, and several 40-mm. guns. The Iowa and her sister
ships were the most heavily armored American warships ever built and were
designed to survive ship-to-ship combat with enemy 16-inch guns. Her own 16-inch
guns can fire projectiles weighing up to 2,700 pounds a distance of 23 miles.
The Iowa was built to carry 3 float planes for scouting and gunfire spotting and
has also carried helicopters.



 Performance


The Iowa was designed for a top speed of 35 knots, with a cruising range of
5,000 miles at 30 knots and 15,000 miles at 15 knots.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
List of Captive Soldiers Proves a Fabrication

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 141 words

DATELINE: SAVANNAH, Ga., Oct. 19


A Vietnamese refugee who gave a United States citizen a list of nine soldiers he
said were held in Southeast Asia apparently fabricated the story to get access
to this country, officials said today.

The list included Capt. David J. Phillips, whose wife, Peggy, was notified by
Air Force officials Sunday her husband might still be alive after 18 years.

On Thursday, an Air Force spokesman telephoned Mrs. Phillips at her home here,
told her the list was a fabrication and apologized.

The refugee, who fled Vietnam in April 1982, initially told interviewers in
Thailand he had no information, according to Ann Griffiths, executive director
of the National League of Families in Washington.

After being denied access to the United States, the refugee responded to an
advertisement placed in a Vietnamese newspaper seeking information.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 20, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Links C.I.A. To Coast Man's Death

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 217 words

DATELINE: FULLERTON, Calif., Oct. 19


The Hanoi Government said Thursday that the Central Intelligence Agency had
masterminded the slaying of a professor known for his pro-Vietnam political
views and studies of the herbicide Agent Orange.

An intelligence agency spokesman, the police and the lawyer for the suspect,
Minh Van Lam, have all denied the suggestion.

Mr. Lam, a 20-year-old Vietnam refugee, pleaded not guilty Wednesday to charges
of killing Prof. Edward Lee Cooperman, 48, who was shot at California State
University here last weekend.

Mr. Lam returned to court Thursday for a hearing in which Municipal Court Judge
Arthur Guy Jr. reduced his bail from $250,000 to $100,000.

The official Vietnam News Agency said from Hanoi Thursday that the slaying had
been directed by the intelligence agency because of the victim's pro-Vietnam
political views. It also said the death was connected with an earlier slaying.

''On May 28 this year,'' the news agency said, ''the ultra-rightists among the
Vietnamese refugees, including C.I.A. agents, had organized the assassination of
Mrs. Pham Thi Luu, wife of Mr. Nguyen Van Luy, president of the Vietnamese
Resident's Association in the U.S.A.''

Patti Volz, an intelligence agency spokesman, said of the allegation, ''It's
totally absurd. We don't engage in assassination.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEGISLATORS ASK IF REAGAN KNEW OF C.I.A.'S ROLE

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 957 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 20


Disclosures this week of possibly illegal activities by the Central Intelligence
Agency in Nicaragua have raised questions in Congress about how much the White
House knew about the agency's actions, members of Congress and their aides said
today.

One of the disclosures was of a classified Defense Intelligence Agency report
saying that American-backed Nicargauan guerrillas were committing political
assassinations as early as 1982, the year after the United States began
financing their activities. An executive order signed by President Reagan in
1981 prohibits Government personnel from taking part or assisting in
assassinations.

In an interview today, Edgar Chamorro, a director of the rebel Nicaraguan
Democratic Force, said: ''Frankly, I admit we have killed people in cold blood
when we have found them guilty of crimes. We do believe in the assassination of
tyrants. Some of the Sandinistas are tyrants in the small villages.''



1982 Report Circulated


The weekly defense intelligence reports are widely distributed among
intelligence officials, and the one first mentioning assassinations, dated July
1982, has been circulated among Government agencies. The document, a copy of
which was obtained by The New York Times, says the rebels' activities in the
spring of 1982 included ''attacks by small guerrilla bands on individual
Sandinista soldiers and the assassination of minor government officials and a
Cuban adviser.''

Asked on Friday if the President or his top advisers knew of the report, White
House spokesman Larry Speaks said, ''No.''

A White House spokesman said today: ''We asked, and we could not find anyone who
had seen such a report. The key people who would have recognized its importance
didn't see it.'' Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who is
deputy chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, said today that
the word ''assassination'' printed in the report ''should have flashed off the
page'' when it was published. ''It would appear to me that the President ought
to have been informed,'' he said.

He also said he did not think the Intelligence Committee had seen the report,
and he has asked for an explanation from the Defense Intelligence Agency.

Similarly, a White House official said on Thursday that President Reagan did not
know about the C.I.A. primer advising Nicaraguan rebels to assassinate selected
Nicaraguan Government officials until he read a newspaper article about it on
Wednesday. Once the White House did learn of the primer, the official said, the
President condemned it and ordered an investigation.

In a radio address today, Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic Presidential
candidate, said: ''Just this week, we all read about the Administration's
training manual offering advice on sabotage and murder. And what has been the
White House reaction? The President didn't know about it.''

In response to the questions from Mr. Mondale and other Democrats about why the
President did not know about the primer and the Defense Intelligence report, a
White House spokesman said today: ''We've tried not to respond to political
campaign charges. That has been our policy throughout the campaign.''

But the primer was well known to American personnel working with the rebels in
Honduras, Mr. Chamorro said.

Some C.I.A. officers in Honduras ''joked'' with the agency employee who prepared
the manual, Mr. Chamorro said. ''They used to kid him a lot,'' he said. ''They
thought he was something of a maverick.''

Mr. Chamorro said, ''we ripped two pages out'' of some copies of the manual
before it was used, but said most copies were not altered. The pages deleted
suggested hiring criminals ''to carry out specific jobs,'' and it advised that
the death of a rebel should be arranged, to create a marytr.

''We didn't agree with that,'' Mr. Chamorro said, although he added that the
sections dealing with ''neutralizing'' selected officials were left intact. To
the rebels, Mr. Chamorro said, the word ''neutralize'' did not necessarily mean
assassinate. ''We do have to kill criminals at times,'' he added. ''Some of the
Sandinistas are criminals.''

Another rebel leader, Salvador Icaza, director of political education for the
Nicaraguan Democratic Force, said in an interview today: ''That manual said a
bunch of things, but if you get the Sears catalog, you don't have to buy
everything in it. We don't participate in terrorism.''

A White House official said on Thursday that the primer was written by a
''low-level contract employee'' who was ''clearly operating outside the way the
C.I.A. wants its contract employees to operate.''

Nicaraguan rebel officers identified the man as John Kirkpatrick, a veteran of
the Korean and Vietnam wars who was known to the rebels as ''Juanito.''

The White House official said that once the primer ''floated up the system, it
was not condoned.''

Two Congressional investigations of the primer were announced last week, along
with three others, by the General Accounting Office, the C.I.A. and the agency's
advisory board. A senior aide to a member of the Democratic Congressional
leadership, who is familiar with the investigations, said, ''The part everybody
is asking about is, how come the President didn't know about any of this?''

A third C.I.A. document came under investigation this week, this one a comic
book that advises Nicaraguans to commit acts of sabotage to help topple the
Sandinista Government. Among the suggestions are to stop up toilets with
sponges, slash upholstery in automobiles, pour dirt into gas tanks and leave
lights on.

The White House has not said when it first learned of the comic book, which
became public last summer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SHIFT IN SALVADOR DENIED

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 694 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 20


Government officials said today that senior American military officers had begun
to move more freely around El Salvador. But they denied there had been any
changes in rules barring advisers from combat.

Questions about their role arose Friday after three advisers assigned to the
United States Embassy were seen near Perquin, near the site of a battle between
Government soldiers and rebel troops. American diplomats in San Salvador said
the rules governing adviser activities appeared to have become more flexible.

Brian Carlson, a State Department spokesman, said there had been no easing of
rules barring advisers from likely combat areas.

A Defense Department official said today that, while the advisers were roaming
farther afield to observe the effects of American training, ''the policy for
American trainers in El Salvador is the same.''

The first group of advisers was sent to El Salvador in 1980 and they were barred
until 1983 from working outside the area of San Salvador, the capital.

''The military group is getting out more than they used to,'' the Pentagon
official said. ''Defense attaches have always traveled around, but in this case,
the military group commander went up to see how the Salvadorans were using the
helicopters.''

He added that the Americans had been in the Perquin area to observe, not to
advise the Salvadorans. A reporter said, however, that one American had been
seen explaining how to defuse a booby trap.  The Pentagon official said travel
by advisers had always been limited to secure areas and that recent Government
successes had expanded the number of areas thought to be safe.

The military people discovered by reporters in Perquin were Col. James Steele,
head of the military training team in El Salvador; a Marine lieutenant colonel
who is the chief naval attache at the embassy, and a sergeant, who is an aide to
Colonel Steele.

A State Department official said the rules allowed them more latitude to travel
and observe military activity, although all such trips must be approved by
Thomas R. Pickering, the Ambassador.

The official said lower ranking trainers were prohibited from leaving ''base
camp areas'' without the permission of their commander and the United States
Ambassador. The official could not say how many times commanders have traveled
into the countryside as they did to Perquin, but he said ''there have been
occasional trips.''

According to State Department officials, the three Americans told Ambassador
Pickering later that they had not come under fire. They said they had gone to
Perquin at the invitation of the Salvadoran commander of the operation carried
out by the Atlacatl Battalion, an American-trained unit.

The purpose of the rules governing the activities of advisers is to make sure
that United States is not drawn into a combat role in El Salvador. In the
Vietnam war, the United States started out by sending advisers to the South
Vietnamese Army, but gradually the advisers became involved in combat. Then the
United States introduced naval and air support, and finally actual combat units.

To avoid a repetition in El Salvador, rules were set out limiting the number of
advisers to about 55, and restricting their presence to noncombat areas and
forbidding them to carry combat equipment, although they were permitted to have
weapons, such as the CAR- 15, a shorter-range version of the M-16 rifle. The
three Americans seen in Perquin on Friday carried CAR-15's.

To deal with the limit on advisers in El Salvador, the United States has been
training Salvadoran troops in the United States and in Honduras, and has built
up a logistics base in Honduras.

In 1982 one adviser, Col. Harry Melander, was transferred out of El Salvador
after a television crew filmed him carrying an M-16 rifle. In 1983 three
advisers were relieved of their duties after they flew an American helicopter
into a battle area. Another adviser was wounded in the incident.

On May 25, Lieut. Comdr. Albert A. Schaufelberger 3d, the deputy chief of the
United States Military Group in El Salvador, was shot dead as he waited for a
car to pick up a friend while off duty.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PERILOUS FLIGHT OF VIETNAMESE IS THWARTED AT THAI BORDER

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1180 words

DATELINE: PHNOM DANGREK, Cambodia, Oct. 18


Hundreds of Vietnamese who are unable or unwilling to risk fleeing their
homeland by sea, or by using legal emigration procedures, are reaching the Thai
border by an arduous overland route through Cambodia.

According to the International Committee of the Red Cross, more than 1,300
Vietnamese have surrendered to the Thai border authorities since the beginning
of July. By comparison, the number of Vietnamese arriving in Thailand by boat
has declined to about 50 a month, according to the United Nations Higher
Commissioner for Refugees.

Turned back from Thailand, which does not want to encourage this migration, and
largely ignored until now by Western nations, according to the Red Cross, 3,670
of these Vietnamese exiles are crowded into this ''holding platform'' adjacent
to a camp for displaced Cambodians about two and a half miles inside a
rebel-held area of Cambodia.

''This is the end of the road for this group,'' Jean-Michel Monod, head of the
regional delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross, said
Tuesday in an interview in his Bangkok office.

Mr. Monod's delegation has been trying to persuade reluctant recipient countries
to begin interviewing these Vietnamese for resettlement. Refugee officials say
the process must start soon if the refugees are to avoid the dangers of
Vietnam's annual offensive against rebels in the area during the winter dry
season.

In conversations here and farther south at Rithisen in a temporary shelter
housing people who have reached the border in the last 10 days, the Vietnamese
described the risky and often costly but well-defined ''underground railway''
that moves them through Cambodia, where 150,000 to 180,000 Vietnamese troops are
reported to be stationed. Here they are still within 10 miles of Vietnamese
artillery.

The refugees also offered some personal accounts of economic conditions in
Vietnam and talked about problems faced by ethnic minorities there.

Among the exiles are recent inmates of Vietnamese re-education camps who say
they believe that there are more than the 10,000 political prisoners Hanoi has
suggested it is holding.

The United States announced in September that it would be willing to admit
inmates from the camps. Vietnam countered that the United States would have to
take all of them.

However, about 2,000 Vietnamese a month are leaving the country under the
Orderly Departure Program, a joint Vietnamese-United Nations-United States
program.

The camp at Phnom Dangrek is in the strip of western Cambodia controlled by one
or another of the three rebel groups fighting the Vietnamese- backed Heng Samrin
Government in Phnom Penh. Here the Khmer Peoples' National Liberation Front, a
non-Communist group, is nominally in charge.

But the largest group in the border area is the Thai Army, which controls the
dirt access roads to settlements on the Cambodian side.

About a quarter of a million Cambodians who joined the rebel cause or tried to
escape from Cambodia live in this anti-Government area. Many of them, having
fled the Vietnamese in Cambodia, are hostile to the exiles from Vietnam, which
include about 50 Vietnamese Army deserters. The Vietnamese are separated from
the displaced Cambodians for their own safety, local aid workers say.

The International Committee of the Red Cross and the United Nations Border
Relief Operation are the only relief organizations in this part of Cambodia.

The Vietnamese at Phnom Dangrek, who began arriving at the border in small
numbers about four years ago, form a kaleidoscope of experiences and
disaffections.

The 57-year-old former Vietnamese officer in charge of the camp, Col. Lam Ne,
was an officer in the French Army when France lost the battle of Dien Bien Phu
in 1954. He was first ''re-educated'' by the North Vietnamese. After his release
he fled to the South and became an officer in the South Vietnamese Army, for
which Hanoi's troops again arrested him after the fall of Saigon in 1975.

'I Told Nobody'


After his second release in 1981 - he said his captors considered him too sick
to survive the malnutrition he suffered - Colonel Lam Ne, a Khmer Krom from a
regional ethnic group similar to the Khmers of Cambodia decided to escape
overland. He was one of the early arrivals.

''I had been home two months,'' he said. ''I got medicine and got better. Then I
heard the Communists were after me again. I had not enough money to go by boat.
So I left my family at midnight on foot. I told nobody, not even my wife and
children.''

The colonel's trek is now a familiar pattern: He said it took seven days to
reach the Mekong at the Vietnamese- Cambodian border. A 12-hour boat trip took
him to Phnom Penh, where he spent two days studying the roads to Thailand. A
12-hour bus ride took him to Battambang, from which he moved to Sisophon, making
the rest of the trip through jungle and scrub on foot.

His journey of nearly 400 miles took only a few weeks. For others who have
followed the route since then, the trip has often been more difficult. What used
to be a relatively cheap escape route has become very expensive, sometimes as
costly as fleeing by boat into the Gulf of Siam, because of bribes and
protection money demanded along the way. Guerrilla war rages in many areas of
Cambodia. The fear of being turned over to Vietnamese troops is always present.

Gold Needed for Bribes


Tran Van Kieu, a 45-year-old former major in the South Vietnamese army who
arrived here with his 13-year-old son on Oct. 6, said he had to pay about four
ounces of gold in bribes. He and other exiles say that the network aiding
fleeing Vietnamese now includes border smugglers as well as members of the
Cambodian Army, who make money ferrying escapers on military vehicles.
''Sometimes they disguise us as troops,'' a refugee said.

Salamath Afandi, 34, is a Cham, a Moslem Vietnamese minority. Mr. Salamath, one
of many minority people in the camp - others are ethnic Chinese and Khmer
Vietnamese like Colonel Lam Ne - said minority peoples seemed to be singled out
as suspected potential rebels.

Mr. Salamath, a student at the National Institute of Administration in South
Vietnam when Saigon fell in 1975, was re-educated, then was jobless for four
years after his release. From 1979 to 1982, he said, he made some money by
tutoring and devoted all his energies to escape attempts, failing several times
to leave by sea.

He and his wife, Stava Mosri, finally set out overland two years ago.
Calculating every eventuality, he broke his journey in Phnom Penh and Battambang
long enough to learn Khmer - he already spoke French, English, Malay and Cham in
addition to Vietnamese - and for his wife to become visibly pregnant ''so she
wouldn't get raped,'' he said.

They reached the Thai border in the fall of 1982 and their daughter Frieda was
born just as the 1983 Vietnamese offensive began. Mr. Salamath carried his
still-weak wife and new baby six miles into Thailand to avoid the attack. The
Thais returned them to Cambodian territory as soon as it was judged safe.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Miss Apple Plans Nov. 24 Wedding

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 66, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 177 words


Barbara Apple, a marketing director at the American Express Travel Related
Services Company in New York, and William R. Sullivan, a senior vice president
of Shearson Lehman/American Express in New York, plan to be married Nov. 24.

The future bride is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Irving Apple of Minneapolis, who
have announced her engagement to a son of Donna Sullivan of Alexandria, Va., and
the late Col. William G. Sullivan, U.S.A.

Miss Apple graduated cum laude from the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania and received a master's degree from the Harvard Graduate School of
Business Administration. Her father is the managing partner of Apple & Apple,
accountants in Minneapolis. Her mother is president of Marion Apple &
Associates, manufacturers' representatives in giftware.

The prospective bridegroom received B.S. and M.B.A. degrees from the University
of Virginia, where he is a member of the board of the Colgate Darden Graduate
School of Business Administration. He served as a first lieutenant with the air
cavalry in Vietnam.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Barbara Apple

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR 60 YEARS, A COZY PLACE FOR STUDENTS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM R. GREER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 46, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 599 words


The hardest step, Kyungsoon Lee thought, was getting her student visa from the
American Embassy in Seoul, South Korea. With her visa in hand, Miss Lee, a
graduate student in communications, flew to New York and found a hotel room at a
modest price. It was not what she had expected.

Her first night, she said, strangers knocking at her door and telephone calls
from people she did not know kept her awake. The same thing happened the second
night.

''It was not really healthy,'' she said. ''People said that if you can survive
in New York, you can survive anywhere, but I never thought that housing would be
that difficult.''

A solution to her problem came on her third day in New York. A professor at the
New York Institute of Technology, where she was studying communications,
suggested she apply to International House, a residence for foreign and American
graduate students on Riverside Drive.

A Place to Feel at Home

The house was founded 60 years ago by Harry E. Edmonds, a Y.M.C.A. secretary,
with help from John D. Rockefeller, as a place where foreign students could feel
more at home in New York.

Several International House alumni returned to the building this weekend for a
series of meetings meant to keep them in touch with the house and to devise
strategies for meeting the house's pressing financial needs.

''Particularly in the past 10 years, it's been rough going,'' said Gordon W.
Evans, who finished a 25-year career in the Foreign Service's Agency for
International Development in 1982 to become president of International House.

In 1974, the house had a deficit of $100,000, and this year it will have to
raise $400,000 for renovations, such as installing a new hot water system and
rebuilding the residents' kitchen.

Students pay $289 a month to live in the house. The rest of the cost of their
stay, about $150, is paid for through donations to the house and the income from
its endowment.

A Mirror on the World

Since 1924, the 10-story building opposite Grant's Tomb has been a dormitory for
graduate students at the city's colleges and universities, both foreigners and
Americans. It has 530 single rooms and 10 apartments in another building for
married couples.

It has also been a reflecton of the state of the world, with international
conflicts mirrored in lunch table discussions and toasts at the house pub.

On Oct. 7, the residents filled the television room to watch the debate between
President Reagan and Walter F. Mondale.

''After, we met in the corridors,'' Miss Lee said. ''It was very heated, because
it is not just America itself that is affected by this election. The President
of America is a symbolic figure of the world. It's our concern as well.''

Jazz and Japanese

The environment in the house can be stimulating in other ways, as well. Masaaki
Wada, a doctoral candidate in mathematics at Columbia University from Osaka,
Japan, and Alan Bair, a graduate student at Columbia's School of International
Affairs, from Pasadena, Calif., were eating ''breakfast'' at 2:20 P.M. one day
in the house's cafeteria.

They were discussing jazz and Mr. Wada was teaching Mr. Bair how to say ''more
or less'' in Japanese.

''After watching the debates or the Vietnam series, I find myself with four
other people from four other countries talking about the world and where we're
going, and the discussions might go on for hours,'' Mr. Bair said. ''I'm headed
back to my room at 4 A.M. without having done anything for classes, and I say,
'This is why I live at International House.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Kyungsoon Lee; Photo of Gordon W. Evans; Photo of
International House on Riverside Drive

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CENSUS BUREAU REPORTS RISE IN FOREIGN-BORN

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 60, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 449 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 20


A flood of Asian and Latin American immigrants has sharply increased the number
of foreign-born residents of the United States, a new Census Bureau study shows.

The bureau counted just over 14 million foreign-born residents in the 1980
census. According to the 1970 census, there were 9.6 million foreign-born
residents of the United States.

Of the recent arrivals, 1.3 million came from Latin America and 1.2 million from
Asia. More than half the newcomers from Latin America arrived from Mexico.

The bureau found 2,199,221 residents of the United States who were born in
Mexico, of whom one-third came to this country from 1975 to 1980.

A distant second on the list of homelands was Germany; 849,384 United States
residents said they were born there. However, most of them have been have been
in this country 20 years or more; only 6 percent arrived since 1975.

Other nations heavily represented in the foreign-born population of the United
States include Canada, which sent 842,859 immigrants; Italy, which sent 831,922;
and Cuba, which sent 607,814.

Most United States residents born in Laos, Vietnam and Cambodia arrived in this
country from 1975 to 1980: 97 percent of the 54,881 Laotians, 90.5 percent of
the 231,120 Vietnam-born, and 90.9 percent of the 20,175 Cambodians arrived in
this country in that five-year period.  Education and Earnings

The Census Bureau study found that foreign-born residents earned slightly less
than persons born in this country; that fewer foreign-born residents had
finished high school than native-born Americans, although about as many finished
college; and that about as many foreign-born as native Americans had
professional jobs.

On the average, about 16 percent of both the foreign-born and native-born are
college graduates, the bureau said.

However, immigrants from certain countries were far ahead of native- born
Americans in educational attainment: 66 percent of residents born in India had
college degrees, along with 60 percent of the Taiwanese and 49 percent of
Nigerian immigrants.

About 68 percent of native-born Americans are high school graduates as against
53 percent of immigrants. But again figures varied widely, from 97 percent of
arriving Nigerians to only 21 percent of Mexicans.

Median household income for the foreign-born was $14,588, against $17,010 for
the United States-born.

Arrivals from India averaged $25,644. But Nigerians, who also had a large number
with high school and college diplomas, averaged only $6,927.

Immigrants from Africa averaged 137 males for every 100 females, in contrast to
78 males per 100 females from both Europe and Asia. Latin America sends 98 males
per 100 females.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS

BYLINE: By Richard Levine and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2179 words


PEACE

is its own prize, of course, but for those devoted to its quest a Nobel can be
sweet encouragement. As with last year's award to Lech Walesa of Poland, leader
of the outlawed labor union Solidarity, last week's selection of South African
Bishop Desmond Tutu for his nonviolent campaign against apartheid is bound to be
interpreted by certain government officials as an effort to increase the
international pressure for change. And like last year's award and several others
of recent vintage, the choice of the 53-year-old religious leader underscores
the Norwegian Nobel Committee's focus on humanitarianism rather than diplomacy.
''World peace is more and more considered a matter of human rights,'' said Egil
Aarvik, the panel's chairman. ''Real peace is where people can live in
freedom.'' Just how much the award, the $190,000 and the inestimable prestige
that accompanies it aids Bishop Tutu in his efforts to establish racial and
political harmony remains to be seen, however. Over the years, laureates have
found that their Nobels have not guaranteed success, as the following survey by
correspondents of The New York Times suggests.  Adolfo Perez Esquivel Outlasting
Oppression

BUENOS AIRES - When Adolfo Perez Esquivel, the Argentine human rights activist,
won the prize in 1980, he was so little known that the Norwegian News Agency
identified him as a Brazilian. At home in Argentina, where the military was
still in power, the award provoked protests from the Government and death
threats against him and his family. But there was a positive side as well. ''The
prize gave international weight to these kind of problems in Latin America,''
Mr. Perez Esquivel said last week. ''We still continued to work in the same
manner, but it gave it more attention.''

The former architecture professor and sculptor was jailed by the Argentine
Government in April 1977 and released more than a year later without being
charged. Nevertheless, the follower of Gandhi continued his work for the Peace
and Justice Service, a small ecumenical organization that he still directs.

Since he won the award for his efforts, including organizing groups in Central
and South America that focused on improving social and economic conditions in
small communities, Argentina has elected a democratic Government, Mr. Perez
Esquivel's criticisms have been officially recognized and a presidential
commission has concluded that during the 1970's Government-sanctioned violence
resulted in the disappearence of 9,000 Argentines. Within a month, the nine
former junta members, including the officers who ordered Mr. Perez Esquivel's
arrest, are to be tried on charges they participated in the murders and torture.
Linus C. Pauling Rebel's Many Causes

Linus C. Pauling, who won the peace prize in 1962, eight years after winning
another Nobel for his work in chemical bonding, has continued his two-pronged
career. He is, by turns, a political activist and a chemist at the Linus Pauling
Institute of Science and Medicine in Palo Alto, Calif. And he is also at least
equally well known as an advocate of the use of vitamins for cancer and other
diseases. His insistence that large doses of Vitamin C will relieve or prevent
the common cold has been widely criticized in the medical community; in
response, Dr. Pauling is working on a second edition of his 1970 book on the
subject.

He lectures regularly on world peace and the arms race, and has in the last
three months spoken in South America, West Germany, Canada and the Soviet Union.
This continues a personal crusade against nuclear weapons that was credited with
helping bring about the test ban treaty between the Soviet Union and the United
States and his second Nobel. ''My winning the Nobel Prize made working for peace
respectable,'' said Dr. Pauling. ''Its effect was not so much on me and my
actions, but on my reputation with the American people, who realize that what I
say is in the interests of the United States and not just the Soviet Union.

''We've been on the wrong track, refusing to talk to the Soviet Union. Their
gross national product is half of ours, which makes the burden of keeping up
with us twice as heavy. We need to stop this exorbitant waste of money and
improve the standard of living on both sides, which eases the need for arms.''
Henry A. Kissinger Puzzled Recipient

WASHINGTON - Of all the recent prizes, the most surprising was probably the dual
award given in 1973 to Henry A. Kissinger and Le Duc Tho, the North Vietnamese
Politburo leader, for the negotiations leading to the Vietnamese cease-fire
signed earlier that year. By the time the Nobel was announced on Oct. 16, the
cease-fire was no longer holding. Dr. Kissinger, who was President Nixon's
national security adviser when he negotiated the agreement and who had also
assumed the post of Secretary of State at the time of the award, said later that
he was startled by the prize because he knew that the cease- fire would not
last.

In his memoirs, Dr. Kissinger said he also had doubts about his co-recipient's
qualifications: ''I could share a certain wonder that a representative of a
country that had invaded all neighboring countries could win a peace prize for
making a cease-fire that even then it was violating in every provision.''

Mr. Tho, in fact, rejected the award, complaining that the accord was not being
carried out. And Dr. Kissinger, who asked the Nobel Committee to donate the
entire $65,000 in prize money to a scholarship fund for children of American
servicemen killed or missing in action in Southeast Asia, tried to return his
prize after North Vietnam captured Saigon. Nobel officials refused, replying
that the latest events ''in no way reduce the Committee's appreciation of Dr.
Kissinger's sincere efforts to get a cease-fire agreement put into force in
1973.'' Willy Brandt Political Side-Effects

BONN - When West German Chancellor Willy Brandt won the prize in 1971 for his
reconciliatory policies toward Eastern Europe, he proclaimed it ''a high and
binding obligation.'' The prize caught him two years into his chancellorship,
with much spadework still to be done on his Ostpolitik, the outstretched hand to
peoples victimized by Nazi aggression. The award was a consolation to many
Germans still burdened by guilt over Hitler's war, and it helped neutralize the
Christian Democratic opposition to the Social Democrat's bold foreign policy.

Arnulf Baring, a pre-eminent historian of the Brandt era, confessed that he had
omitted to mention the peace prize in ''Power Switch,'' a recent account of the
period. ''I was criticized for it,'' said the historian, who mentioned the event
in subsequent editions, ''and I felt the criticism was valid.''

But Mr. Baring believes that the prize was ''harmful'' to Mr. Brandt's political
activities, which ended with his resignation over a spy scandal in 1974. ''He
was elevated too much and lost contact,'' maintained Mr. Baring. ''There is
always a tendency in Bonn to think of oneself as a spirit walking over the
waters. He didn't work; he sloughed off.''

Even so, Mr. Baring believes that the prize contributed to Mr. Brandt's enormous
fame outside Germany, helping to make him ''in some respects the most important
German we have.'' U.N. High Commissioner For Refugees The Work Goes On

UNITED NATIONS, N.Y. - The cables and telegrams from world leaders poured in
when the office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees won the
1981 prize. But none meant more than the handwritten letter Commissioner Poul
Hartling received from Quach Hue Lai and his family, refugee file no. iv 17011,
17157-61. ''Although you modestly and typically attributed the credit to the
refugees themselves, all of us here agree with the Nobel Committee that the
award serves to underscore and spotlight and acknowledge the contributions of
(the office) to the cause of the refugees and of more peaceful relations among
nations,'' the Vietnamese family wrote.

The Nobel provided a moment of recognition in the organization's quiet, largely
anonymous and apparently never-ending effort to protect and provide for refugees
fleeing political crossfires. But while the world instantly identifies Lech
Walesa or Mother Teresa, the bespectacled Mr. Hartling and his staff can still
stroll the streets of any city unknown. ''It was personally rewarding to the
Commissioner and it was the highest tribute to the institution,'' said an agency
representative, but there was no dramatic increase in staff, volunteers or
resources. The $180,000 in prize money was put in a special fund for handicapped
refugees.

Only the crises have changed in the years since the award, the commission's
second. In 1981, Mr. Hartling battled to save the lives of Vietnamese and
Cambodians. Then the former Danish prime minister had to worry about more than a
million Afghans who fled the Soviet invasion. Now concern is building about
those in Central America and Africa uprooted by political and social upheaval.
Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan Two Women of Ulser

BELFAST, Northern Ireland - The lives of the two Ulster women who won the 1976
prize have been completely transformed. Betty Williams was divorced in 1982 and
later married a Florida businessman, Jim Perkins, whom she met on a speaking
tour of the United States. She and her daughters now live in Jacksonville. In
July, she and three other Nobel winners boarded a boat to Nicaragua with a
shipload of supplies donated by Sweden and Norway. She broke off her contacts
with Northern Ireland's Peace People movement about two years before she
remarried and emigrated, and since then has had no communication with her fellow
prize-winner, Mairead Corrigan.

In 1981, Miss Corrigan was herself married to Jackie Maguire, the widower of her
sister, Anne, who committed suicide after the death of three children in a
terrorist incident in 1976, an event that helped inspire the peace group's
founding. From her home near Belfast, she speaks enthusiastically about the
opportunities a Nobel can create. ''It gives you an audience wherever you go and
a chance to promote the work of others whom you admire - like Professor
Esquivel, whom Betty and I twice nominated for the prize for his human rights
stand, and eventually helped to success.''

She remains active in the organization and is proud of the part the movement
plays in bringing together young Protestants and Catholics in work camps and
athletic activities in a city where 20-foot-high brick walls separate
communities. The Nobel still helps bring in money and assistance from Norway and
the United States, although the organization has been scaled down considerably
since the marches of 1976 and 1977. Still, Miss Corrigan refuses to be
discouraged by the continuing violence and even sees hope that the bombing in
Brighton earlier this month will convince more people that violence holds no
answers to the Irish problem.  Andrei D. Sakharov Laureate in Exile

MOSCOW - On the day his wife received his prize on his behalf, Andrei D.
Sakharov, barred from traveling to Oslo, was standing outside a courtroom in
Vilnius where a fellow human rights campaigner was on trial. Barred as well from
entering the courtroom, Dr. Sakharov cried out, ''My voice must be heard in
there. I have a right to shout.'' Those words summed up his commitment to human
rights activism as eloquently as the 5,000-word address read in Oslo by his
wife, Yelena G. Bonner.

Nine years later, Soviet authorities have succeeded, for the moment at least, in
silencing Dr. Sakharov. They have barred him not only from travel abroad, or
entry into the courtrooms where many activists have been tried and sentenced,
but from all contact with the outside world. Banished in January 1980 to the
Volga River city of Gorky, where foreigners are forbidden to travel and friends
may not visit on pain of harassment or house arrest, Dr. Sakharov is sealed off.
Mrs. Bonner, his last link with Moscow, has reportedly been tried and is banned
from leaving Gorky. The 63-year-old Dr. Sakharov was reported to have begun a
hunger strike in May, and since then there has been no reliable word on his
welfare. Outsiders must rely on brief, bland statements from Soviet officials
and a montage of surreptitious film clips sold to the West for confirmation even
that he is alive.

Dr. Sakharov cherished his Nobel. In the frequent appeals and statements he
issued, typed single-spaced on onion-skin paper for easier concealment from
authorities, he often signed himself ''A. Sakharov, Nobel Prize laureate.'' He
understood that the honor had secured him international recognition and insured
that when he raised his voice it would be heard. Since 1975, the Soviet Union
has carried out a systematic and successful program to destroy the organized
dissent movement. The award, along with his status as one of the country's
leading physicists, may also have helped save him from the labor camps to which
many of his companions were sent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan; photo of Henry Kissinger;
photo of Willy Brandt; photo of Bishop Desmond Tutu

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOUTHEAST ASIANS PONDER AMERICA'S RETRENCHMENT

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 881 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK


The self-confident free-market nations of Southeast Asia, their buoyant
economies only slightly slowed by a recession they seem to have weathered better
than most of the developing world, are beginning to plan for the 1990's. Three
nations loom large in their plans:


* Japan, whose economic penetration has set off alarms. Last week, Thai students
announced a boycott-Japan campaign, and Thailand's Board of Investment chief
warned Japanese managers to stop neglecting Thai employees. In Kuala Lumpur, the
Japanese have been accused of using the Malaysian Government's 'look East'
policy to open a one-way street from Tokyo.


* China, which, with its new economic reforms and impending absorption of Hong
Kong, holds immense potential. If it stays on course, planners say, through
sheer size of market and labor forces, China will eventually outstrip Japan.


* And then there is the United States. What, Southeast Asians ask, are we to
make of the Americans? ''We have problems with America,'' said Dr. Snoh Unakul,
the Columbia University- trained head of Thailand's national development board.
For many Asians, the greatest problem is seen as an uncharacteristic American
tendency to run from competition and hide behind higher and higher walls of
protectionism. The Reagan Administration has exhorted Southeast Asians to
develop the private sector. But as new industries gather strength, they almost
inevitably run into difficulties with one American lobby or another, like the
challenge Thailand has just survived from the canned tuna industry.  From
Southeast Asia, American policy can appear to be a collection of sometimes
conflicting special interests. Beyond the economic arena, for example, there
have been efforts in Congress to cut off aid to Thailand, a crucial ally,
because opium poppy fields are not being destroyed. ''A strong America as the
leader of the modernization process should be able to move like a real leader,
not a reluctant and confused leader, which is what is now going on,'' Dr. Snoh
said. Southeast Asians see the United States becoming chiefly an investor,
particularly in joint ventures that develop local skills. United States
investment has grown considerably, much of it in energy after of the 1970's oil
crises. Last year, Americans edged out the Europeans for the first time as
Singapore's largest investors. Planners also expect continued American
management assistance and communications technology, but the region hopes to
expand in those areas, too. Singapore's Prime Minister, Lee Kuan Yew, plans to
direct the coming generation in his high tech economy into communications.

For many here, the visible American presence has diminished substantially in the
decade since the Vietnam War. American economic aid, about $30 million annually,
is relatively low - only $5 million more than Australian or West German aid.
Japanese officials in Bangkok offer no overall total but say Japanese projects
for the first half of 1984 topped $40 million. Many are highly publicized and
imaginative: a ship, for example, that takes Southeast Asian and Japanese youths
on intercultural learning cruises.

Low-Keyed VolunteersBy comparison, Americans, including 200 Peace Corps
volunteers, work in relative obscurity, which many seem to prefer. This
low-keyed approach, contrasting with the high-profile Yankee military presence
of the 1960's and early 70's, is sometimes little appreciated. ''I don't
understand these American volunteers,'' said Paul Liou, a Laotian-born United
Nations agronomist. ''They seem to come here to learn the local culture and
criticize their own.''

In Southeast Asian cities, daily life brings little contact with American
products, except for fast foods, videos, cosmetics and films. Cars are Japanese
or Western European; electronic goods, taxis and even fire engines also come
from Japan. Mercedes buses carry tourists from Tokyo, Stockholm and Paris. No
American airline has regularly scheduled service to Bangkok. American visitors,
while up about 10 percent this year, are greatly outnumbered by Europeans and
Asians, despite the dollar's strength.

Construction bids in Southeast Asia's booming cities increasingly go to
Japanese, who are described by Thai officials as ''forthcoming in commitment to
funds for infrastructure'' and able to work faster and cheaper.

If Americans are being talked about in some circles as people from a bygone
industrial age, the Chinese are viewed as people of the future. They have
built-in advantages, if ideological gaps continue to narrow, notably through the
ethnic and linguistic affinities of overseas Chinese who have long dominated
business and banking.

To Dr. Snoh, the Chinese are the new pragmatists. ''They have set their minds on
the Four Modernizations (in industry, agriculture, science and technology and
the military),'' he said. ''They are building up and institutionalizing this
process to a great degree by sending people for training overseas.'' At the
Asian Institute of Technology, near Bangkok, where Chinese students are
beginning to join their Southeast Asian counterparts, the institute's president,
Alastair M. North, shares this view. ''The Peoples Republic will emerge as a
major power,'' he said. ''It is a matter of when, not if.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHILE ATLANTIC CITY ROLLS ON, LAS VEGAS COMES UP LOSING

BYLINE: By IVER PETERSON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 947 words

DATELINE: LAS VEGAS, Nev.


Check in for a flight to Las Vegas and chances are that with your boarding pass
you'll get a little pack of coupons called a Las Vegas FunBook. Register at a
hotel here - other coupons come with the room key, these called FunPak or Fun
Spree and the like. A dinner at a different hotel will bring yet another little
batch of coupons courtesy of the establishment. All are designed to lure the
visitor toward the casinos, lounges and supper clubs up and down the Vegas Strip
with offers: for instance, a shrimp cocktail for only 99 cents at the Imperial
Palace.

People who remember Las Vegas's boom years say they find it hard to believe that
the mighty pleasure palaces that line The Strip would be at all interested in
anyone who thought a few dollars off on a shrimp cocktail was worth a detour.
Penny-pinchers were never very popular here. But as the coupon offers
demonstrate, ''Vegas'' has changed. It's looking for new customers as it tries
to adjust to new competition, a different kind of trade and new technologies.

Sometime in the next six months or so, Atlantic City is expected to surpasses
Las Vegas in gross revenues and claim the title of national gambling capital.
The rapid rise of Atlantic City since the first dice were tossed in May 1978 has
cut heavily into the cream of Las Vegas' carriage trade, the canny crap shooters
and card players who came to gamble and gambol in the glittering unreality of
the place.

''There is a stereotype you hear about the New York gambler,'' said William
Eadington, an economics professor at the University of Nevada in Reno and one of
the state's leading gambling analysts.

''He's a businessman who likes to gamble with cash, a free-spender who likes the
casino ambiance and who traditionally would fly to Las Vegas two or three times
a year to gamble,'' Professor Eadington went on. ''Now he has found out it's
easier to go to Atlantic City five or six times a year instead, and that has
been a loss to Vegas. That chunk of the market is simply gone, and it has taken
the city some time to regain growth.''

While Atlantic City was attracting more and more of the East's gamblers, Las
Vegas was hit hard by the five-fold devaluation of the Mexican peso in 1982,
which served to drive away a lucrative Mexican clientele. And because the
Mexican high-rollers' debts were in dollars and their incomes in pesos, many of
the big casinos found themselves with millions in bad debts amounting, Professor
Eadington estimates, to more tha half of the total gross receipts of some of
them in 1982.

As a result, gambling receipts for Las Vegas and the surrounding Clark County,
which had been growing at a 15 percent annual rate in 1979 slowed to a 6.3
percent growth rate in 1981 and 3.7 percent in 1982, recovering to 8.4 percent
on gross receipts of $2 billion last year. The rest of Nevada, notably Reno,
Lake Tahoe and the upstart town of Wendover, accounted for just under $1 billion
in receipts for the year.

Atlantic City, meanwhile, also felt the effects of the 1981-82 recession,
forever exploding the myth that gambling is recession-proof, but has maintained
a fairly steady average growth rate of about 10 percent since it opened, and
last year grossed about $1.7 billion. It is worth noting, however, that there
are just 10 casinos in Atlantic City, compared to 17 on the Las Vegas Strip and
dozens more in the downtown area and outlyng reaches of the county.

A New ClienteleTo lure new business, Las Vegas has - reluctantly, some say -
embraced the Southern Californians who have emerged as the city's bedrock
clientele nowadays. Market studies show that these people typically have less
time and money to spend, stay in cheaper accommodations and are less
knowledgeable about gambling. By and large, they prefer slot machines or video
poker to the old Las Vegas staples, the craps, blackjack and 21 tables.

''I think it's a shame,'' said Doris Meeker, a cocktail waitress for ''longer
than you want to know,'' who thinks Las Vegas has lost some of its old style.
''Now its slots, slots, slots. The old shows are mostly gone, even Caesar's is
after the walk-in trade,'' she said.

Indeed, Caesar's Palace, the city's premier draw for high rollers, an
establishment set far back off The Strip as though to underline its exclusivity,
has installed moving sidewalks to whisk strollers in from Las Vegas Boulevard.
Circus Circus, one of the more aggressive of the casinos, has installed a huge
motor-home trailer park, ''The Best RV Park in the World,'' next door.

Whether because of a decline in the social status of its visitors compared to
earlier years, or because of changes in society at large, the action at Las
Vegas and all other casino resort towns has also changed, with mechanical
gambling - slots and video poker, for the most part - rapidly displacing the
traditional table games.

In 1976, for example, there were 23,040 table games and 39,281 slot machines
operating statewide in 101 major casinos, according to the Nevada Gaming
Abstract, with the table games accounting for 58.2 percent and the slots 31.8
percent of total receipts.

In 1983, in contrast, Nevada had 75,486 slot machines and only 3,800 table
games, with the slot machines accounting for 50 percent of the take and the
tables only 42 percent.

One reason for the decline in table games, Professor Eadington speculated, is
the decline in general understanding of the game of craps, with its intimidating
array of options, as veterans of the World War II and the Korean War age. ''In
Vietnam you didn't have the old sarge out behind the barracks showing how it's
done,'' he said. ''The sociology of the game has changed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of slot machines and patrons in Atlantic City

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;
SOVIET, CHINESE TALKING AGAIN

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim, Carlyle C. Douglas and Henry Giniger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 269 words


Soviet officials last week were reminded anew that Kremlin behavior is often
resented, not least by fellow Communists and Moscow's aid clients in the third
world.

Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Leonid F. Ilyichev returned to Peking to resume
the deadlocked two- year-old discussions on normalizing relations with China.
Deng Xiaoping, China's senior leader, advised visiting Japanese politicians to
expect ''nothing but a routine meeting'' because the Russians had not budged on
''the three big obstacles.'' He referred to Moscow's refusal to withdraw the
Soviet forces in Afghanistan, to end Soviet support for Vietnam's occupation of
Cambodia and to sharply reduce troops and SS-20 nuclear missiles along China's
border. Soviet newspapers blamed Chinese stubbornness for the deadlock. But
there has been improvement on less-political issues. Chinese-Soviet trade is
expected to pass $1 billion this year, up 80 percent from 1983.

In another apparently thorny encounter last week, Syria's President, Hafez
al-Assad, spent three days with Soviet leaders. Moscow newspapers omitted the
usual accounts of banquet speeches, prompting diplomats to detect signs of
disagreement. Syria is not pleased with recent Soviet overtures to its Arab
rivals, Egypt and Iraq. Syrians and Russians are also at odds over which
Palestinians to support, with Moscow standing by Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O.
chairman. The communique issued after Mr. Assad's talks called for ''speedy
settlement of the disputes with the P.L.O.,'' condemned American policy in the
Middle East and promised continued Soviet economic aid to Syria.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE CASE AGAINST LIBERATION THEOLOGY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 51, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5012 words


Michael Novak, resident scholar in religion, philosophy and public policy at the
American Enterprise Institute in Washington, is the author of ''Freedom With
Justice: Catholic Social Thought and Liberal Institutions,'' to be published
next month.

CHRIST LED ME TO MARX,'' bluntly declares Ernesto Cardenal, the Nicaraguan
priest Pope John Paul II wagged an admonishing finger at during the Pontiff's
arrival ceremony at the Managua airport last year. ''I do not think the Pope
understands Marxism,'' says Father Cardenal, the Sandinist Minister of Culture
and an advocate of liberation theology, in a recent interview. ''For me, the
four Gospels are all equally Communist. I'm a Marxist who believes in God,
follows Christ and is a revolutionary for the sake of His kingdom.''

Leonardo Boff, the Brazilian Franciscan summoned to Rome last month to defend
his decidedly proliberation theology views, wrote shortly afterward in the
left-wing Rome newspaper Paese Sera that Pope John Paul II's view of Marxism,
reflected in a 36-page Vatican document on liberation theology, is ''a kind of
caricature.'' Friar Boff says that the document, which endorses the Church's
commitment to the poor while condemning Marxism, seems ''to believe what is on
the label of the bottle before trying the real contents.'' He sets aside the
Pontiff's lifetime experience of Marxism, asserting: ''Marxism is a principally
European theme. In Latin America, the big enemy is not Marxism, it is
capitalism.''

The debate between the Pope and such Roman Catholic clerics as Father Cardenal
and Friar Boff involves the United States. For the main enemy of liberation
theology, according to its founder, the Rev. Gustavo Gutierrez of Peru, and many
of its adherents, is the United States.

In his electrifying and seminal book, ''A Theology of Liberation,'' Father
Gutierrez writes that ''among more alert groups today, what we have called a new
awareness of Latin American reality is making headway. They believe that there
can be authentic development for Latin America only if there is liberation from
the domination exercised by the great capitalist countries, especially by the
most powerful, the United States of America.''

Liberation theology is a method of defining Christian faith in the political
context of underdevelopment, in a partisan spirit committed to action. It is not
distinctive for wishing to apply Christian faith to social action. It is not
more concerned about ''the working class'' or ''the poor'' than Pope Leo XIII,
whose 1891 encyclical underlined Catholicism's responsibility to these groups.
Nor can it be universally defined as Marxist. Yet it gains its excitement from
flirting with Marxist thought and speech, and from its hostility to the
''North.'' Today, nearly 50 percent of the world's 800 million Catholics live in
developing nations - predominantly in Latin America and the Philippines, but
also in Africa and the small yet vital Catholic communities of Southeast Asia.
If Marxism, even of a mild sort, flourishes in these lands, and if it were to be
officially blessed by Catholicism, two powerful symbolic forces would then have
joined hands. What would be the actual consequences of such a merger? Would the
revolution - for that would be the first effect - truly eradicate past
traditions of political oppression and poverty? Would liberation theology truly
liberate?  ''The indispensable cry for justice and the preferential solidarity
with the poor need not be mortgaged to ideologies foreign to the faith,'' the
Pope said, criticizing the new theology at a recent address to a delegation of
Peruvian bishops in Rome. At the same time, he condemned ''subhuman'' poverty,
which can and must be overcome.  About liberation theology, Pope John Paul II is
less trusting than such clergy as Father Cardenal and Friar Boff. The Pope, who
rebuked Father Cardenal in a vivid scene televised worldwide, has ordered the
priest to quit the Marxist-inspired Sandinist Government.  Liberation theology
is indeed a much broader tapestry than its Marxist thread, which is just one of
its many flaws. It is a robe of many vibrant colors. Yet, this theology is to
Marxist analysis what ''popular fronts'' have typically been to Marxist
movements elsewhere. The Vatican has carefully avoided making the mistake of
thinking that all such theology is Marxist or that the condemnation of Marxist
elements will bring an end to its long-term vitality.

THE WRITING AND LECTURES ON LIBERATION THEology by Gustavo Gutierrez have been
influential far beyond his native Peru. His book, published in 1971, has since
been followed by those of an intellectual school of clergymen that includes Juan
Luis Segundo of Uruguay (''A Theology for Artisans of a New Humanity,'' five
volumes); Jose Miguez Bonino of Argentina (''Christians and Marxists: The Mutual
Challenge to Revolution''); Hugo Assmann of Brazil (''A Theology for a Nomad
Church''); Alfredo Fierro of Spain (''The Militant Gospel''), and Friar Boff
(''Jesus Christ Liberator''). Most of the intellectual leaders, in Latin America
especially, have been trained in Europe; a few are European or North American
missionaries.

Still, some Latin American experts say that liberation theology affects only a
minority of the clergy, even among theologians, and that the symbolic strength
of the movement is exaggerated internationally by the apparent marketability of
writing by liberation theologians, whose works are translated far more often
into other languages than those of their critics.

Strong defenders of liberation theology such as Arthur F. McGovern, professor of
philosophy at the University of Detroit and author of ''Marxism: An American
Christian Perspective,'' point out the large differences among the major
proponents of liberation theology. Father McGovern, who is a Jesuit, says most
are neither atheist nor materialist, as their critics contend, and they are
generally careful to avoid or to modify concepts of class hatred, violence and
''class struggle.'' Their starting point is not Marxism but an awareness of the
structural causes of poverty; their faith commitment leads them to use the
insights from Marxist critiques of society. However, in the liberation-theology
advocates' sharp critiques of the status quo, he says, their critics ''hear''
Marxism when they are saying something quite different.

More significant, the new theology has given rise to a teaching body made up of
hundreds of activist priests and sisters - and it has inspired hundreds of
thousands of the Catholic faithful.

Many theologians take liberation theology seriously as a theology, rather than
regarding it as merely a political vision. Some Christians who are nonpolitical
find that its analysis helps them escape self-centered pietism. At the very
least, it describes Christian faith in terms closer to those of today's
newspapers and magazines, making faith seem less distant from reality. Since
Marx modeled his theory on key items of Christian faith, even the Marxist
tendencies of liberation theology seem less like political parody than like
theological mirrors.

Through United States missionaries, liberation theology has reached the United
States not only to the many Catholics in Congress but to the Speaker of the
House, Thomas P. (Tip) O'Neill Jr. Sister Jeanne Gallo of the Sisters of Notre
Dame de Namur, a former missionary in Brazil and a member of the Nicaragua
Action Group in Cambridge, Mass. (Speaker O'Neill's home district), keeps him
informed on political currents. ''We realized that Mr. O'Neill was key to what
happened in the House,'' she says. ''The group decided to work on educating him
about Central America.''

Mr. O'Neill's aunt had been a Maryknoll. ''I have great trust in the order,'' he
says. ''When the nuns and priests come through, I ask them questions about their
feelings, what they see, who the enemy is, and I'm sure I get the truth. I
haven't found any of these missionaries who aren't absolutely opposed to this
policy,'' he adds, referring to the Reagan Administration.

IT IS NOT DIFFICULT TO imagine how so much confusion has arisen over the
solution to Latin America's poverty. Put yourself in the place of an idealistic
priest or sister during the 1960's, fresh from theological studies in Europe or
North America, fired with a vision of social justice and the relevance of
Christian teachings to this world and sent to work among the poor of Latin
America's teeming cities. On unpaved streets, in shacks with no plumbing, among
children badly clothed and poorly fed, most of these priests and sisters arrived
with political- social ideals formed by social- democratic currents in Europe
and North America - but without the traditional support of the middle class. To
many, the Christian Democratic parties of Latin America, by then at least a
generation old, seemed far too weak. They felt faster action was needed.

These ardent spirits encountered two solid cultural problems. First, folk
Catholicism in Latin America has long emphasized personal, familial piety - but
not much social action or public responsibility. Second, the traditional church
itself - not only in the history of its bishops but also among the upper classes
who have supported its schools, orphanages and other good works - seemed to be
part of the very establishment responsible for Latin America's social ills.
These two powerful Latin- Catholic traditions appeared to block progress for the
poor.

Enter Father Gutierrez. His book enunciated a new approach to Latin America's
problems, which were unlike those in Germany, Switzerland or France. With him,
Latin Americans claimed they were rediscovering a Judeo-Christian theme as old
as the Exodus itself. They were also declaring their intellectual independence
from the prevailing theological models of Western Europe and North America.

Some European theologians have praised liberation theology, but they find little
that has not been closely pioneered by Europeans who had learned their methods
of political analysis from social democracy and from the ''young, humanist''
Marx. Some ask, what is so ''new'' about liberation theology? Critics assert it
will na"ively deliver Latin America to the Communists.

If this debate had been contained solely among intellectuals, perhaps nothing
much would have come of it. But as Brazil's ''economic miracle'' in the 1960's
faded and military rule commenced; as the elected Government of Salvador Allende
was toppled and replaced by the repressive dictatorship of Gen. Augusto
Pinochet; as a broadly based revolution in Nicaragua overthrew the autocracy of
Anatasio Somoza, and as leftist guerrilla movements arose in Peru, Bolivia,
Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala and elsewhere, liberation theology appeared to
leap to life.

At the same time, beginning with the Second Vatican Council, from 1962 to 1965,
the Latin American bishops had discovered a new unity and a resolve to attack
their sociopolitical problems head-on. While some bishops remained
traditionalists, many more grasped the challenge of social action in terms
analogous to those of their colleagues in Western Europe and North America.
Others adopted more ''radical'' views. Meeting in 1968, at Medellin, Colombia,
the entire episcopal conference of Latin American bishops issued a letter that
became the manifesto of a new church clearly committed to a much-needed, long-
delayed social transformation of the continent.

The Medellin document spoke of ''External Neocolonialism,'' asserting that ''the
countries which produce raw materials - especially if they are dependent upon
one major export - always remain poor, while the industrialized countries enrich
themselves.'' While the bishops urged ways of nonviolence and peace, their use
of ''liberation'' - introducing the term before Father Gutierrez - was charged
with the energy of revolutionary expectation. To the astonishment of many
observers, they concluded: ''We wish to emphasize that the principal guilt for
the economic dependence of our countries rests with powers'' - foreign powers -
''inspired by uncontrolled desire for gain. . . .''


It is not a long jump from Medellin to the judgment of one of the most
explicitly Marxist of the liberation theologians, Hugo Assmann, that Latin
Americans are ''being kept in a state of underdevelopment.''

The judgments of Medellin most useful to liberation theologians are not its
theological judgments. Rather, the bishops' empirical assessment of the
continent, as mapped out by James V. Schall, an American Jesuit and author of
''Liberation Theology in Latin America,'' described the following chain: poverty
- dependency - exploitation - ''conscientization'' - revolution.

Writing from Sao Paolo, the critic and theologian Francois Hubert Lepargneur
condenses the message: ''By casting all the blame for Latin American
underdevelopment on the shoulders of international capitalism, these believers
are too ready to excuse the responsibility of Iberian Christianity and of its
Latin American clerical representatives.

''We are the good guys, the oppressed. The others are bad, the oppressors. Who
are they? Principally the United States when it is a question of economics and
hence of imperialism. . . .''

THE NEW TEACHing of the Medellin conference coincided with the rise of a new
school of thought among secular social scientists - the so-called dependency
theory. For some social activists, this new theory articulated two vague
self-perceptions: Latin American nations have been disproportionately dependent
on external economic activities and decisions, and the inequalities between the
very rich and the very poor (with an unusually small middle class) was analogous
to Marx's ''class struggle'' between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. This
revisionist theory gave Marxism a new lease on life.

These two movements - the birth of social conscience in the church and the rise
of secular theories of dependency - appeared to many to go hand in hand,
although there is no necessary reason why they should. Even if dependency theory
is largely false, as many of its original propagators now believe, Catholic
social thought retains its own validity.

Prominent Catholic leaders associated with liberation theology typically mix
these two streams of discourse. On the one hand, they try to show at every
opportunity that Catholic social thought has implications for the restructuring
of unjust societies. And so it does. Ever since Pope Leo XIII's Rerum Novarum in
1891 and Pope Pius XI's sequel, ''Reconstructing the Social Order'' in 1931,
this point has not been in dispute. The Catholic Church has in recent decades
placed itself firmly on the side of human rights, economic development and the
defense of religious liberty.

On the other hand, in diagnosing the specific ills of Latin America,
particularly the economic order, Latin American church leaders, traditionally
anticapitalist, sometimes identify their societies as ''capitalist.'' But most
Latin American countries exhibit economies that are precapitalist -
disproportionately state-directed. The three leading classes are still
government officials, landholders and the military. Yet it is precisely here, in
its economic theories, that liberation theology comes dangerously close to
Marxist analysis - and where most of the confusion arises.

''Today the only thing we can do is to decide whether we are going to leave to
individuals and private groups, or to take away from them, the right to possess
the means of production which exist in our countries,'' Father Segundo writes.
''That is what we call the option for capitalism or socialism.''

While clear-eyed in his analysis of Marxist popular fronts, Pope John Paul II
has frequently criticized ''rigid capitalism.'' During a recent visit to Canada,
he denounced what the press accounts summarized as ''unfettered capitalism,''
attacking those who ignore ''the needs of the many in pursuit of profits for the
few.'' The Pope spoke of ''imperialistic'' monopolies among the rich nations.
Yet, he did not mean to condemn capitalism, only to criticize its excesses.
Advocates of liberation theology are clearly wrong if they think the Pope is
soft on capitalism. He recognizes early the disguises in which Marxists hide
their purposes.

In his book, ''Christians and Marxists'', Jose Bonino, the Methodist theologian,
quotes Fidel Castro as exclaiming in wonder, ''The theologians are becoming
Communists and the Communists are becoming theologians!'' While elsewhere in the
world Marxism as an intellectual current seems on its deathbed, in Latin America
Marxism and the church may need each other. Eric Hobsbawm, a leading Marxist
historian at the University of London, explains in a 1978 article that ''the
churches are now left free to move left, for neither the right nor the state can
any longer protect them against erosion. Some Christians may thus hope to
retain, or more doubtfully, regain the support of the masses believed to be
identified with the left. It is a surprising development. Conversely, parties of
the Marxist left, seeking to widen their support, are more inclined to abandon
their traditional identification with active opposition to religion.''

But the dependency theory, whence socialism in Latin America seeks to derive its
legitimacy, has serious factual problems. First, countries such as Canada and
the United States have become far larger exporters of raw materials - grain,
lumber, coal - than all of Latin America put together. As the economist John
Kenneth Galbraith says, ''If to be part of the third world is to be a hewer of
wood and a supplier of food and natural produce, the United States and Canada
are, by a wide margin, the first of the third-world countries.''

Second, such countries as Taiwan, Japan and South Korea of the East Asia rim,
are far poorer in natural resources than Latin America, yet have in recent years
been far more successful in building highly intelligent and dynamic free
economies, overcoming poverty worse in 1945 than that of Latin America.

Dependency theory ill explains why Latin America is poor; poverty existed long
before capitalism was a gleam in Adam Smith's eye. Even more inadequately does
it explain why Latin America has done so much worse with its own vast resources
than stellar performers like Singapore, Hong Kong and others with infinitely
less.  THERE ARE, then, both theological and practical reasons for rejecting the
main claims of liberation theology. Its single greatest flaw lies in combining
two quite different methods of analysis in an effort to overcome ''dualism,''
rejecting European and North American distinctions between religion and
politics, church and state, theological principles and partisan practice.
Liberation theology says that truth lies in revolutionary praxis. So extreme is
this position that Father Segundo can claim that the choice of socialism
-''human life in society, liberated as far as possible from alienations'' -
constitutes the highest real value, at the ''theological crux,'' and that to say
otherwise reduces the Gospel to ''no value at all.''


Needless to say, Catholic faith, whose chief guardian is the papacy, cannot
accept such a claim. From the beginning of his pontificate, Pope John Paul II
has built a case against ''liberation theology.'' He believes that religion must
transcend politics, and that the primacy of the spiritual can be surrendered by
no Christianity worthy of the name.

''Would you go to communion alongside General Pinochet?'' asks the British
religious writer Peter Hebblethwaite, graphically describing the visible
distortion liberation theologians introduce into Christianity. ''On the whole,
they answer 'no.' He is a class enemy. But if someone raises the objection that
Christians are commanded to love their enemies, the theologians of liberation do
not demur. But they go on to produce a whole casuistry which enables them to
combine class war with, so to speak, a postponed love of enemies.''

Many liberation theologians deny they reduce everything to revolutionary praxis.
If true, this defense robs this theology of its most important claim to
originality, its identification of theologizing with revolutionary action. A
more moderate judgment seems to be that most liberation theologians do want to
save the transcendent claims of Christianity on the one hand, while on the other
hand insisting that Christian faith demands choice, partisanship, action. Most
do not reduce Christianity to class struggle or to the commitment to socialism.
Yet the Marxist vulgate of so much Latin American intellectual life obliges them
to think in terms of Marxist analysis.

Pope John Paul II lived his entire adult life in the bosom of Marxist analysis,
far more rigorously and cynically applied than anything Latin Americans have yet
experienced, except in Cuba and possibly Nicaragua. No Marxist thinker in Latin
America has attained the stature of the Pope's Polish compatriot, the Marxist
philospher Leszek Kolakowski. Joseph Cardinal Ratzinger, prefect of the Sacred
Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and the Pope's longtime ally, also
has firsthand knowledge of Germany's bitter ideological struggles among
Stalinists, Trotskyites, democratic socialists and social democrats. These men
know well the sociology of the ''slippery slope'' - principles one generation
accepts provisionally harden into icy dogmas for a next generation brought up on
nothing else.

The Pope believes that whoever accepts Marxist analysis sooner or later
authorizes the bold and the ruthless to draw consequences for action. The
clergymen who employ it without drawing its inexorable consequences would have
won the contempt of the young Marx of the Manifesto: ''Christian socialism is
but the holy water with which the priest consecrates the heartburnings of the
aristocrat.''

Surprisingly, no liberation theologian has yet clarified what Marxist analysis
means. But the indications that they give are not consoling. Consider the
following elements:

The new man and the new earth. Father Gutierrez writes in ''The Theology of
Liberation'' that ''emancipation'' is ''to see man in search of a qualitatively
different society in which he will be free from all servitude, in which he will
be the artisan of his own destiny. It is to seek the building of a new man.
Ernesto (Che) Guevara wrote, 'We revolutionaries often lack the knowledge and
the intellectual audacity to face the task of the development of a new human
being by methods different from the conventional ones. . . .' ''

The utopian sensibility. According to Father Segundo, writing in ''Liberation
North, Liberation South,'' the goal of liberation theology is ''the permanent
opening up of society to its future.''

A na"ive vision of the state. One might well ask, has any government been
concerned solely for the common good - and not for the particular goods of the
ruling elite? The trust shown by liberation theologians in state ownership shows
how close they are to traditionalist Latin American conceptions of authoritarian
control. Even today in most Latin nations, state authorities control more than
50 or 60 percent of the economy (including banks and many basic industries), and
in some cases as much as 80 percent, directly or indirectly, of all employment.

No theory of wealth creation. Marxist analysis, which has as its precondition
capitalism's successful creation of wealth, simply takes affluence for granted
and assumes poverty is caused solely by exploitation. Nothing is said about
creating new wealth, about invention, about entrepreneurship. My poverty is ipso
facto someone else's fault, and its cure is the expropriation of the
expropriators. The dependista theory, placing the onus for poverty and oppressor
on exogenous forces, primarily North America, has been invented to apply this
myth to precapitalist lands.

The abolition of private property. This notion recurs as the crucial theme of
virtually all liberation theologians. There is, to be sure, some confusion on
this score. I once heard Paolo Cardinal Arns of Brazil say something to the
effect that ''it is not for the Church to pronounce on capitalism or socialism.
One thing is clear, however: We must reject capitalism, which is based on
selfishness. We believe in the right of workers to own their own land and to
keep their profits for themselves, and therefore we incline toward socialism.''

Class struggle. Father Gutierrez writes that ''the class struggle is a fact, and
neutrality in this question is not possible.'' He may mean only that the poor
must be helped, that poverty is neither necessary nor acceptable. Adam Smith
said as much. One does not need Marxist analysis in order to liberate the poor.

The evils accompanying private property, the profit motive, multinational
corporations, international finance and, in a word, capitalism. Here, the
liberation theologians, standing almost entirely outside the Anglo- American
intellectual tradition, totally fail to grasp the genius of the free economy in
the free and pluralistic polity. Most liberation theologians tend to have a
naive faith in socialism, despite scores of socialist experiments around the
world since 1945. They have an uncommon trust in the political elites to whom
they intend to confide all economic (and other) decisions. They adamantly
believe that selfishness, sin and injustice are inherent in, and do not just
accompany the institutions of a free economy. They believe this despite abundant
evidence that the world's freest communities, with the strongest (albeit flawed)
institutions of human rights, have relatively free economies.  WHILE THE Vatican
has brilliantly diagnosed the ways in which some liberation theologians risk
confounding authentic Catholic belief, my own objections are directed more
centrally at their flawed vision of political economy. Most liberal theologians
are so intent upon revolution against injustice that they give little thought to
the shape of the institutions of political economy they intend to put in place
after the revolution.

Cardinal Ratzinger's instruction last month was fairly succinct: ''Millions of
our own contemporaries legitimately yearn to recover those basic freedoms of
which they were deprived by totalitarian and atheistic regimes which came to
power by violent and revolutionary means, precisely in the name of the
liberation of the people. This shame of our time cannot be ignored: While
claiming to bring them freedom, these regimes keep whole nations in conditions
of servitude which are unworthy of mankind. Those who, perhaps inadvertently,
make themselves accomplices of similar enslavements betray the poor they mean to
help.''

To the skeptical eye, liberation theology for all its good intentions promises a
mirror image of the Latin American authoritarian societies of the past, but this
time of the left rather than of the right. Once again, economic decisions will
be state-controlled. Once again, many theologians will identify Christianity
with the Latin American state.

The missing link in liberation theology is the absence of a concrete vision of
political economy. It refuses to say how safeguards for human rights, economic
development and personal liberties will be instituted after the revolution.
Liberation theology appears to trust its own fervent Christianity as a
sufficient brake on tyranny. This is na"ivete - already unmasked in Nicaragua.

A crucial condition for genuine liberation is that no one group of men gains all
power over politics, economics, morals and culture. The absorption of all life
by a state ideology is the Achilles' heel of existing socialist systems. The
separation of systems - the hard-won lessons of liberal societies - do achieve
liberation.

FRIAR LEONARDO Boff of Brazil left his ''dialogue'' with Cardinal Ratzinger in
Rome, smiling, confident and cocky enough to continue upbraiding the Vatican for
its alleged na"ivete. Two Brazilian cardinals flanked him, somewhat
symbolically. Friar Boff will probably not be further reprimanded. Now
liberation theologians will busily begin to show how the Cardinal Ratzinger
declaration does not apply to them. Perhaps, in so doing, they may become more
''critical'' - precisely the chief recommendation of Cardinal Ratzinger - about
the vaguely Marxist thinking their works have exhibited.

If traditional Latin American societies are unacceptable, and if Marxism is
unacceptable, then what? Estimates based on demographic statistics project that
Latin America will need at least 76 million new jobs by 1999. Will generals,
landholders or commissars create these new jobs? Even a little economic
sophistication - learned perhaps from East Asia - will suggest that Latin
America needs an unprecedented burst of entrepreneurship and industrial and
commercial activity. Revolutionaries in Cuba, Nicaragua and Vietnam, among other
Communist countries, mostly create huge armies. Only economic activists create
jobs. Sooner or later, liberation theologians will need to grapple with how new
wealth can be created and sustained systematically.

Regrettably, liberation theologians never look northward except in anger. They
will not concede that the United States, too, embodies a kind of liberation
theology - liberal, pluralistic, communitarian, public-spirited, dynamic and
inventive. Such a liberal society is not, has never promised to be, either a
utopia or a sinless paradise. Especially regarding Latin America, our society
has committed a full complement of sins. But mutual criticism does not
presuppose innocence. Let us hope that the Latin Americans can build free
societies, uplifting all their poor, better than we have done. In any case,
there are more liberation theologies in this world, committed to practice, to
trial and error, and to self-reform, than the liberation theologians of South
America have yet to dream of.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Pope John Paul II; photo of Friar Leonardo Boff; photo of
priest celbrating mass in El Salvador

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPRERBACK BEST SELLERS Ocr. 21,1984 ;
Fiction*1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 60, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 762 words


THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.  *2

BLOOD AND ORCHIDS, by Norman Katkov.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four Hawaiian youths
are accused of raping a Navy officer's wife.  *3

FIREFOX DOWN, by Craig Thomas. (Bantam, $3.95.) A sequel about the theft of a
secret Soviet warplane.  *4

MORETA: Dragonlady of Pern, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.) On a
distant planet, humans and dragons fight a spore invasion.  *5

GRANDMASTER, by Warren Murphy and Molly Cochran. (Pinnacle, $3.95.) Two chess
prodigies in the world of espionage.  *6

SINNERS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) Sex and scandal in Hollywood.  *7

WHEN LOVE COMMANDS, by Jennifer Wilde.  (Avon, $3.95.) An Englishwoman in the
clutches of a sadistic Russian count.  *8

MISTRAL'S DAUGHTER, by Judith Krantz.  (Bantam, $4.50.) The art world of the
20's and the fashion business of the 80's.  *9

FIRST LOVE, WILD LOVE, by Janelle Taylor.  (Zebra, $3.75.) An innocent beauty
finds rapture in the arms of a Texas cattle baron.  10

THURSTON HOUSE, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) Three generations of a San
Francisco family.  11

DARKFALL, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $3.95.) Ratlike creatures escape from
hell to leave a trail of disfigured corpses in this tale of horror. 12

MANDARIN, by Robert Elegant. (Pocket, $4.50.) Asian intrigue and European
tradition in China during the latter 19th century. 13

AUGUST, by Judith Rossner. (Warner, $4.50.) The five-year relationship of two
women, a teen-age patient and her analyst.  14

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) The struggle for money and
power in Tinseltown.  15

SAVANNAH, by Eugenia Price. (Berkley, $3.95.) The romance and ambitions of a
young man in the Old South.  The listings above are based on computer-processed
sales figures from 2,000 bookstores and from representative wholesalers with
more than 40,000 retail outlets, including newsstands, variety stores,
supermarkets and bookstores. These figures are statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. The number of
titles within the two subdivisions of nonfiction can change from week to week,
reflecting changes in book buying.  *An asterisk before a book's title indicates
that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry nationally, are
barely distinguishable from those of the book above.





Nonfiction

General *1

MOTHERHOOD, THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION, by Erma Bombeck. (Dell, $3.95.) Humor
by the syndicated columnist.  *2

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) Americans flee an
Iranian prison.  *3

INTREPID'S LAST CASE, by William Stevenson.  (Ballantine, $3.95.) How the famous
spymaster looked for a mole in British intelligence.  *4

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of a respected
physician and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  *5

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) The plight of men who have
never grown up: a psychologist's analysis.  *6

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  *7

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  *8

CUBS WIN!  by Bob Logan. (Contemporary Books, $4.95.) Celebrating the 1984
Chicago baseball team. *9

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) A helicopter pilot's Vietnam
experiences.  10

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.



Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous *1

GARFIELD LOSES HIS FEET, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.  *2

NO MORE SECRETS FOR ME, by Oralee Wachter.  (Little, Brown, $4.95.) How children
can defend themselves against sexual abuse.  *3

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  *4

IN SEARCH OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson.  (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $4.95.) A
new collection of the syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.  *5

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
For 1984.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS;
FictionOct. 21,1984 *1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 58, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words


110

THE FOURTH PROTOCOL, by Frederick Forsyth.  (Viking, $17.95.) A London jewel
robbery leads to plots and counterplots behind the Iron Curtain.  *2

23

GOD KNOWS, by Joseph Heller. (Knopf, $16.95.) King David describes his life in
comic and anachronistic style.  *3

6

4

STRONG MEDICINE, by Arthur Hailey.  (Doubleday, $16.95.) A strong woman rises in
the pharmaceutical industry.  *4

3

19

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  *5



1

LOVE AND WAR, by John Jakes. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The Civil War
rages in this saga of a Pennsylvania family and a South Carolina family, begun
in ''North and South.'' *6*

7

6

CRESCENT CITY, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $16.95.) Life in 19th-century New
Orleans, seen from the viewpoint of a Jewish woman.  *7

5

18

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  *8

4

12

FIRST AMONG EQUALS, by Jeffrey Archer.  (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
Three young men vie to be chosen Prime Minister of Britain.  *9

15

5

ROLE OF HONOR, by John Gardner. (Putnam, $11.95.) James Bond leaves Government
service to become a private spy.  10

8

9

TOUGH GUYS DON'T DANCE, by Norman Mailer.  (Random House, $16.95.) A murder
mystery set in Provincetown, Mass.  11

9

8

JOB: A Comedy of Justice, by Robert A. Heinlein.  (Del Rey, $16.95.) A bigoted
yet lovable religious man has his faith tested in a series of tribulations in a
variety of alternate worlds.  12

14

2

SUPERIOR WOMEN, by Alice Adams. (Knopf, $16.95.) Five friends at Radcliffe and
after.  13

10

9

THE MIKO, by Eric Van Lustbader. (Villard Books, $16.95.) An American
businessman struggles with a vengeful Japanese sorceress in a high-stakes battle
involving oil.  14*11

33

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  15*12

32

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.







Nonfiction*11

8

LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia.  (Slack/Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $13.95.)
Suggestions for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the
fullest.'' *23

7

THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The author of
''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' recounts his search for a true love.  *32

6

PIECES OF MY MIND, by Andrew A. Rooney.  (Atheneum, $12.95.) More essays by the
journalist and television commentator.  *415

2

MOSES THE KITTEN, by James Herriot. (St.  Martin's, $9.95.) The illustrated
version of a story told in ''Vet in Harness.'' *5

1

HERITAGE, by Abba Eban. (Summit, $30.) An account of Jewish history by the
Israeli diplomat who hosts the PBS show of the same name.  *66

5

HEY, WAIT A MINUTE, I WROTE A BOOK!  by John Madden with Dave Anderson. (Villard
Books, $14.95.) An anecdotal autobiography of the popular television sports
announcer.  *7

1

''THE GOOD WAR,'' by Studs Terkel. (Pantheon, $19.95.) World War II as
remembered by men and women who lived through it.  *84

17

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family.  *97

3

CLOSE ENCOUNTERS, by Mike Wallace and Gary Paul Gates. (Morrow, $17.95.) A
memoir by the ''60 Minutes'' reporter.  105

7

THE REST OF US, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Little, Brown, $19.95.) Success stories
of American Jews from Eastern Europe.  11*10

4

THE WENDY DILEMMA , by Dan Kiley. (Arbor House, $15.95.) Why some women
inappropriately mother their men.  12

1

THE WEAKER VESSEL, by Antonia Fraser.  (Knopf, $19.95.) Woman's lot in
17th-century England.  1311

16

IN GOD'S NAME, by David A. Yallop. (Bantam, $16.95.) A British journalist argues
that Pope John Paul I's death in 1978 was a case of murder.  148

33

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  159

100

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $13.50.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.


And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

AN ANGEL AT MY TABLE: An Autobiography. Volume Two, by

Janet Frame. (Braziller, $12.95.) The New Zealand novelist tells

how, mistakenly diagnosed as a schizophrenic, she spent eight

years in mental hospitals, and how her need to write rescued her.

BLOODS: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans,

by Wallace Terry. (Random House, $17.95.) The recollections of 20

black American soldiers, the title taken from the label black G.I.'s

gave themselves. Brilliantly edited by a correspondent in the war.

DEADLY GAMBITS: The Reagan Administration and the

Stalemate in Nuclear Arms Control, by Strobe Talbott. (Knopf,

$17.95.) A masterly account of the Reagan record by a writer to

whom just about everyone in the Government talked privately.

FROST: A Literary Life Reconsidered, by William H. Pritchard.

(Oxford, $15.95.) A compact, sympathetic rendering of Frost's life

as a poet that, unlike Lawrance Thompson's biography of 1980,

puts the emphasis where it belongs - on Frost's powerful art.

HARLAND'S HALF ACRE, by David Malouf. (Knopf, $13.95.)

Through his chief characters, a visionary artist and his realistic

agent, the novelist David Malouf provides an eloquent distillation

of Australian life - and its contrasts with the old world.

ISRAEL'S LEBANON WAR, by Ze'ev Schiff and Ehud Ya'ari.

(Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) Disclosures in this book helped bring

about an Israeli inquiry into the war in Lebanon, the sacking of key

political and military officers and a prime minister's resignation.

PAYBACK, by Joe Klein. (Knopf, $17.95.) A perceptive document of

the post-Vietnam War lives of five Marines by an author whose

interest was stimulated by a news story about a former soldier in

Indiana who was shot to death by police after he went berserk.




Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous*11

5 WHAT THEY DON'T TEACH YOU AT HARVARD

BUSINESS SCHOOL, by Mark H. McCormack.  (Bantam, $15.95.) Notes and tips of a
''street-smart executive.'' *22

30

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  *3

1

THE ONE MINUTE SALES PERSON, by Spencer Johnson and Larry Wilson. (Morrow, $15.)
Advice on increasing selling skills. *43

3

MARY KAY ON PEOPLE MANAGEMENT, by Mary Kay Ash. (Warner, $15.50.) The head of a
cosmetics company applies the golden rule. *54

29 WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE

DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard work updated in 1983.  The
listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.  *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 21, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REFUSE PLANT TO MEASURE DIOXIN LEVEL

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 6; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words


WHILE the New York City Board of Estimate prepares to open debate on the health
risks of building a garbage-to-energy incinerator, just such a plant is going
into commercial operation in Peekskill.

In New York City the main question is whether an incinerator planned for the
Brooklyn Navy Yard would produce significant amounts of dioxin, a deadly poison
that is often produced when garbage is burned; in Charles Point, where the
Westchester County plant is operating, the dioxin question is only now coming to
the fore.

Dioxin, a name commonly applied to a family of chemicals, one of whose members
has been described as the most toxic chemical known to man, is the subject of
wide scientific debate. It has been implicated as the poison that caused
problems for servicemen exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam, and fear of the
chemical led officials to close an 18-story state office building in Binghampton
after a fire in February 1981 apparently consumed some PCB's, another hazardous
chemical, and thus produced dioxin. But the Federal Environmental Protection
Agency ranks it relatively low on the list of toxic substances, and has not set
a limit on the maximum permissible concentration in air.

In New York City, a variety of environmentalists, led by Dr. Barry Commoner,
director of the Queens College Center for the Biology of Natural Systems, has
argued that the Brooklyn Navy Yard plant, the first of eight planned by the
city, runs a serious risk of being a dioxin producer, and thus unusable. The
Navy Yard facility would burn 3,000 tons of garbage a day; the Charles Point
plant was designed to handle 1,900.

Officials in Westchester expect to know soon what their plant is producing.
According to Edward K. Davies, the county's deputy commissioner of public works,
an ''ambient-air testing program'' will begin in the near future, with results
available in about a year.

In the testing program, which Mr. Davies said would cost the plant operators an
amount of money ''in the low hundreds of thousands,'' air sampling machinery
will be located upwind of the plant, to determine background levels, and then
downwind, to find the incinerator's contribution.

The $237 million plant is operated by the Signal Refuse Energy Systems Company
of Hampton, N.H., with the electricity being sold to Consolidated Edison, at a
price based on the utility's fuel savings.

The testing program was part of the plan for the incinerator before it was
built. But according to Mr. Davies and according to environmentalists in the
county, dioxin was not a major issue in the lengthy planning process that led to
the decision to build.

The county's position before construction was that the dioxin output would be
''extremely minimal, very very minuscule,'' Mr. Davies said. Just as the
administration of Mayor Koch in New York City is, in Mr. Davies's summation,
''not worried'' about dioxin, ''we came to the same conclusion when we did an
environmental statement in 1981,'' he said.

The county committed itself before the final decision to holding an
environmental hearing whether one was required, Mr. Davies said, and the issue
did not come up there.

Two major environmental organizations in the county agree that they had not made
a point of the dioxin question at the time.

''It's one of those projects that came to be without the intense kind of
environmental review that is usually required on the Hudson,'' said John J.
Cronin, the Riverkeeper of the Hudson River Fishermen's Association. ''The
Charles Point plant is one of the very few projects that managed to come to be
in the Hudson River without getting really good environmental review from other
than governmental agencies,'' he said. ''It is one of the few issues that
managed to elude us while it was coming to be, for no other reason than it came
at a time when we were completely tied up on many other things and just didn't
have the people or the staff or the experts to look at it,'' he said.

At the Federated Conservationists of Westchester County, Carolyn Cunningham, the
executive director, said her group had pushed for a plant that would separate
paper, plastic, and other kinds of garbage before they were burned, in part to
aid recycling and in part because of evidence that burning paper and plastic
together aid in the production of dioxin.

However, she said, after failures at separation plants elsewhere, proponents
realized ''that it wasn't going to work as well as we had hoped.'' At the same
time, she pointed out, the Croton Point landfill was being forced to close by
court order, largely because it was polluting the soil.

''Our group came out in favor of the plant becase the need was urgent and it
seemed to be the best way to go,'' she said.

Now Mrs. Cunningham is awaiting the results of the dioxin study. ''You hope for
the best and you hope current knowledge will be adequate to protect people's
heath and safety, although that hasn't been the case in the past,'' she said.

Mr. Cronin said he was also hoping that the results showed no dioxin. That
chemical is already present in some fish in the Hudson, from other sources, he
said.

Mrs. Cunningham was optimistic about the results of the tests because of the
design of the plant. ''Most everybody seems to think that if you burn at 1,800
degrees that you have taken care of most of the dioxin problem,'' she said,
referring to studies that seem to show that the chemical is broken down at high
temperatures. The Charles Point plant, she noted, is designed to burn at 1,800
degrees and above, with the gases spending a relatively long period in the heat.

An important difference in the design proposed for the Brooklyn Navy Yard and
the one built in the county concerns the pollution-control equipment, which,
according to Dr. Commoner, in the Brooklyn plant may cause more problems than it
solves. Mayor Koch's proposal calls for a fabric filter on the gases, which is a
highly effective way to trap particulates. However, it also retains
concentrations of smoke at relatively low temperatures, a condition that Dr.
Commoner says is conducive to dioxin production.

The Westchester plant does not have the fabric filters.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 22, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ADVISER SAYS REAGAN WILL DISMISS OFFICIALS LINKED TO REBEL PRIMER

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 21


The White House national security adviser said today that President Reagan would
dismiss any United States official who developed or approved the Central
Intelligence Agency manual advising Nicaraguan rebels to commit political
assassinations.

The adviser, Robert C. McFarlane, said Mr. Reagan ''will deal with this as he
has with other issues in this domain, unequivocally, firmly, promptly.''

The primer became public last week, and on Thursday the President ordered two
investigations to determine if the C.I.A. acted improperly in preparing it. Mr.
McFarlane said he expected the investigations to be completed ''within a week or
so.''



'A Subordinate Thing'

Asked if the C.I.A.'s director, William J. Casey, will be dismissed if the
investigation shows that he was involved, Mr. McFarlane said, ''Whoever was
involved ought to be fired.''

But he added that ''all the evidence preliminarily is that this was a
subordinate thing, perhaps not even someone who is employed by the C.I.A.'' Mr.
McFarlane was interviewed on the ABC News program ''This Week.''

In the debate tonight in Kansas City, Mo., between the President and his
Democratic challenger, Walter F. Mondale, Mr. Reagan was asked about the manual.
He said that it had been written by a man in Nicaragua who was paid to advise
the agency and that agency officials in Nicaragua and in Washington had excised
some of it, ''but some of the original copies got out down there.''

Mr. Mondale disagreed, saying that ''several thousand'' of the manuals had been
distributed.

Last week a White House spokesman said the primer ''appears to be the work of a
low-level contract employee of the C.I.A. working in the region.''



'Brought a Lot of Money'


Rebel leaders said the man was named John Kirkpatrick and was a veteran of the
Korean and Vietnam wars who had a particular interest and expertise in
psychological warfare techniques. They said the primer was prepared from Mr.
Kirkpatrick's personal notes.

They added that he paid for publication of 2,000 bound copies of the manual,
titled ''Psychological Operations in Guerrilla Warfare,'' and also bought the
rebels expensive specialized equipment, including loudspeakers, public address
systems and cameras.

''He brought a lot of money with him,'' said Edgar Chamorro, one of the
directors of the rebel group, the Nicaraguan Democratic Force.



'Something of a Maverick'


Mr. Chamorro said other C.I.A. employees working with the rebels in Honduras
were aware of the primer. He said the others were friendly with Mr. Kirkpatrick.
''They kidded him a lot,'' he said. ''They thought he was something of a
maverick.''

Mr. Chamorro said Mr. Kirkpatrick spent three months with the rebels last fall
but frequently traveled back to the United States during that period.

Today Mr. McFarlane said, ''The President has made clear that if there were U.S.
officials involved in the development of this and approval of it, then they
ought to be fired.'' Asked again if they would be dismissed, he said, ''Yes.''

A White House spokesman said on Saturday that the President became aware of the
primer when he read a newspaper article about it on Wednesday. ''As to whether
there were others in the White House who may have known about the document or
its history, I don't know,'' he added. ''That's what we will find out in the
investigations.''

Kidnappings Are Advised


Senator Paul Laxalt, traveling to Kansas City with President Reagan today, said
of the primer, ''We've got to get to the bottom of that.'' Mr. Laxalt, general
chairman of the Reagan-Bush campaign, said: ''For us to be instructing people in
Central America in how to go about terrorism is an exercise in futility.''

The primer ''came to light as a document that had been circulated to some degree
in a format with parts that didn't comply to policy,'' he said.

The primer advises the rebels to ''kidnap all officials of the Sandinista
Government,'' to arrange the deaths of their own members so they will become
martyrs and to execute selected Nicaraguan officials publicly.

The C.I.A.'s Deputy Inspector General is investigating the primer, as is the
Intelligence Oversight Board, whose members are appointed by the President. The
Senate and House Intelligence Committees and the General Accounting Office, the
investigative arm of Congress, are also investigating the primer.

In 1981, President Reagan signed an executive order that forbids Government
employees to take part in assassinations or to ask anyone else to commit
assassinations.

The Nicaraguan rebels' activities have been financed by the United States,
through the C.I.A., since 1981. On Saturday Mr. Chamorro said, ''Frankly, I do
admit we have killed people in cold blood.''

He added: ''We do believe in the assassination of tyrants. Some Sandinistas are
tyrants in the small villages.''

Today, Bosco Matmoros, the Washington representative for the Nicaraguan
Democratic Force, said Mr. Chamorro ''is not authorized to speak on the F.D.N.'s
behalf anymore.''

Although Mr. Chamorro remains an officer in the rebel force, Mr. Matmoros said,
''his views as they have been presented are his own, not the F.D.N.'s.''

''We have condemned any form of terrorism, including assassinations.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 22, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodia Appeals for Aid

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 42 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 21


Cambodia has appealed for foreign emergency aid after recent floods ravaged vast
areas of the country, killing 20 people and leaving more than 372,000 homeless
or stricken by famine or disease, the official Vietnam News Agency reported
today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 22, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Thousands March in Japan In Protests on Nuclear Arms

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Oct. 21


Tens of thousands of people marched in Japan today to protest nuclear weapons,
the police said.

The protests marked the annual International Antiwar Day, begun in the
mid-1960's to protest increased United States bombing of North Vietnam in the
Vietnam War.

In Tokyo, 16,000 people took to the streets calling for a ban on nuclear weapons
and abrogation of the United States-Japan security treaty. One person was
arrested.

In Yokosuka, a Seventh Fleet base, 9,500 demonstrators staged a rally and
appealed to Washington and Moscow to work harder to ban nuclear weapons. They
later marched past the base, chanting slogans opposing a United States plan to
equip warships with Tomahawk cruise missiles.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A. AIDES DISPUTE REAGAN ON PRIMER

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


Central Intelligence Agency officials told two Senators today that no copies of
the C.I.A. manual on guerrilla warfare were edited to remove advice on
''neutralizing'' Nicaraguan Government officials.

During the Presidential debate Sunday night, President Reagan said C.I.A.
officers in Central America and in Washington had edited the manual before it
was printed, deleting material that was in violation of United States policy.
Only 12 copies escaped the agency's editing process ''some way or other,'' the
President said.

Today White House officials said the President had misspoken, meaning that only
12 copies of the manual had been sent to Washington. Administration officials
still ''don't have all the information,'' one White House official said.

 '

Offensive Language' Noted


After a briefing today by C.I.A. officials, Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of
Georgia, said he had been told that ''the term 'neutralization' was in all the
documents.''

Senator Nunn and Senator Malcolm Wallop, Republican of Wyoming, both of whom are
members of the Senate Intelligence Committee, attended the C.I.A. briefing along
with staff members.

Mr. Nunn said, ''There were deletions before some printings were made and before
some distributions were made.'' But he added that all copies of the manual ''had
some of what would be called questionable to some and to others offensive
language, including language relating to so-called 'neutralization.' ''

Both Senators said that the C.I.A's investigation was not complete and that many
questions had not been answered.

Rebel's Account Corroborated


Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who is deputy chairman of
the Intelligence Committee, did not attend the meeting but was briefed on the
discussion. ''The C.I.A.,'' he said, ''still has not told us who ordered this
manual, who wrote it and who approved it.''

Also today, a Nicaraguan rebel officer, Alfonso Callejas Deshon, a senior
director of the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, said in an interview that 2,000
copies of the manual were printed. All contained the language advising the
rebels to ''neutralize'' Sandinista officials, he said.

Mr. Callejas corroborated the account given Saturday by Edgar Chamorro, the
rebel leader who said he was in charge of publishing the manual.

''I am not aware that there were any other editions,'' Mr. Callejas said.

The manuals ''were given to some of our officers,'' he said. ''I saw quite a few
of them'' in the rebels' headquarters in Tegucigalpa, Honduras. ''I was given
one myself.''

The only editing the manual received was by the rebels themselves, who ripped
two pages from some copies, Mr. Callejas said.

Contract Employee Blamed


Also today, Stansfield Turner, who was director of the C.I.A. during the Carter
Administration, said ''the President is trying to distance himself from this
controversy'' by blaming it on ''a contract employee.''

The White House has said the manual was written by ''a low-level contract
employee'' in Central America. But Mr. Turner said: ''A contract employee isn't
just somebody they found out on the street. It can mean a retired agent brought
back in. The only difference is that he isn't on the full-time Civil Service
payroll.''

Congressional staff members said today that initial reports indicate the man,
identified as John Kirkpatrick, was a C.I.A. employee during the Vietnam era who
retired and was called back on contract recently.

Mr. Turner said: ''With the tremendous expansion of covert activities'' during
the Reagan Administration, ''they've had to call back a lot of old- time
employees. And some of them are working under the old assumption that they can
get away with a little more. They are used to working in secrecy.''

Pages Excised, Reagan Says


On Sunday night, Mr. Reagan said, ''We have a gentleman down in Nicaragua who is
on contract to the C.I.A. advising, supposedly, on military tactics.''

''He drew up this manual'' and turned it over to a C.I.A. officer in the region,
''and a number of pages were excised by that agency head there,'' Mr. Reagan
said. He added that the primer was sent to C.I.A. headquarters in Washington
''where more pages were excised before it was printed.''

''But some way or the other there were 12 of the original copies that got down
there and were not submitted for this printing process by the C.I.A.''

Mr. Callejas said 2,000 copies of the manual, unedited, were printed by his own
men in Honduras.

''This man came down to give us advice,'' Mr. Callejas added, ''gave Mr.
Chamorro and others a draft'' of the manual ''and they translated it.'' Mr.
Chamorro was in charge of editing, ''and somehow this terrible advice escaped
and was printed.''

Assassinations Are Disputed


After the books were printed, Mr. Callejas said, ''we tore out pages 70 and
71,'' which included advice on hiring professional criminals. The criminals were
to arrange the shooting deaths of other insurgents so that they would become
martyrs.

Mr. Callejas did quarrel with Mr. Chamarro's assertion that the rebels had
assassinated Nicaraguan Government officials.

On Saturday, Mr. Chamorro said in an interview: ''We do believe in the
assassination of tyrants. Some Sandinistas are tyrants in the small villages.''

Mr. Chamorro used to be the rebels' official spokesman, but Mr. Callejas said
''he has not been authorized to speak for us since May.'' Mr. Callejas said he
was ''shocked to read what Mr. Chamorro said about executions.''

''That is totally against the policies of our national directorate,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Alfonse Callejas and Bosco Matamoros (page A12)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Peking Deplores Role Of Hanoi in Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Oct. 22


China indirectly criticized the Soviet Union today for its support of the
Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia. The move came as Soviet negotiators held
talks here on ways to improve their troubled relations.

An analysis of recent Vietnamese actions on the Cambodian issue published by the
official New China News Agency today did not mention Moscow, but China has
consistently said Moscow's close ties with Hanoi encouraged Hanoi's occupation
of Cambodia and threatened to disrupt the Pacific region.

The timing of the commentary to coincide with the current round of normalization
talks between China and the Soviet Union made clear that Peking considered
Moscow's backing for Hanoi a major block to relations, political analysts said.

The press agency report rejected Hanoi's proposals for talks on Cambodia or
discussions between Hanoi and the Peking-backed anti-Vietnamese guerrilla
coalition, which includes both Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the Khmer Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW WILDERNESS PERIL: GROWERS OF MARIJUANA

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1594 words

DATELINE: GARBERVILLE, Calif., Oct. 18


Law-enforcement officials say many of the nation's most scenic and remote
wilderness areas are increasingly dangerous for visitors because of violence
linked to illegal marijuana cultivation.

At least four murders related to such production have occurred this fall in the
lush, redwood-clad counties of northern California, according to police
investigators.

In September, they say, a youth who strayed into a remote marijuana patch in
Mendocino County south of here was hit by shotgun blasts in both knees.

Scores of backpackers, hunters and others exploring the backwoods of this
region, police investigators say, have reported being forced by marijuana
growers, often at gunpoint, to leave public and private lands. Others have been
injured by booby traps armed with shotgun shells, razors, and other weapons to
discourage intruders and thieves.

Wide-Ranging Problem


''Every one of our 141 national forests in 40 states has reported some activity
within the last three years,'' said Ernest Andersen, director of law enforcement
for the United States Forest Service, which manages 191 million acres of
timberland.

While California, Oregon and other Western states appear to have the greatest
amount of marijuana production, he said it was also a problem in Florida,
Georgia, Missouri, West Virginia and Virginia, among others. ''It's a national
phenomenon,'' he said.

Mr. Andersen said the vast majority of the violence linked to marijuana
cultivation had occurred in the West, but that no part of the country had been
exempt from it.

Other Federal officials said that in recent years illegal marijuana gardens had
been found occasionally in wilderness areas of New York, Connecticut and New
Jersey, but that they generally tended to be modest enterprises designed to
serve a few individuals rather than commercial production.

'You May Get Shot'

''You want to have a wilderness experience?'' asked John Cimolino, a Mendocino
County Supervisor. ''You won't have one in Mendocino County. You may get shot.''

Federal, state and local law-enforcement officials say they have expanded
efforts this fall, the harvest season, to eradicate marijuana plots in the
wilderness by commercial growers and have destroyed thousands of plants.

But they say that many growers have become more sophisticated in their ability
to conceal plants and, with the marijuana in each plant worth $2,000 to $3,500,
more determined than ever to protect them from police raiders or thieves, called
''patch pirates.''

Investigators say innocent bystanders are increasingly becoming the victims of
growers' efforts to protect their crops with booby traps and firearms. While the
violence has been serious in California, where some officials estimate the crop
being harvested will be worth more than $1 billion, investigators say it is a
national problem.

Changing Nature of Growers

John Rooney, director of the Idaho Department of Law Enforcement, attributes the
rise in violence to changes in the nature of marijuana growers.

''There's a new element,'' he said. ''These aren't hippie types anymore, but
hard-core people who treat it as a business, and they're serious and very
protective of their investment.''

Jerry Wageman, 34 years old, of Klamath Falls, Ore., told of tracking a deer
with two friends in a remote area about three miles north of the
California-Oregon border on Oct. 4 when shots rang out. Someone ''opened up on
us like there was a war going on,'' he said.

Two men stripped and beat him, then shot him in the head with a long gun, he
said.

'I Thought I Was Dead'

''They flat out put the gun up to my head, said, 'We're going to kill you,' ''
he said. ''Then 'Bang!' I thought I was dead.''

One companion, Ronald Young, 33, was shot in the head and chest with a
.38-caliber revolver, and the third hunter, Clifford Profitt, 44, escaped
unhurt. Despite serious injuries, the hunters who were apparently left for dead
survived.

Jeff Maldonado, an investigator for the Jackson County sheriff's office in
Oregon, said the hunters had walked into a marijuana patch recently harvested of
30 to 40 plants.

Michael Stanley Dreneiser, 45, of Medford, Ore., has since been arrested and
charged with 11 felony counts, including three counts of attempted murder and
two counts of first-degree assault.

''The end of the growing season and the hunting seasons tend to coincide,'' Mr.
Maldonado said. ''I'm surprised that more people haven't been injured.
''Cultivation is big bucks, and the people who are doing it are willing to go a
pretty long way to protect their investment.''

Booby Traps in Backwoods

Mr. Andersen said booby traps were showing up increasingly in the backwoods of
America.

Paul Sedillo, an enforcement agent in the Winema National Forest near Klamath
Falls, Ore., said that he had found three kinds of deadly traps in northern
California this summer: sharpened sticks planted in the ground similar to those
used by the Vietcong; a shotgun device triggered by almost invisible trip wires,
and branches filled with barbed fishhooks, also activated by a trip wire
surrounding a marijuana patch.

''You never know what you're going to run into when you go to these gardens,''
he said, adding that a stranger can very easily trip one of the devices or come
into a situation where people are armed.''

Marijuana growers were so prevalent in the back country of the Shasta Trinity
National Forest near Redding, Calif., a year ago, Mr. Sedillo said, that
''people were afraid to go into the district'' and the Forest Service virtually
stopped actively administering the area because agents feared armed marijuana
growers and booby traps. This year the agency returned with other
law-enforcement agencies, raided marijuana growers and opened it to the public
again.

Joint Efforts of Agencies

The raids were part of the Campaign Against Marijuana Production, a joint
project of the Drug Enforcement Administration and state and local police
agencies. This week a Federal judge in San Jose ruled that many of the raids by
the special group were unwarranted searches and thus violated the Fourth
Amendment.

Bill Ruzzamenti, a Federal drug enforcement agent and deputy commander of the
authorities' operation, said the ruling would not have a major effect because
most of the searches were on public land and therefore did not require warrants.

Since late summer, about 150 officers, equipped with 11 helicopters and
fixed-wing spotter planes, have been at work in the remote northern counties of
California, particularly Mendocino, Del Norte, Humboldt, Sonoma and Trinity,
trying to locate and destroy marijuana plants growing in some of America's most
rugged and spectacular scenery. Through the middle of this week, they had
destroyed almost 150,000 plants, made 109 arrests and seized 233 firearms and 46
vehicles.

Known collectively as the ''Redwood Country,'' it is a region of great beauty,
considerable poverty, a strong Western spirit of rugged individualism and a
general distrust of outsiders.

Regarded as Legitimate Crop

With its timber industry depressed by a long national slump in home building and
environmental regulations that have restricted logging of the redwoods, it is an
area in which many people have regarded marijuana is a legitimate cash crop
(indeed, the only one, some have said) and in which hatred for out-of-town
''patch pirates'' runs as deep as a frontier town's distaste for cattle
rustlers.

Garberville, one of many hamlets tucked into the forests, is a town that
investigators say is a major center of marijuana commerce. Some local officials
even acknowledge that vigilante groups have been formed by residents to deal
with patch pirates.

Many of Garberville's 1,350 residents have angrily attacked as foreign invaders
the daily raids of the Campaign Against Marijuana Production. When its
helicopters descend and disgorge fatigue-clad police officers with automatic
rifles, at least as many comparisons have been drawn to the Vietnam War as to
the raids of Federal revenue agents under Prohibition.

Among some residents, however, a previous tacit tolerance toward marijuana
production seems to have ebbed recently as it has shifted from a kind of
mom-and-pop enterprise to what amounts to a major industry with imported, bloody
violence.

Call for Legalization

''The killing and maiming of people occurs almost every day in the county,'' The
Ukiah Daily Journal, the region's largest newspaper, said recently in an
editorial concluding that the legalization of marijuana was the only way to end
the violence.

Mr. Ruzzamenti of the Drug Enforcement Agency said economic self-interest might
be a factor, too. ''What's happened, I think, is that the old perception that
you had a few good old boys in the business raising 20 or 50 plants has
changed,'' he observed.

If there was a change in attitude, some residents of the Redwood Country said,
the reason was not so much economic but the realization that it was no longer
safe for them to walk into the forests and enjoy the beauty that had brought
them here.

''I want to travel freely again in my county without fearing for my life,'' said
Mr. Cimolino, the member of the Mendocino County Board of Supervisors. ''I want
to be able to go for a walk in the woods; I want to be able to ride a horse
without being afraid that someone will yank me off of it; I want to go
berry-picking without being afraid I'll be shot. I want my county back.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of California; photo of police officers burning marijuana plants

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

POOR RESULTS IN SHELLING LAID TO OLD AMMUNITION

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 22


Old ammunition was partly responsible for poor results in the shelling of
Lebanon's coast last year by the battleship New Jersey, according to a Navy
expert.

Comdr. Richard Gano, chief weapons officer of the New Jersey's recently
recommissioned sister ship, the Iowa, said no ammunition for the dreadnought's
16-inch guns had been manufactured since the Korean War, with some shells dating
to World War II.

In the offshore shelling of Syrian antiaircraft positions last December, New
Jersey's vintage powder charges produced shell velocities that varied as much as
120 feet-per-second from expected, Commander Gano said, making precise aim
nearly impossible. A deviation of only two or three feet-per- second would
normally be taken into account, he added.

His comments came on a tour of Iowa's weapons as she steamed up the coast from
Norfolk, Va., to Manhattan last week. The Navy plans to base a seven-vessel
surface action group on Staten Island in New York harbor by the end of the
decade, with the Iowa as its flagship.

Although current stocks of 16-inch gun ammunition are at least three decades
old, the Navy possesses about 25,000 shells. Most of the projectiles for the
mammoth guns are suitable only for bombarding unfortified targets, with few
armor-piercing or antipersonnel types still available.

New Purchases Planned

A Navy spokesman at the Pentagon said the service plans to buy new projectiles
and powder for 16-inch guns beginning in the fiscal year 1988.

On Dec. 14, 1983, the New Jersey fired 11 rounds from her 16-inch guns at Syrian
positions. Damage assessment at the time was sketchy. Navy officials later said
that the guns had hit little of military value, but attributed the disappointing
performance to rules of engagement that prevented gun crews from getting good
reconnaissance from forward spotters.

Both the New Jersey and the Iowa carry nine 16-inch guns on three turrets, two
on the foredeck and one aft. They are capable of firing a 2,700 pound projectile
more than 20 miles.

At such ranges, accurate strikes require knowing precisely at what angle to
slant the gun barrel from horizontal, as well as at what speed the projectile
leaves the muzzle. The angle is chosen through complex geometric calculations,
aided on the Iowa by a 1940's-era analog computer. The projectile speed is
determined by the amount of explosive powder placed in the gun's breech.

According to D. T. Froedge, an explosives expert who is vice president of
Phillip R. Berger and Associates, an industrial blasting concern, deterioration
of the powder is inevitable. ''No one would have ever expected those powders to
last that long,'' he said of the Navy's stockpile. ''The fact that they shoot at
all is a plus.''

Mr. Froedge said a complicating factor in using the old powder would be that
individual charges would have decayed unevenly, making reliable prediction of
their explosive force difficult. ''Powders that old could not be matched,'' he
said. ''Each would deteriorate at its own rate.''

The Iowa was reclaimed from mothballing last spring at a cost of about $400
million. She and the New Jersey, which was recommissioned in 1982 at a cost of
$326 million, were originally launched in 1942.

Although both ships had been retired after the Korean War, the New Jersey was
brought out in 1967 for the Vietnam War to bombard North Vietnamese coastal
positions, but questions about the accuracy of her guns and cost-effectiveness
against small targets put her back in mothballs by the end of 1969.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLIC RELATIONS A FACET OF WESTMORELAND TRIAL

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words


Almost every day, a 49-year-old barrel-shaped man with a ruddy face and a gray
curly beard shows up in the courtroom where Gen. William C. Westmoreland is
suing CBS for libel. He sits with the press. He knows each reporter by first
name. He laughs with them, and when the day's session is over he is very often
standing outside the courtroom handing out documents.

Sometimes the documents are the evidence that had been discussed in court that
day and sometimes they are materials that have not been used in court, but
relate to the day's evidence.

The man, John Scanlon, is not a member of the press, and he is not a lawyer. He
is on CBS's side, but he is not a CBS employee: he is new scenery on the
landscape of legal procedure. He represents one of two public relations
companies working for the opposing sides, and while the legal battle is being
fought according to the principles of law, Mr. Scanlon and General
Westmoreland's representative, David Henderson of Washington, are fighting with
the uncodified art of public relations.

The presence of two public relations companies at this trial has raised
questions: Should the opposing sides in a trial be seeking the outside world's
approval when the ostensible goal of litigation is to attain justice inside the
courtroom? And what is the propriety of the press possibly taking its cues from
a paid information officer during a trial?

When the press needs transcripts of the day's testimony, Mr. Scanlon, a senior
executive vice president of the Chicago-based public relations company Daniel J.
Edelman Inc., provides them. When the press asks for documentary evidence
submitted from either side, he, or an associate, James Noonan, checks with the
CBS attorneys and does his best to produce it. Reporters turn to him for
material, and he gives it to them, along with a passionate discourse about the
trial. Sometimes when he thinks they have described CBS's case clearly, he
congratulates them the next day.

'It's Pretty Unusual'


Mr. Henderson - whose company, Alcalde, Henderson and O'Bannon, has contributed
his services to General Westmoreland - has been less apparent at the trial than
in the months leading up to it. Nevertheless, he has spent three to four hours a
day on the telephone with reporters answering questions and directing them to
documents.

''It's pretty unusual,'' said Prof. Arthur R. Miller of the Harvard Law School.
''I've noticed other instances of it in the last couple of years. You sort of
get the feeling that you want to get your point across in the newspapers, or the
broadcast media. When you're dealing with the integrity of a broadcast
organization, you want to get CBS's message out so there's no ripple effect in
the public - that unless you get your side of the story communicated, people
lose their faith in CBS News.

''For the Westmoreland side, there may be a feeling that there's a certain
symbiotic relationship between the media and CBS.''

''Both sides,'' said Professor Geoffrey Hazard of the Yale Law School, ''are
seeking a public opinion verdict as well as a jury verdict.''

Neither professor found anything wrong or improper in the presence of public
relations men at the trial.

Several judicial commentators have cited the recent precedent of the DeLorean
trial in which John Z. DeLorean's counsel held press conferences on the
courthouse steps ''trying,'' said one law professor, ''to create the picture of
an innocent man trapped in the hands of a nefarious Government.'' The attorneys
at the Westmoreland-CBS trial have not conducted press conferences, and CBS has
left most of the distribution of information to Mr. Scanlon.

'We Know the Case'


''We know the case,'' Mr. Scanlon said in an interview this week. ''There is an
unarticulated trust between CBS and us.''

When CBS first faced the $120 million libel suit brought by General
Westmoreland, it was determined not to repeat the public relations disaster it
felt it encountered during a California slander suit brought by a doctor last
year against CBS's Dan Rather and ''60 Minutes.'' CBS executives felt the news
division's image sustained public injury from the trial.

''They won the case and got killed in the press,'' said Mr. Scanlon, who
contends that the press became hostile to CBS because it received more
information from those suing the network.

When it became clear the Westmoreland trial would last a long time, Mr. Scanlon
- who had represented clients ranging from the Municipal Assistance Corporation
to Columbia Pictures' ''Gandhi'' - was asked to come in and talk. By last
December, Mr. Scanlon was at work. He scheduled news conferences almost
immediately after the other side's. Attempts at swift refutation are one of Mr.
Scanlon's trademarks. On a number of occasions he arranged appearances for one
of the CBS defendants, George Crile, on the same television interview programs
with Don Kowet, an author of a book critical of the Westmoreland documentary.

And when the trial began, Mr. Scanlon was there, working the hallways. ''I don't
find anything improper about it,'' said David Zucchino, a reporter for The
Philadelphia Inquirer. ''I use him for documents. It's pretty obvious he has a
definite interest in the case. I hope people are sophisticated enough to realize
what he has to do here.''

Other reporters have generally expressed some skepticism about Mr. Scanlon's
friendly and effusive services during the trial, but none have strenuously
objected.

Reports to CBS Legal Department


Mr. Scanlon reports to the CBS legal department, run by George Vradenburg 3d,
the CBS deputy general counsel. In December 1983, Mr. Scanlon was brought into
the case by Van Gordon Sauter, an executive vice president of the CBS Broadcast
group - and until he was dropped recently, a defendant in the libel suit. The
network has stressed that in an election year the CBS public relations
department has all it can handle without getting involved in the huge number of
press requests expected during the Westmoreland trial.

''What the plaintiff is trying to do,'' said Mr. Vradenburg, discussing Mr.
Scanlon's place in the Westmoreland trial, ''is dismantle the reputation of a
major news network. If the plaintiff, day after day, diminishes our reputation,
and the defendant systematically fails to respond to it, there is the inaccurate
view in the public that there is no answer to it.''

Mr. Henderson, General Westmoreland's public relations man, believes that his
profession is not out of place in the courtroom, but that ''we do not have, nor
expect to have, the same kind of profile during the trial they have,'' he said.

''The general's every effort was to go to trial. He trusts the institutions of
the trial, and a court of law is where this should be finished. As a
consequence, we don't feel the need to carry this thing further in the press.''

''Prosecutors have been doing this kind of thing for years,'' said Professor
Miller. ''I always have felt very queasy about a situation in which a lawyer is
conducting a satellite trial in the media. But the world of public opinion can
damage you in the marketplace. When it comes to this kind of thing, you can't be
too prissy about it.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 23, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-COLONEL DENIES CBS DOCUMENTARY ASSERTION

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1209 words


A former military intelligence officer in South Vietnam yesterday denied an
assertion in a CBS Reports documentary that a lieutenant colonel was ''fired''
because he wanted to report a high rate of North Vietnamese infiltration in
1967.

Col. Charles A. Morris testified in Federal Court yesterday that the report was
untrue. He said that the officer, Lieut. Col. Everette S. Parkins, was relieved
of his duties because ''he refused to carry out a legal order'' to devise a
better formula for estimating enemy losses.

''And I'd do it again,'' said Colonel Morris, who was director of intelligence
production for General Westmoreland in 1967. He was the fifth witness for
General Westmoreland in his $120 million libel suit against CBS over the 1982
CBS Reports documentary: ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

Colonel Morris, a graying, 64-year- old retired officer who spent two years in
Vietnam during a long career in military intelligence, said he knew nothing
about statements in the documentary that Colonel Parkins wanted to report a
monthly infiltration rate of 25,000 - four times the official figure in use in
late 1967.

Asked Study on Losses


Colonel Morris said that when he asked Colonel Parkins to undertake the study on
enemy losses, ''he said it couldn't be done, that it was a waste of time.''

''I asked him several times to try,'' Colonel Morris recalled. ''I directed him
to try. Then I ordered him from the room and later ordered that he be
dismissed.''

Dan. M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, asked Colonel Morris whether the
dispute that day related to reports ''by Parkins of an infiltration rate of
25,000'' North Vietnamese in the months before the Tet offensive of January
1968.

''No,'' said Colonel Morris.

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, contends that CBS libeled him by saying that he had deceived President
Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of Communist
forces in South Vietnam in the year before the Tet offensive.

The general specifically accused CBS and several other defendants - including
George Crile, the program's producer and Mike Wallace, its narrator - of saying
that he had arbitrarily set a ceiling of 300,000 on enemy strength, suppressed
reports from his officers of a higher enemy presence and a higher infiltration
rate than was made known, and engineered a cover- up of the truth after the
offensive.

Interview Not Used


Colonel Morris was interviewed by telephone by Mr. Crile six weeks before the
documentary was broadcast on Jan. 23, 1982. None of the colonel's remarks were
used on the program, which alleged a ''conspiracy at the highest levels of
American military intelligence to suppress and alter critical intelligence on
the enemy in 1967.''

In a pretrial affidavit, Colonel Parkins said he had spoken to Mr. Crile one or
more times by telephone, and did not remember the producer asking him about
enemy infiltration.

Colonel Parkins said in the affidavit he had been relieved of his duties after
an argument with Colonel Morris in November 1967 over a study of Communist
forces. He said Colonel Morris ''believed that the study should report enemy
strength figures lower than the figure I was reporting.'' But Colonel Parkins
said he told Mr. Crile that he did not think there had been a conspiracy to
suppress military intelligence.

The 1982 documentary, Colonel Parkins said, ''inaccurately portrayed the events
that related to myself'' and was a ''slur'' of General Westmoreland. He said he
had no recollection of North Vietnamese infiltration in the fall of 1967 being
anywhere near as high as 20,000 to 25,000 and ''I believe I would recall'' it.

At one point on the broadcast, Mr. Wallace said: ''CBS Reports has learned that
during the five months preceding the Tet offensive, Westmoreland's infiltration
analysts had actually been reporting not seven or eight thousand but more than
25,000 North Vietnamese coming down the Ho Chi Minh Trail each month, and that
amounted to a near invasion. But those reports of a dramatically increased
infiltration were systematically blocked.''

Mr. Wallace said that Colonel Parkins, ''a West Point graduate who planned to
make a career of the Army, had become so incensed by MACV's (Military Assistance
Command, Vietnam) refusal to send on reports of an enemy infiltration of 25,000
a month that he lost his temper and shouted at his superior.''

Mr. Crile then appeared on the program, talking to Russell Cooley, who was a
major in military intelligence in Vietnam in 1967:

Crile: Lieutenant Colonel Parkins was fired for trying to get this report
through, and . . .

Cooley: He was relieved from his position. The word ''fired,'' yes, he was.

Major Cooley, who eventually became a colonel and is expected to testify for CBS
in this trial, went on to blame another intelligence colonel, Daniel Graham, for
''blocking the infiltration estimates from going through.'' Colonel Graham, who,
later as a general, became head of the United States Defense Intelligence
Agency, was shown in the documentary denying such action.

Defined Infiltrators


Yesterday, Colonel Morris testified that, to be counted in the official tally of
infiltrators, North Vietnamese forces had to actually cross into South
Vietnamese territory. It wasn't enough, he told the jury, for those forces to
move from one spot to another in North Vietnam or along the Ho Chi Minh trail to
Laos. That, he said, was known as ''infiltration-related activity.''

Colonel Morris said the term infiltration ''got misused quite often,'' and he
could understand how Mr. Crile ''might not pick up on the difference'' between
infiltration and infiltration-related activity.

Colonel Morris said that, in the fall of 1967, he learned from National Security
Agency communications intelligence, and from John L. Michalski, a military
intelligence major, of two divisions of North Vietnamese troops that were
massing for what ultimately became the siege at Khe Sanh, an American base in
northern South Vietnam.

Major Michalski, according to Colonel Morris, advised him that Colonel Graham
had said the major was ''not ready to report his findings'' yet. But Colonel
Morris said he overruled Colonel Graham and immediately sent the information up
the chain of command.

Colonel Morris, who is scheduled to be followed on the stand today by Gen.
Phillip Davidson, chief of military intelligence in Vietnam in 1967, said he had
participated in discussions in Saigon with the Central Intelligence Agency over
enemy strength figures and had never been instructed to adhere to a total of
300,000, or any particular estimate.

Under cross-examination by David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, Colonel Morris
ackowledged that he was aware of ''political pressure'' at that time to show
progress in the war.

''One could certainly appreciate that fact that, politically, things were not
going well back home.'' he said. ''I read the newspapers, and one had to be
blind not to see that. Certainly, we were under pressure to get on with the job
and get it over with. It was an unpopular war. It was tearing the country
apart.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TORPEDOING SALVADOR'S TALKS

BYLINE: By Mark Uhlig ;
Mark A. Uhlig, associate editor of Foreign Affairs, visited El Salvador in
September.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 716 words


Now that tentative talks are under way between the Salvadoran Government and
guerrillas, both sides have begun to press for battlefield advantages that will
translate into negotiating leverage. The terrible irony in this fight-and-talk
strategy is that the Government's position is likely to be undermined by the
$196.5 million in United States military aid approved for fiscal 1984. The new
aid is likely to exacerbate the traditional weaknesses of the Salvadoran Army,
threatening the prospects for negotiations and ultimately encouraging direct
United States involvement in an escalating war.

According to senior United States officials in the area, most of the money will
be spent on ''capital improvements'' - new aircraft, helicopters and improved
naval capabilities - in the hope that American technology can substitute for
firsthand assistance from United States advisers.

All of the weapons contemplated in the aid package are standard tools of the
United States military, but their use in El Salvador promises to be
inappropriate, if not clearly counterproductive.

For the Salvadoran Army, known for fighting a ''9-to-5 war'' and retreating to
its barracks at night, the new aid package is likely to reinforce

all the wrong tendencies. By relying on complex weapons and heavy fire- power
rather than a dedicated, persistent effort to fight the guerrillas on their own
ground, the army can never hope to regain control of the countryside and will
undoubtedly risk high civilian casualties.  The most conspicuous offenders in
this regard are aircraft weapons, including the bombs, napalm and other
explosives carried by A-37 jets and the extraordinarily destructive Gatling-gun
cannon fire of AC-47 gunships. Positive identification of targets from the air
is difficult under any circumstances, and in conditions of guerrilla war it
verges on impossible.  The inevitable result is reckless and indiscriminate
bombing that kills more civilians than dispersed guerrilla fighters. It also
terrorizes civilians, forcing them to flee and depriving guerrillas of local
cover and aid. The problem is that the returning civilian population can hardly
be expected to provide the loyal support that the Goverment must cultivate if it
is ever to win lasting peace.  The second component of the aid package - a
dramatic increase in the the Salvadoran helicopter force from 24 to a total of
some 49 by the end of this year - can also be expected to encourage the army to
fight a reactive ''fireman's war,'' rushing troops to a crisis spot and then
withdrawing them to the safety of distant bases.  Helicopters are extremely
sophisticated machines, vulnerable in battle, and they require expensive
technical support just to keep them in the air. (According to conservative
Pentagon figures, the United States lost nearly 5,000 helicopters in Vietnam -
approximately one helicopter for every 10 American servicemen killed.) In El
Salvador, the question is not only who will pay for and maintain such an
extravagant technological tool, but who will man the controls. With only 46
trained helicopter pilots, and four more now training in the United States, the
Salvadoran Army cannot hope to keep its new ''air cavalry'' flying for long
without outside help - help that only the United States military can supply.

The third major component of the aid package - new ships - is simply wasteful.
Inspired by the Reagan Administration's dubious claim that Salvadoran guerrillas
depend on outside sources of supply, this effort would seek to do in El Salvador
what we cannot accomplish off our own shores - shut out illegal sea traffic -
and it will undoubtedly require direct United States help.

Taken as a whole, the new aid package suggests an all-too-familiar scenario:
incremental escalation of the war, fed by and built around complex United States
weaponry. Rather than putting pressure on the guerrillas, it will do their work
for them by further alienating the army from the local population. Rather than
setting the stage for productive negotiations, it will broaden the war and
encourage those in the military who mistake blunt firepower for diplomatic
strength. It is also likely to draw us in ever deeper, in search of military
answers at the cost of American lives. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Cambodian Rebel Attack

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 26 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 23


Cambodian guerrillas said today that they attacked a Vietnamese outpost near the
Thai-Cambodian border on Sunday, killing or wounding 10 soldiers.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GROUP CITES RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 565 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Wednesday, Oct. 24


Amnesty International issued its annual report on human rights in 117 countries
today and took note of what it said was a large number of people who have been
attacked by their governments for calling attention to human rights abuses.

The activists, the report said, are only a handful among the thousands who have
been tortured, kidnapped, killed or imprisoned in cages, malaria-infested
''re-education camps'' or psychiatric hospitals in the calendar year 1983, which
the report details. But the few named, it said, ''must stand as symbols for the
rest.''

Among those singled out by the organization, which won the Nobel Peace Prize in
1977 , was America Yolanda Urizar, a Guatemalan labor lawyer abducted in March
1983 by heavily armed men, driven away in an army jeep and never seen again.

Another was Levko Lukyanenko, a Soviet lawyer who Amnesty said was serving his
second 15-year sentence for trying to monitor his Government's compliance with
human rights provisions of the 1975 Conference on Security and Cooperation in
Europe,

Teacher Held in Benin


Also singled out was Paul Koudoukpo, a teacher who was said to have been
arrested in Benin in 1982 and held since without trial on suspicion of
distributing leaflets calling for the release of 35 students and teachers
arrested from 1979 to 1981 after criticizing the Government's education policy.

Milan Soklic, a sociology teacher, was sentenced to five years in prison in
Yugoslavia for comparing capitalism favorably with Yugoslav socialism and
complaining about restrictions on freedom of expression in the presence of
several people at his home and in a hotel, the report said.

Sofya Belyak, a Roman Catholic Church organist from the Ukraine, was sentenced
in October 1983 to five years in prison and five years of internal exile,
according to the report, for circulating pamphlets on the reported appearance of
the Virgin Mary at Fatima in Portugal in May 1917.

Ly Dai Nguyen, a Vietnamese writer and literary critic, the report said, has
been detained for ''re-education'' for more than eight years without charge or
trial.

Illness in Vietnam Camps


Amnesty International said it continued to receive reports that many detainees
in the ''re-education'' camps in Vietnam, where 10,000 are believed held, were
suffering from serious illnesses, including malaria, tuberculosis, heart
ailments and malnutrition.

The report also noted the tendency to torture victims. In Bangladesh, it said,
prisoners were beaten, whipped, hung upside down from the ceiling and shocked.
In Iran, it said, the whipping was done with whips, cables, hosepipes and wooden
strips bound with wire. To induce confessions, Amnesty said, relatives are also
tortured.

In Guinea, where all political detainees were held incommunicado, detainees have
been executed with the ''black diet,'' total deprivation of food and water, the
report said. In Gabon, it said, prisoners are held in chains for long periods of
time.

In Chile, the report said, hundreds have testified to beatings, shocks, and such
public punishment as being made to run barefoot and sometimes naked in the
street, sometimes on broken glass. In El Salvador, it said, Rafael Carias
Flores, a teachers' union leader who was arrested in February 1981 and held
without trial until his release in April 1983 was tortured with sulphuric acid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN GETS A HAIL OF HECKLING, BUT CROWD RALLIES TO HIS PARRIES

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 728 words

DATELINE: PORTLAND, Ore., Oct. 23


President Reagan had to persevere with his re-election plea through a hail of
heckling today, promising to continue the ''second American revolution'' as
dissenters shouted, ''There you go again!''

Several dozen hecklers bellowed at a generally friendly Reagan rally of 4,000
people in the University of Portland's Chiles Auditorium here, presenting the
most vocal dissent the President has heard thus far in his smoothly run
campaign.

The scene had a tinge of the late 1960's as the President rallied the crowd to
his side and the hecklers persisted with accusations that he was conducting a
war in Central America.

At the same time, there was none of the old scatology of the Vietnam era. The
strongest imprecation from one man was a childhood curse on the President:
''Liar, liar! Pants on fire!''

'We Don't Want Your War'


Mr. Reagan, soon after beginning his standard denunciation of his Democratic
opponent, Walter F. Mondale, began to hear over the applause of the majority
some boos and shouts of, ''We don't want your war in Central America!''

The majority rallied to the President, chanting, ''Four more years!'' Then a
heckler, easily heard through the acoustically compact hall, shouted, ''Two more
weeks!''

The President, a veteran from his days as Governor of California in playing off
hecklers, responded: ''You know what? I may just let Mondale raise his taxes.''

This brought laughter and cheers from the Reagan partisans, but the hecklers
persisted, shouting, ''Dump Reagan!'' Outside, a man in pinch- faced Reagan mask
scuttled about, shaking a death's-head rattle and holding a sign that read,
''The bombing begins in five minutes.''

Protest Keyed to TV News


Some of the demonstrators said they were there to interrupt the usually flawless
pictures of Mr. Reagan's campaign day that appear on television's evening news
programs.

''People are influenced by what they see on TV,'' said one heckler, Elliot
Mantell, a 33-year-old chiropractor. ''I want them to know that there are other
voices of opinion out here.''

''The demonstrators were grossly out of order,'' said Ronald Zook, a retired,
57-year-old air traffic controller who wore a Reagan button. ''They showed no
respect for the office.''

The heckling was particularly unexpected because before the President's arrival
the crowd had responded happily to a long film commercial from the Reagan
campaign, cheering as pictures of him flashed on a big screen.

'Small Voices in the Night'


Mr. Reagan delivered his full speech, pausing for the interruptions, bobbing his
head resolutely and commenting at one point, ''I know that can't be an echo of
my voice.'' He described Mr. Mondale's criticism of the Reagan record as ''small
voices in the night, sounding the call to go back'' to a time of ''torpor,
timidity and tax.''

At another point he commented, gesturing to the hecklers in grandstands on
either side, ''This is a perfect demonstration of where we solid citizens are -
caught between the right and the left.'' He did not elaborate.

Three demonstrators were ejected. One, identified as Bill Hewitt, was carried
out by students wearing red university staff shirts after he stood up and began
blowing a police whistle.

Secret Service guards in uniform were in the stands but were not noticed
stepping in except to keep the aisles cleared. No arrests were reported.

'Best Days Are Yet to Come'


''They needed to do something like that to help their failing candidate,'' James
Lake, the Reagan campaign spokesman, commented. Some demonstrators said,
however, they were also opposed to Mr. Mondale.

''We're not Communists - we're not anything,'' said Ed Zupcic, a 21-year- old
political science student. ''We're just people concerned about where we're going
to go, and we do not support the building of more weapons.''

The President made it to the end of his speech, promising the younger generation
that ''America's best days are yet to come.'' This drew a closing chorus of boos
just before the usual barrage of red, white and blue campaign balloons went up.

Later, in Seattle, after a campaign appearance that followed his Portland
speech, the President slipped at the top step of the stairway leading to Air
Force One. He fell on the steps, got up, waved and smiled, saying he had not
been hurt.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo President Reagan

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WITNESS HAS A DISTINGUISHED SERVICE RECORD

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 295 words


Lt. Gen. Phillip Buford Davidson Jr., who testified at the Westmoreland libel
trial yesterday, served as the United States military chief of intelligence in
Vietnam for two years, from May 1967 to May 1969. He retired from the Army 10
years ago.

His active service, which spanned 35 years following his graduation in 1939 from
West Point to his retirement in 1974, shows a distinguished record in terms of
military education, combat, commands, decorations won and intelligence
experience.

He was born Nov. 26, 1915, in Hachita, N.M. His first assignment after
graduation from West Point was as troop officer in a horse cavalry regiment.
During World War II he was a battalion commander and regimental executive
officer in the mechanized 3d Cavalry Division, fighting in four major campaigns
in Europe. His first intelligence assignment was during the postwar American
occupation of Japan, at Tokyo headquarters from 1948 to 1952.

He was a student at the Army War College in Carlisle Barracks, Pa., in 1954 and
later at the National War College in Washington. From 1965 to 1967 he was
assistant chief of staff for intelligence at the headquarters of the U.S. Army
of the Pacific in Hawaii. He was the Army's top intelligence officer at the
Pentagon in 1971 and 1972.

His decorations include the Distinguished Service Medal, the Army's highest
noncombat decoration, and the Silver Star, the third highest combat decoration.
He won the French Croix de Guerre.

He has three sons by his first marriage, in 1940, to Jeanne Eleanor Considine.
He recently remarried. He said he was cured of cancer in 1974.

General Davidson was the co-author with Maj. Gen. Robert R. Glass of a book on
military intelligence. The title: ''Intelligence Is for Commanders.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 24, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM INTELLIGENCE CHIEF WAS UNAWARE OF CONCERNS

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words


A former head of military intelligence in South Vietnam testified yesterday that
none of the officers who later complained about being encouraged to lower their
estimates of enemy strength had brought their concerns to him.

Some of these officers voiced their complaints in a 1982 CBS Reports documentary
that is now the subject of a $120 million libel suit by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1967.

The witness, Lieut. Gen. Phillip B. Davidson Jr., now retired, said in Federal
Court in Manhattan that he participated in a number of meetings in Saigon in
September 1967 that focused on the size and nature of the enemy.

The Saigon meetings - also attended by representatives of the Central
Intelligence Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency, the State Department and
the Pacific Command - were convened to determine figures for North Vietnamese
and Vietcong troop strength that could be used in the military's order of battle
and in a special national intelligence estimate for President Johnson.

The order of battle is the official military listing of enemy strength.

Denies Complaints From Officers


Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, asked General Davidson yesterday
whether any of the officers in General Westmoreland's command had complained to
him at the time that the figures they advanced at the meetings were ''improper''

''No,'' General Davidson said.

Q. Did anyone from MACV (Military Assistance Command, Vietnam) object to the
figures used by the command?

A. The answer is no.

On the CBS documentary, titled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' the
narrator, Mike Wallace, said that General Westmoreland's intelligence officers
''had been instructed to argue for estimates far lower than they believed to be
true.''

Told C.I.A Figures Were Low


Col. Gains Hawkins, chief of General Davidson's order of battle section, said on
the broadcast that he had told Samuel A. Adams, a C.I.A. intelligence analyst,
at an August 1967 session preceding the Saigon meetings ''that I thought our
figures were lower than they actually should be.'' Mr. Adams was known to share
that view.

But Colonel Hawkins said he had concluded after briefings with General
Westmoreland and others the previous May that enemy strength figures were to be
kept down.

''That was the message,'' he said on the broadcast.

Col. George Hamscher, an intelligence officer from the Pacific Command in
Hawaii, headed by Adm. Ulysses S. Grant Sharp, said on the program that ''the
message we got'' was to hold the figures below the old total of 300,000.

Mr. Wallace used Colonel Hamscher's remarks to support his own statement on the
broadcast that ''CBS Reports has learned that Colonel Hawkins was in fact
carrying out orders that originated from General Westmoreland.''

Unedited Interview Played


Yesterday, however, Mr. Burt played for the jury the unedited videotape that CBS
had made of its interview with Colonel Hawkins, who is expected to testify for
the network.

On the tape - but not on the program - Colonel Hawkins said that neither General
Westmoreland nor anyone else had instructed him to stay below an enemy strength
total of 300,000 at the sessions involving the intelligence agencies.

''I deduced it,'' Colonel Hawkins said in the taped interview. ''And I defended
it willingly. I was not given any specific orders.''

Colonel Hawkins told George Crile, the program's producer, that he was ''no
virgin.''

''I've been down a lot of roads,'' he said. ''It was a bad moment.''

Not Worried by Legalities


At another point in the videotape that was not shown on the program, Colonel
Hawkins said he had not worried about the legality of reducing figures in what
he regarded as an arbitrary fashion.

''When it comes right down to it,'' he said, ''who the hell can prove what
figure is better than the other figure. You don't have that two plus two equals
four in this business.''

Colonel Hawkins also said that the figures for the enemy's regular, uniformed
troops - as opposed to such forces as its ''home guard'' - were ''not touched.''
The former figures, he said, were ''inviolate.''

The colonel said he always assumed that President Johnson, who had a personal
representative in Saigon, ''knew everything'' about the dispute over the
estimates.

''George,'' he said to Mr. Crile, ''there was so much noise being made, I don't
see how anybody could have been kept in the dark.''

While the documentary alleged a ''conspiracy'' at ''the highest levels of
American military intelligence'' to suppress and alter ''critical'' data,
Colonel Hawkins said on the videotape that the dispute could have resulted from
differences of ''honest judgment.'' He said he couldn't describe anyone in the
dispute as a ''villain.''

General Davidson, a bald, 68-year- old veteran who served as a battalion
commander under Gen. George S. Patton in World War II and who later became a
Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Defense Department, took the stand just after
noon. Shortly before 4 P.M., however, he complained of being tired and was
excused. His testimony will continue today.

Mr. Burt then played an unedited videotape of a CBS interview with Comdr. James
Meacham, an intelligence officer in Vietnam in 1967 and 1968 who is now the
military correspondent of The Economist.

The documentary referred to a number of strong letters Commander Meacham had
written his wife from Saigon, deploring ''lies'' and ''falsifications'' of enemy
strength data. But on unused portions of the videotape, the commander said the
letters were written in ''the heat'' of the moment and were open to multiple
interpretations.

Asked to 'Tamper' With Data


On the broadcast, Commander Meacham said that, after the Tet offensive of
January 1968, he and other officers were asked by a superior, Col. Daniel
Graham, to ''tamper'' with the computer that held data on enemy strength. Mr.
Wallace characterized the episode as a ''cover-up.''

But, in a portion of the videotape that was not used on the CBS broadcast, the
commander minimized the incident and said ''it was certainly not a falsification
of official records, if that's what you're asking.'' Commander Meacham also
suggested at several stages that Mr. Crile, who was conducting the interview,
was trying to get him to say things at variance with what the commander
believed.

''You quite clearly know what you want me to say, but that's not the perception
I have,'' Commander Meacham said.

The trial, now in its second week of testimony, deals with both the accuracy of
the documentary and the procedures used in its preparation. General Westmoreland
contends CBS libeled him by saying that he deceived his military superiors and
President Johnson about the scope of enemy strength in the year before the Tet
offensive.

General Davidson - who was not interviewed for the CBS documentary - testified
that the ''compromise'' agreement on enemy strength that was finally reached in
September 1967 was proposed, not by General Westmoreland, but by George Carver,
a senior C.I.A. official.

The agreement settled on an enemy strength of 223,000 to 248,000, but noted the
existence of an additional 75,000 to 85,000 Vietcong ''political cadre.'' ''Home
guard'' forces were no longer quantified, but the new national intelligence
estimate said these forces, while diminished, had been in the range of 150,000
in 1966. While some military officers and intelligence officials believed the
''home guard'' posed a military threat and should be included in the figures,
Generals Westmoreland and Davidson did not share this view.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 25, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Floods Kill 33

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 28 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Oct. 24


Flooding caused by heavy rains killed 33 people and left more than 38,000
families homeless in central Vietnam this month, the Vietnam News Agency said
today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 25, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. INTELLIGENCE CHIEF SAYS HE WASN'T ASKED TO FALSIFY REPORTS IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1409 words


The head of military intelligence in South Vietnam in 1967 testified yesterday
that Gen. William C. Westmoreland never asked him to falsify intelligence
reports and, if the general had, he would have disobeyed him.

The 68-year old retired officer, Lieut. Gen. Phillip B. Davidson Jr., offered
one of the few emotional moments so far in the $120 million libel suit brought
by General Westmoreland against CBS in connection with a 1982 documentary.

The documentary asserted that top American military intelligence officers
engaged in a conspiracy to suppress information about a high enemy presence
prior to the Tet offensive of January 1968.

Asked About Oath


On his second day of testimony, General Davidson - who was not interviewed for
the CBS documentary, although other officers under him were - was asked by Dan
M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, whether he had taken an oath upon his
graduation in 1939 from West Point.

''Yes, sir,'' General Davidson said.

Q. And what was that oath?

A. To honor and obey the orders of my superior officers and to protect and
defend the Constitution of the United States.

Q. Does that oath require you to obey an illegal order?

A. No, sir.

Q. Did General Westmoreland ever order you to fake intelligence?

A. No.

Q. If General Westmoreland had ever given you such an order, would you have
obeyed it?

General Davidson, his brow furrowed beneath a bald head, leaned toward the
microphone over the witness stand - a few feet from General Westmoreland, a rapt
jury and a crowded audience of reporters and spectators.

''No,'' he boomed.

''I have no further questions,'' said Mr. Burt, his own voice hoarse.

Detailed Cross-Examination


General Davidson was the sixth witness for General Westmoreland, who commanded
American forces in Vietnam from 1964-68, in the two-week old trial in Federal
Court in Manhattan.

While General Davidson, who was a battalion commander under Gen. George S.
Patton in World War II, was forthcoming in his answers to Mr. Burt on direct
examination, he seemed unable to recall many of the events that were brought up
in detailed cross- examination by David Boies, the lawyer for CBS.

At one stage, Judge Pierre N. Leval advised General Davidson that, if he grew as
tired as he had during testimony on Tuesday, he could take a break.

''I'd prefer to have Mr. Boies complete his cross-examination,'' General
Davidson said.

''No promise of that,'' said the judge, to considerable laughter.

''I understand that all too well, your honor,'' the general replied.

General Westmoreland contends that CBS and several other defendants libeled him
in a 1982 CBS Reports documentary titled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception.''

Thesis of Conspiracy


General Westmoreland specifically accused CBS of saying he had deceived his
President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, arbitrarily set a ceiling of
300,000 on enemy strength, suppressed reports from his officers of a higher
enemy presence and a higher rate of North Vietnamese infiltration than was made
known and engineered a cover-up of the truth after the Tet offensive.

The documentary said that General Westmoreland's command had blocked reports
from some officers in its ''combined intelligence center'' that 25,000 North
Vietnamese troops were infiltrating into South Vietnam each month in the fall of
1967.

But, under questioning yesterday by Mr. Burt, General Davidson said there was no
evidence that infiltration into South Vietnam - as opposed to enemy troop
movements outside the country - had reached such proportions before January
1968.

Six Months Time Lag


Moreover, General Davidson said, there was usually a six months time lag before
most intelligence officers would know the magnitude of infiltration for a
particular month.

General Davidson said he and other ranking officers learned as early as November
1967 that a total of 25,000 North Vietnamese were moving southward toward Khe
Sanh, an American base in northern South Vietnam that came under siege before
the Tet offensive. But the source of the information, the general said, was
highly-secret communications intelligence from the National Security Agency.

General Davidson said that information from the N.S.A. was not normally shared
with officers in the ''combined intelligence center'' because Vietnamese worked
there. The Vietnamese, he said, were not subject to the same kinds of security
controls and investigations that United States personnel were.

Relying on military reports that were compiled after the Tet offensive, General
Davidson told Mr. Burt that the size of the ''attacking force'' was 84,000, much
lower than the figure that CBS is expected to advance later in the trial.

Dispute on Casualties


According to the CBS documentary, Americans were caught unprepared for the size
of the offensive. And, during his cross-examination yesterday of General
Davidson, Mr. Boies attempted to show that if the figure were no more than
84,000, then virtually the entire attacking force must have been put out of
action.

In response to a question under cross-examination, General Davidson said that,
according to military reports, about 35,000 enemy troops, 5,000 enemy political
cadre and 5,000 civilians were killed by United States and South Vietnamese
forces in the month of fighting following the offensive. And, as a rule, he
said, 1.5 persons would have been wounded for each person killed.

So, said Mr. Boies, ''the number of those killed and wounded would significantly
exceed the number in the attack, would it not, sir?''

Eighty-four thousand, General Davidson replied, ''was the number they started
with,'' not the total force. He said he knew of no studies that calculated the
latter figure.

Among the key issues in the trial is a controversial 1967 decision by General
Westmoreland to drop a category of enemy personnel - the self-defense and secret
self-defense forces - from the official listing of enemy strength known as the
order of battle. The CBS documentary indicated that the decision was unwarranted
militarily and was prompted by the general's desire to hold the total enemy
strength figure below 300,000.

Generals Westmoreland and Davidson have said that the decision was based on
their belief that those forces did not pose a military threat. The continued
inclusion of those forces in the order of battle, at a probable figure of over
100,000, would have misled the press and the public into believing that enemy
strength was mounting rather than receding, the generals have said.

Concerned About Chinese


General Davidson, who finished his testimony yesterday and will be followed to
the stand by Robert Heon, a military intelligence officer under the general,
became the intelligence chief in South Vietnam in May 1967. Most of the time
that summer, he testified on Tuesday, was taken up with such questions as
whether the Chinese were going to send troops to the aid of North Vietnam or
supply Hanoi with surface- to-surface missiles that could be fired into South
Vietnam from Laos or Cambodia.

He gave comparatively little attention, he added yesterday, to the debate over
enemy strength then raging between General Westmoreland's command and the
Central Intelligence Agency. The agency, like some military intelligence
analysts in Saigon, wanted to increase the estimate of enemy strength to as much
as 500,000.

But Mr. Boies pointed to instructions General Davidson had given a subordinate
in August 1967 that ''this headquarters will not accept a figure in excess of
the current strength figure carried by the press'' - about 300,000. The same
month, in another memorandum to that officer, Col. George Godding, General
Davidson wrote that ''the figure of combat strength'' in the order of battle
''must take a steady and significant downward trend as I am convinced this
reflects true enemy status.''

Under questioning by Mr. Boies, General Davidson could recall virtually nothing
about these instructions, about any discussions he had with General Westmoreland
over enemy strength figures, or about the circumstances surrounding the decision
to delete the self-defense forces from the order of battle.

''Mr. Boies,'' he said, referring to his instructions to Colonel Godding, ''I
cannot recall what my views were 17 years ago in this matter.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 25, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

IN IOWA, A NEGATIVE SENATE CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 21, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: WATERLOO, Iowa. Oct. 23


Like many Iowans, Wendell Watson, who raises cattle, deplores the quality of the
campaign for the United States Senate in this state.

''There are too many half truths,'' said Mr. Watson, who used to work at John
Deere, the farm machine company that laid off more than half its 12,000 employes
in the last four years. ''Each candidate picks out the worst thing about his
opponent.''

This is a year of negative campaigning in Senate races from North Carolina to
Texas. Voters in Iowa say they have never seen such mudslinging. Although such
tactics are publicly deplored by both candidates, both campaigns acknowledge
that the negative strategy appears to work.

Last summer Senator Roger W. Jepsen, a 55-year-old Republican seeking a second
term, trailed his opponent, Representative Tom Harkin, 44, by as much as 17
percentage points in The Des Moines Register's Iowa poll. Then Mr. Jepsen began
personal attacks on Mr. Harkin,

'Have You No Honor at All?'


The Senator's attacks culminated in a television debate Monday evening when he
called the Congressman a liar. A new Jepsen television commercial berates Mr.
Harkin for accusing the Senator of seeking to cut Social Security benefits.
''Have you no decency, Mr. Harkin?'' an older person asks. ''Have you no honor
at all?''

Similarly, Mr. Harkin was nine points behind the Senator last month before he
initiated negative television commercials. He swiftly moved to a five-point lead
in the seesaw battle.

One commercial shows Mr. Jepsen sweating profusely, while another shows a hog
snorting loudly while an announcer intones, ''When two Iowa farmers drove a
tractor all the way to Washington to talk to him about farm debt, Roger Jepsen
fell asleep.''

Senator Jepsen justifies his negative campaign by saying Mr. Harkin is a
''liberal activist'' in Washington who masquerades at home as a conservative.

The Senator attacks his opponent as free-spending, soft on defense and
pro-abortion, and accuses him of selling out the interests of Iowans in his
support of legislation requiring a portion of domestic content in the
manufacture of certain goods and his opposition to nitrites used to preserve
meats.

Mr. Harkin accuses Mr. Jepsen of being ''the biggest-spending Senator in Iowa's
history,'' voting for ''every gold-plated Tinker Toy that the Pentagon and
defense contractors have ever wanted.''

Personal Character as an Issue


The personal character of the two candidates may be the sleeper issue of this
campaign.

Mr. Harkin's campaign slogan, ''A Senator Iowans can be proud of,'' is a veiled
reference to Mr. Jepsen's personal difficulties. The most publicized was the
Senator's membership, early in 1977, in Leisure Spa Ltd., a Des Moines brothel
patronized by some of the state's political and business leaders before it was
closed by the police. The incident occurred before Mr. Jepsen became a ''born
again'' Christian and initiated his successful senatorial campaign.

Mr. Harkin will not discuss the Leisure Spa incident, but he says a candidate's
character is always an issue in a political campaign.

He also said, ''The most important thing that a Senator or Congressman can have
in Washington, D.C., is the ability to keep his word,'' noting that Senator
Jepsen had led and then abandoned opposition to the sale of AWACs planes to
Saudi Arabia, and had changed positions on a dairy bill.

The Senator replied, ''My word and my relationship with my peers and colleagues
is a matter of record.''

Mr. Harkin, who was quoted as having said that he flew ''combat air patrols'' in
the Vietnam War, was accused by Senator Barry Goldwater, Republican of Arizona,
of having fabricated his combat record. The Congressman acknowledged that he
actually flew planes from Vietnam to Japan for repairs.

Shirttail Factor Ruled Out


Mr. Jepsen had to explain his war record, too. Although he once said he was a
paratrooper in World War II, he did not enter the service until 1946, a year
after the war ended. He replied that the Veterans Administration considered the
war as having been ''technically ended in 1946.''

Unlike other states with close Senate races in which President Reagan's lead
could provide shirttails for Republican candidates, the President leads his
Democratic opponent, Walter F. Mondale, by less than 10 percentage points in
Iowa, primarily because of the depressed farm economy.

Moreover, unlike many other campaigns in which the Democratic candidate does not
identify himself with the top of the ticket, Mr. Mondale and his running mate,
Geraldine A. Ferraro, have campaigned in Iowa in behalf of Mr. Harkin, while Mr.
Reagan and Vice President Bush have campaigned for Mr. Jepsen.

Both senatorial candidates have spent about $2 million.

''It's a very tight race, a neck-and-neck race,'' said Rolf C. Croft, the state
Republican chairman. ''It's going to go down to the wire.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Race for Congress; A series of articles on selected 1984 contests

GRAPHIC: photo of Tom Harkin; photo of Roger Jepsen

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 25, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN MAY AID G.O.P. IN MID-ATLANTIC REGION

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS

SECTION: Section B; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words

DATELINE: WILMINGTON, Del., Oct. 23


The silver-haired candidate moved briskly to the lectern, tilted the microphone
down to lip level and, speaking in a brisk voice, wasted no time in making her
point at the Kiwanis Club.

''Tom Carper and I are as different as day and night,'' she said.

For Delaware residents, there was a difference that hardly seemed necessary for
the speaker to mention in her effort to unseat Thomas R. Carper, Democrat of
Delaware, the state's only United States Representative. She is a du Pont.

Elise du Pont, like Gov. John D. Rockefeller 4th of West Virginia, bears one of
the most widely recognizable names among candidates in a wedge- shaped band of
four Middle Atlantic states between New York and Virginia.

And she is one of the candidates in the area on whom the Republican Party has
pinned part of its hopes for gains in the next Congress.

Rockefeller Victory Expected

Mr. Rockefeller, who cannot succeed himself after two terms, is expected to win
a Senate seat easily and keep speculation alive that he may one day run for
still higher office.

The two are running in an area where Republican candidates can expect some help
from the popularity of their ticket leader, President Reagan, if recent polls
prove accurate.

In Delaware, the only polling data available have come from politicians, but
even the most recent taken by Democrats, in late September, showed Mr. Reagan
ahead of former Vice President Walter F. Mondale by 17 percentage points.

The narrowest margin among the most recent polls was shown in West Virginia,
where The Charleston Daily Mail last week reported the President leading Mr.
Mondale by about 9 percentage points. A poll published Oct. 17 by The Pittsburgh
Post-Gazette gave Mr. Reagan a 10-point lead in Pennsylvania, and a poll
published Sunday by The Baltimore News American gave him a lead of 12 points in
Maryland, which is usually regarded as a Democratic state.

In Wilmington, as she spoke in the Hotel du Pont, it was unnecessary for Mrs. du
Pont to mention that she is also the First State's First Lady, the wife of
Pierre S. du Pont 4th, one of Delaware's most popular Governors. As she
crisscrosses the state, she often travels on the Du Pont Highway, and past plant
sites of E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Company, Delaware's top employer.

Du Pont-Carper Race in Delaware

Her own supporters cite her credentials. Mrs. du Pont, 48 years old, finished
college, earned a law degree and entered government service after rearing four
children. She has served a three-year stint as a Reagan appointee, as assistant
administrator of the Agency for International Development and director of its
Bureau for Private Enterprise.

She is pitted against a freshman Congressman who ''has made all the right
moves,'' as one political analyst said the other day.

Mr. Carper, 37, a former naval flight officer, served three terms as State
Treasurer after earning a master's degree in business administration at the
University of Delaware, before his election to Congress in 1982.

Mr. Carper's campaign cites a lead of eight or nine percentage points in its own
polls, and independent analysts believe that may be accurate.

Tradition of Ticket-Splitting

A strong tide that is expected to run here for Mr. Reagan could help Mrs. du
Pont, but the ''coattail effect'' of a ticket leader has been less of an
advantage here than in some states. Delaware, where Democrats outnumber
Republicans 3 to 2, has a strong tradition of ticket-splitting.

The Republican gubernatorial candidate, Michael N. Castle, who serves with Mr.
du Pont as Lieutenant Governor, is viewed as far ahead of his Democratic
opponent, William T. Quillen, a former justice of the State Supreme Court.
Political experts here also see Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., a Democrat, as an
easy winner over his Republican opponent, John M. Burris, a businessman and
former State Representative.

In two other states in the region, Pennsylvania and Maryland, a few other races
are seen by Republicans as opportunities for gains in the House, where they are
now outnumbered 267 to 166.

One is a contest for a seat now held by Representative Bob Edgar, a Democrat in
the affluent, conservative and predominantly Republican Seventh District of
Pennsylvania, most of it in suburban Delaware County, bordering Philadelphia.
Mr. Edgar is opposed by Curt Weldon, a County Commissioner and former Mayor of
the blue-collar town of Marcus Hook.

G.O.P. Sees Chance to Win

On the other side of Philadelphia, in suburban Bucks County's Eighth District,
Republicans now see a chance for their inexperienced candidate, David Christian,
a highly decorated veteran of the Vietnam War who entered the contest late after
no leading Republican could be persuaded to oppose Representative Peter H.
Kostmayer, a Democrat.

In Maryland, Republicans are confident of retaining their one House seat and
hopeful of capturing another, in the Second District, north of Baltimore. The
seat is now held by an 11-term Democrat, Clarence D. Long. His challenger, Helen
D. Bentley, lost to Mr. Long by 8,400 votes in 1982.

No such chances are seen for House gains by Republicans in West Virginia, and
Governor Rockefeller is expected to keep the Democrats in control of the Senate
seat vacated by the retirement of Senator Jennings Randolph.

Mr. Rockefeller, the tall, 46-year-old grandson and namesake of the founder of
Standard Oil, is facing John R. Raese, a wealthy businessman.

A recent poll showed Mr. Rockefeller leading by 26 percentage points, despite
attacks from critics on his leadership in a national recession in which West
Virginia suffered more than any other state and from which it has never fully
recovered.

Hopes for the Presidency

Mr. Rockefeller, who is married to the former Sharon Percy, daughter of Senator
Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois, is widely believed to harbor hopes of
the Presidency.

If so, critics in West Virginia say, he has paid for the opportunity. He has
spent $7.79 million so far, including a loan to his own campaign of $6.5
million.

His opponent, Mr. Raese, has reported spending $579,033.

In the state's other major race, an old foe of the Governor, Arch A. Moore Jr.,
holds a lead that is almost as broad, 23 percentage points, over a conservative
Democrat, Clyde M. See, in the race for Governor,

Mr. Moore, who could not succeed himself in 1976, attempted a comeback in 1980,
losing to Mr. Rockefeller.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Elise du Pont; photo of Thomas Carper

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE LEGACY OF GRENADA:MESSAGE TO FOES, ALLIES

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


Administration officials and nongovernmental experts say that President Reagan's
decision to invade Grenada a year ago created a powerful legacy in American
politics.

Reflecting on the decision and how it came about, Langhorne A. Motley, Assistant
Secretary of State for Inter- American Affairs, said:

''The talk was solely about the students. There never was any intent of sending
a larger message, no talk of bigger ramifications. But as an aftermath, there
were messages received.''

Mr. Motley was alluding to the American medical students whose safety was
thought to be threatened in the aftermath of a hardline coup that ousted Prime
Minister Maurice Bishop. President Reagan cited the welfare of the students as
the main reason for the invasion. But he has also spoken of the invasion as
necessary to eliminate a threat posed by the leftists in power in Grenada.

Situation Held Precarious


For the Grenadians, the message was one of American help. By overthrowing the
leftist Government, the invasion provided a temporary respite from years of
right-wing and left-wing dictatorships. Now, the experts say, Grenada's economic
and political future is once again precarious.

In the Caribbean and Central America, the message was mixed. Some diplomats and
experts say that the show of force inspired caution among adversaries and
courage in friends. Others say that any beneficial effects of the invasion were
dissipated by the absence of diplomatic follow-through. Initial criticism by
allies in Latin America and Europe has mostly vanished.

Politically, President Reagan seems to have benefited significantly. William
Schneider, a public opinion expert at the American Enterprise Institute, said in
an interview that Mr. Reagan's actions in Grenada and Lebanon met the key
lessons of leadership from the Vietnam War, ''which were to win quickly or get
out quickly.''

''The moral justification for the invasion of Grenada is not clear to the
American people,'' Mr. Schneider said. ''But it worked, and American people
judge these things on pragmatic grounds.''

An Exercise in Leadership


By the same token, the polls suggest to Mr. Schneider that Mr. Reagan's decision
to remove American forces from Lebanon was not regarded as a failure ''because
it also represented an exercise in leadership to get out.''

''Grenada is not seen as a symbol of American strength - people are not proud of
invading a little country - but as a symbol of Reagan's effectiveness,'' Mr.
Schneider said.

Administration officials acknowledged that despite considerable America aid,
most Grenadians are in poor economic shape. Mr. Motley put the total aid at $57
million, for 100,000 people. Much has been for ''war reconstruction.''

He described the program as one of ''micro, not macro, economic recovery,'' and
said that Grenada did not have much by way of economic resources to work with.

The weight of feeling from Central American diplomats and American experts is
that whatever the beneficial reactions to the invasion, they have largely faded.

William Hyland, editor of the magazine Foreign Affairs, said the invasion was
''a shot in the arm for morale, but its effect has worn off, and we are back to
the basic problems in the Caribbean and Central America.''

As he sees it, ''Mr. Reagan showed he could get tough, but a year later we are
still bogged down in Nicaragua and in a somewhat better but still inconclusive
situation in El Salvador.''

Robert Pastor, a Central American specialist at the University of Maryland, who
characterized the Grenadian victory as ''the equivalent of taking over Martha's
Vineyard,'' the resort island in Massachusetts, said the United States had done
little to capitalize on its ''initial gain in credibility.''

''There is no evidence that the Administration used it for anything more than to
scare Nicaragua and Cuba,'' he said. ''precipitating the largest military
buildup of Cuba by the Soviet Union since the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.''

Howard Wiarda of the American Enterprise Insitute and Amherst College said the
invasion had ''a major impact.'' To him, it caused left-wing forces to reassess
their chances of success, become more cautious and willing to negotiate.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

President Signs Bill to Help Some Exposed to Herbicide

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 153 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


President Reagan signed a bill Wednesday that would compensate certain Vietnam
veterans exposed to the herbicide Agent Orange and create a commission to review
the basis of claims of other Vietnam veterans.

The commission will study which diseases may have been caused from exposure to
the herbicide. It also will look into diseases among 380,000 veterans who may
have been exposed to radiation either in tests or as members of the occupation
forces in Hiroshima and Nagasaki after the atom bomb exploded in 1945.

The bill provides temporary compensation for two years to veterans who have
developed skin diseases already conclusively linked to Agent Orange. The
legislation will cost about $7.5 million in the next year.

It leaves unresolved thousands of cases involving a wide array of afflictions
Vietnam veterans assert were caused by Agent Orange, which was used to kill
plant growth in Southeast Asia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NO 'CEILING' ON FIGURES, CBS CASE WITNESS SAYS

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1278 words


The military's chief negotiator at a high-level 1967 conference on the size of
the enemy in South Vietnam testified yesterday that, with the ''blessing'' of
Gen. William C. Westmoreland, he presented estimates based on the ''best''
intelligence available to him.

The witness, Brig. Gen. George A. Godding, said he told CBS during its
preparation of a 1982 documentary that is the subject of a libel suit by General
Westmoreland that the military's figures on enemy strength were not the result
of a ''ceiling'' imposed arbitrarily by General Westmoreland.

In effect, General Godding, like most of the other witnesses for General
Westmoreland who have preceded him to the stand since testimony began on Oct.
15, implied that CBS had distorted important events in Saigon and Washington in
1967 relating to military assessments of the enemy.



Questioned the Statements

But at the start of vigorous cross- examination that will continue on Monday,
David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, questioned whether the statements made by
General Godding on the witness stand were consistent with what he had said in a
pretrial deposition.

Q. When you gave your deposition, did you understand that you were under oath?

A. Yes, sir.

Under direct examination, General Godding said he told George Crile, the
documentary's producer, that ''there was no ceiling placed on us.'' He said the
military's figures - which totaled 298,000 without certain categories that had
previously been counted - were substantially lower than those advanced by the
Central Intelligence Agency at the conference but derived from ''our best
estimates from intelligence sources.''

On the CBS documentary, titled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' the
narrator, Mike Wallace, said the chief of the military's delegation ''told us
that General Westmoreland had, in fact, personally instructed him not to allow
the total (enemy strength) to go over 300,000.'' Mr. Wallace said that some
military officers at the conference felt that figure was too low and represented
an ''arbitrary ceiling.''

Not Identified by Name

General Godding, who was not interviewed on camera for the broadcast, was not
identified by name by Mr. Wallace.

Yesterday, General Godding testified in Federal Court in Manhattan that, during
the conference in August 1967, he presented both the military's and the C.I.A's
estimates to the Joint Chiefs of Staff. The Joint Chiefs, he said, agreed with
General Westmoreland's position that the enemy's self- defense and secret
self-defense forces should no longer be included in official estimates of North
Vietnamese and Vietcong strength.

On the documentary, Mr. Wallace described the exclusion of those forces as ''a
new tactic'' by General Westmoreland to artificially reduce the size of enemy
forces to make it appear that America was winning ''a war of attrition.''

If the self-defense and secret self-defense forces - whose military capacity was
in dispute - had continued to be counted in the official listing of enemy
strength known as the order of battle, the total size of the enemy would have
been in the range of 420,000. At the time of the weeklong conference attended by
General Godding at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., the order of battle
listed full enemy strength at 299,000.

Size of Communist Forces

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to
1968, contends that CBS libeled him by saying that he deceived President Johnson
and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of Communist forces in
South Vietnam in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968.

The general specifically accused CBS and several other defendants - including
Mr. Wallace and Mr. Crile - of saying that he had arbitrarily ordered a ceiling
of 300,000 enemy forces, suppressed reports from his officers of a higher enemy
presence and a higher infiltration rate than was known, and engineered a
cover-up after the offensive.

CBS takes the position that the documentary was true.

The purpose of the conference at C.I.A. headquarters - which was attended by
representatives from a variety of intelligence agencies - was not only to update
the order of battle but to devise a special national intelligence estimate for
the President.

One of the officers from General Westmoreland's command who took part in the
conference was Col. Gains Hawkins, chief of General Westmoreland's order of
battle unit.

Consultant on Documentary

On the CBS broadcast 15 years later, Colonel Hawkins said he thought the
military's old figure of enemy strength needed to be dramatically increased and
he had said so to Samuel A. Adams, one of the C.I.A. representatives at the
meeting. Mr. Adams eventually served as a paid consultant to CBS for its
documentary, on which he appeared. He is also a defendant in General
Westmoreland's suit.

But General Godding said yesterday that he had talked ''constantly'' to Colonel
Hawkins at the conference - they had both flown from Saigon for the meeting -
and Colonel Hawkins never complained to him that he was ''dissatisfied or
displeased'' with the military's estimates.

General Godding said that, when an ''impasse'' developed with the C.I.A. over
which figures to use, he took his concerns to an early morning meeting with the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, headed by Gen. Earle G. Wheeler.

When General Wheeler and the other Joint Chiefs ''concurred'' in the decision
not to exclude the self-defense and secret self-defense forces, General Godding
recalled, he sent a cable to that effect to his immediate superior in Saigon,
Lieut. Gen. Phillip B. Davidson Jr.

The next day, according to records introduced during the trial, General Davidson
cabled General Godding to say that the figure of 420,000 had ''surfaced'' in
Saigon and ''stunned the enemy and this headquarters and resulted in a scream of
protests and denials.

''In view of this reaction and in view of General Westmoreland's conversations,
all of which you have heard, I am sure this headquarters will not accept a
figure in excess of the current strength figure carried by the press.''

Interpreted the Remarks

General Godding testified that he interpreted these remarks to mean that General
Westmoreland believed the self-defense and secret self-defense forces were not
combat forces. He said that before he left Saigon for Langley, he had briefed
General Westmoreland on the figures he would present at the conference.

''He told me my estimates were good,'' General Godding recalled. ''He gave me,
basically, his blessing and told me to move out.''

On cross-examination, Mr. Boies drew admissions from General Godding that, on
several occasions, he had erred in his deposition before trial.

For example, in the deposition, General Godding said he had taken to the
conference a set of figures that included self-defense and secret self-defense
forces. But yesterday, he said the figures he took were revised ones that
reflected the exclusion of the two groups.

Mr. Boies asked General Godding about the military threat posed by the
self-defense and secret self-defense forces.

''They were capable of putting in small mines,'' the general said, ''or by
assisting regular forces by leading them into a combat area.''

General Godding agreed that the most complete information on all enemy forces
should be made available to American troops at all times, with Mr. Boies
implying that, because of the exclusion of the self-defense and secret
self-defense forces, that had not been done in Vietnam.

There will be no trial session today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Artist's rendition of courtroom scene

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 26, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WITNESS ASSERTS KY HEADS VIETNAMESE GANGS IN U.S.

BYLINE: By SELWYN RAAB

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 845 words


A witness who said he had recently been a middle-echelon leader of a Vietnamese
crime gang in the United States testified at a Federal hearing yesterday that
his superior had told him that Nguyen Cao Ky, former Prime Minister and Vice
President of South Vietnam, headed a Vietnamese crime organization in this
country.

The hooded, unidentified witness spoke before the President's Commission on
Organized Crime as it ended three days of hearings in Manhattan on the growth of
Asian crime organizations in the United States.

Earlier, the commission staff asserted in a report that Vietnamese gangs
operated in 13 states, including New York, Pennsylvania and California, and
mainly victimized Vietnamese and Chinese in the United States.

The witness, when questioned by the commission's deputy executive director,
Rodney G. Smith, said he had never met Mr. Ky.

'Everyone Should Know'


''Were you told by a superior that he was the leader?'' Mr. Smith asked.

''Yes, the information was that everyone should know that Ky was the leader,''
he replied.

Later, he added that in Vietnamese communities in the United States, ''everyone
knows'' that Mr. Ky headed the organization.

After the hearing, the commission's chief counsel, James D. Harmon Jr., when
asked by a reporter whether the commission had any additional evidence
implicating Mr. Ky, said, ''I can't comment beyond what was said in testimony,
but as a general reply, wouldn't a member in the Lucchese family know who the
boss is?''

He was referring to the Lucchese group, which law enforcement officials contend
is one of the five major crime groups in the New York area.

'Most Famous Refugee'


At his home in Huntington Beach, Calif., Mr. Ky said that ''I know nothing about
this.'' He said he was being singled out ''because I am the most famous refugee
in America.''

''Of course, I have heard rumors about the activities of these groups, but I
know nothing about them,'' he said. Mr. Ky described himself as ''a poor man''
and said that because of recent business setbacks, he had put his $260,000 house
up for sale. Mr. Ky, who is 54 years old, has been in exile in California since
1975, when South Vietnam was overrun by North Vietnam.

The witness said the gangs committed murders, robberies and extortion and
trafficked in marijuana. Besides Mr. Ky, the witness said former South
Vietnamese Army generals and officers were leaders in the organization that
controlled the gangs. According to the witness, the gangs justified their crimes
by maintaining that they were anti-Communist groups raising money for guerrillas
in South Vietnam.

Commission staff members said it was necessary to conceal the background of the
former Vietnamese gang member to protect him and his family.

Testifying from behind a screen and with a dozen Federal marshals stationed in
the marble-columned hearing room, the witness said he knew of gang operations in
the Los Angeles area, San Francisco, Chicago and Houston.

At a training camp in California, he said, he and others were taught how to use
guns, including a 9-millimeter semiautomatic machine gun. That gun, which had
been provided by the witness, was examined by 7 of the 19 commission members at
the hearing in Federal Hall at 26 Wall Street.

The witness said there was a ''boss'' in each state where Vietnamese gangs
operated. Each unit, he said, has a leader and an assistant leader. He said he
was an assistant leader in one gang. He estimated that nationwide there were
about 1,000 members.

Instructions for Killing


At training sessions, he said, recruits were instructed on how to rob Chinese
gambling opertions, how to extort money from merchants and ''how to kill.''
Before a murder, he said, members were cautioned to make sure that they had
''backup transportation'' to escape from the crime area and to wear gloves so
that no fingerprints would be found on murder weapons.

The commission also heard yesterday about the murder and intimidation of
Vietnamese journalists who had written about the gangs in Vietnamese- language
newspapers in the United States. A woman who was later identified by staff
members as the widow of Dam Phong, described how her husband, a publisher, was
slain on Aug. 24, 1982, in Houston.

She said her husband was threatened after he published articles about exortions
and frauds committed by a gang. She said that before the slaying, her children
received telephone threats instructing them to tell their ''father to stay away
from our business or he will be sorry for what he does.''

She said that her husband was shot to death in his office and that a group
calling itself the Vietnamese Party of the Annihilation of Communism and for the
National Restoration left a message in Vietnamese next to his body describing
him as a ''traitor.''

Another unidentified witness, wearing a black hood, said he was a Vietnamese
journalist who had been shot at twice after writing about gangs for a weekly
newspaper. He said he had stopped writing such articles.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRINCETON MEETING TO HONOR NORMAN THOMAS, CLASS OF '05

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 54, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 739 words


Princeton University was never a hotbed of socialism, but it did produce one of
America's most prominent socialists, the late Norman Thomas.

And next month, the university will honor Mr. Thomas, the maverick valedictorian
of its class of 1905, with a scholarly conference on ''Socialism in America.''

Socialists of the 1930's and 1940's will tell the conference about Mr. Thomas's
quixotic Presidential campaigns and the Socialist Party's organizing drives
among auto workers, sleeping-car porters and Southern tenant farmers.

Present-day Socialists, such as Michael Harrington, will reflect on the decline
of the American Left after World War II and the prospects for socialism in the
future. Irving Howe, the author and literary critic, will sum up with thoughts
on the meaning of ''The Socialism of Norman Thomas.''

Scholars of American radicalism and trade unionists from around the country are
expected to attend the conference, Nov. 8 to 10.

A Minister's Son

Norman Thomas was born Nov. 20, 1884. The son of a Presbyterian minister and for
a short time a minister himself, he adopted his idealistic politics as a result
of working among the people of New York City's slums.

As a prophet of socialism, he traveled around the country warning of the ''evils
of capitalism'' and the need for social justice. And six times, every four years
from 1928 to 1948, he stubbornly campaigned for the Presidency as the Socialist
Party's candidate, garnering 884,781 votes in 1932 at the depth of the
Depression.

In his 80's, he often appeared on platforms to preach against the war in
Vietnam, discrimination and poverty. But by then he had become an institution,
and the causes he had fought for as a younger man - unemployment compensation,
Social Security, public- health insurance, minimum-wage laws - had become part
of the fabric of America. When Mr. Thomas died Dec. 19, 1968, President Lyndon
B. Johnson and Nelson A. Rockefeller, then New York's Governor, sent tributes.

Sean Wilentz, an assistant history professor who helped organize the conference,
described Mr. Thomas as ''the great hero and leader of American socialism the
last time it achieved a mass following.''

Sought Major Changes

While it was common for middle- class reformers to work among the poor, Mr.
Wilentz said that ''where Mr. Thomas was special was in the way he drew a
socialist conclusion from his experience.''

Mr. Wilentz said Mr. Thomas had appeared on the American political stage just as
''socialism began to fragment, when American politics took a very clear turn to
the right and when the labor movement found itself very much on the defensive.''

''That period,'' Mr. Wilentz said, ''convinced Mr. Thomas that major changes in
the structure of American society were called for.''

Yet, while Mr. Thomas urged public ownership of the main means of production, he
disdained violent revolution and class conflict. He remained essentially an
American democrat.

''He wasn't trying to cloak his ideas with rhetorical garb,'' Mr. Wilentz said,
''but rather to pose the socialist ideal in a way that seemed to be self-
evidently in the welfare of all Americans.''

Mr. Wilentz says he thinks it is possible to see Lyndon Johnson's ''war on
poverty'' and the upsurge of social idealism in the 1960's of that period
''ineluctably tied to the activities of Thomas.''

Party Had Little Impact

Yet, as Mr. Thomas often conceded, the Socialist Party did not grow into a
significant force in American politics. Mr. Wilentz said that there was
currently only one notable Socialist office holder in the United States -
Bernard Sanders, the Mayor of Burlington, Vt.

Many reasons have been offered for this failure. Some scholars maintain that
socialist programs were eventually adopted by the Democrats and Republicans.
Others say that it is difficult in a fluid society such as that of the United
States to maintain the loyalty of working-class people who soon achieve material
security and lose their egalitarian stirrings.

Nonethless, Mr. Wilentz suggested that it would be important for younger people
interested in reform to become acquainted with Mr. Thomas. Now 33 years old, Mr.
Wilentz remembers seeing Mr. Thomas in 1967 at a rally against the Vietnam War.

''He seemed almost like a relic,'' Mr. Wilentz said. ''We didn't have an
awareness of what earlier generations had been up to.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEARING SET ON C.I.A. MANUAL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 230 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 27


The Senate Intelligence Committees hopes to hold a hearing next week on the
origins of a primer on guerrilla warfare developed by the Central Intelligence
Agency for use by the Nicaraguan rebels, a committee aide said tonight.

The aide said the panel has recently obtained a copy of a 1968 Army manual on
guerrilla warfare. The manual, prepared for use by the Army's Special Forces in
Vietnam, contains passages that the aide said ''were strikingly similar'' to
portions of the Nicaraguan manual.

It is unclear who wrote the manual for the Nicaraguan rebels. Congressional
staff members have said the man was identified in initial reports as John
Kirkpatrick, a C.I.A. employee in the Vietnam era who retired and was called
back on contract. Edgar Chamorro, one of the leaders of the Nicaraguan
Democratic Force, has described Mr. Kirkpatrick as a ''maverick'' who spent
three months with the rebels last fall.

The White House has said that the manual was written by a ''low-level contract
employee.''

The primer advocates the ''neutralization'' of Nicaraguan Government officials
and suggests that the rebels arrange for the killing of some of their own
followers so that they could become martyrs.

Assassinations by American intelligence agents were first banned by President
Ford in 1976. That prohibition was restated by President Carter and President
Reagan.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FAILURE TO WIN INDEPENDENTS HURTING MONDALE, POLL FINDS

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1476 words


Walter F. Mondale's failure to attract broad support from political independents
is blocking his efforts to overtake President Reagan in the homestretch of the
political campaign, according to the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll.

Among the electorate as a whole, the survey showed that on the foreign policy
issues Mr. Mondale pressed in the debate last Sunday, more people side with him
than with Mr. Reagan.

But Mr. Reagan's overwhelming strength on the economy and doubts about Mr.
Mondale's leadership that have increased over the past 10 days have had a more
powerful effect with most voters and have stalled Mr. Mondale's challenge at
this stage, the poll indicated.



Uneasiness With Mondale

In the survey, taken by telephone Oct. 23-25 among 1,068 registered voters,
roughly half the probable voters said they were uneasy about the way Mr. Mondale
would handle a foreign crisis or manage the economy, while solid majorities
expressed confidence in Mr. Reagan in both areas.

Aside from the expected opposition among Republicans, the survey showed the
Democratic nominee running into particularly strong resistance among people
identifying themselves as independents, among men and among the large block of
voters in the 30-to-44-year-old bracket, many of whom were attracted to Senator
Gary Hart in the Democratic primaries.  While heavy television advertising
efforts and intense campaigning in the final week may lead voters to change
their minds, The Times/CBS News Poll indicated that the margin between Mr.
Reagan and Mr. Mondale had widened since mid-October.

The poll found that among probable voters 53 percent favored Mr. Reagan and 35
percent favored Mr. Mondale, as against 50 percent for Mr. Reagan and 37 percent
for Mr. Mondale in a Times/CBS News poll taken Oct. 14-17. In both polls the
overall percentages were subject to sampling error of plus or minus three
percentage points.

In the current survey, 12 percent of the registered voters said they were still
undecided. When the undecided were asked their leaning, slightly more went to
Mr. Reagan. Including them, he led by 56 to 37 percent.

Many Women Are UndecidedMore than two-thirds of those still undecided are over
45 years old, identify themselves either as Democrats or independents, and as
ideologically moderate or conservative. Slightly more than half are women. On
the pivotal questions of leadership, their views are closer to those of Reagan
supporters than Mondale supporters.

The difference between men and women in voter preference, what politicians call
the gender gap, was larger than ever in the current survey. Mr. Reagan did much
better among men than Mr. Mondale while his margin among women was modest. The
survey found Mr. Reagan was preferred among men by 59 to 29 percent and among
women by just 47 to 41 percent.

Roughly one-third of the probable voters told The Times/CBS News Poll that they
worried that Mr. Reagan was too old to be an effective President for the next
four years, and among that group Mr. Mondale had more than a 5-to-1 margin. But
among those who were not troubled by the 73-year-old President's age, Mr. Reagan
is a 5-to-2 favorite.

There were several foreign policy issues on which more voters supported Mr.
Mondale's position than Mr. Reagan's.

Among these were his assertions that the Federal Government should do more to
achieve nuclear arms control, his warning that a space-based antimissile system
will accelerate the arms race, his opposition to aid for those seeking to
overthrow the Government of Nicaragua and his charges that Mr. Reagan is at
least somewhat to blame for the fatal bombings of three American installations
in Lebanon.

Over all, the poll found that among the one voter in five who is more swayed by
military and foreign policy issues than the economy, Mr. Mondale runs narrowly
behind Mr. Reagan.

But the poll found that the economy was by far the most powerful issue driving
the election, with 55 percent of the electorate saying it was more important
than anything else, and it works very strongly for Mr. Reagan.

Moreover, according to the survey, Mr. Mondale has lost ground in the past 10
days on what many political strategists consider the two most critical personal
indicators: the public's perceptions of a candidate's leadership and its general
reaction to a candidate.  Loss of Confidence

After the first Presidential debate in Louisville, Ky., on Oct. 7, a modest
plurality rated Mr. Mondale a strong leader. But now, after the second debate in
Kansas City, Mo., that plurality turned negative, 40 percent saying Mr. Mondale
was strong and 45 percent saying he was not. By contrast, 70 percent say Mr.
Reagan is a strong leader, a level he has maintained all fall.

With just nine days of campaigning left, the poll indicated that Mr. Mondale
faced formidable obstacles in his efforts to jar Mr. Reagan's support. It found
that more than 90 percent of the voters on either side said their minds were
made up and that 56 percent of the Reagan supporters were enthusiastic about
their choice, as against 36 percent of Mr. Mondale's supporters.

The poll underscored, however, that it is in the battle for the political
center, often the key to American elections, that Mr. Mondale has encountered
his most striking difficulties. A comparison with 1976, when Jimmy Carter
narrowly defeated President Ford, underscores his problems.

In 1976, Mr. Carter beat Mr. Ford among self-described Democrats by 77 percent
to 22 percent and lost Republicans by 9 percent to 90 percent, according to a
CBS News Poll of voters on Election Day. In the current Times/ CBS News Poll,
excluding the undecided, Mr. Mondale led Mr. Reagan among Democrats by a margin
of 69 percent to 22 percent and trailed among Republicans by 5 percent to 88
percent.  The Independent Vote

Crucial to Mr. Carter's victory was his relatively strong showing among
independents, whom he lost by only 43 percent to 54 percent. By contrast, among
this large swing group, comprising roughly a third of the probable electorate
this year, Mr. Mondale is far behind, 16 percent to 66 percent, with 16 percent
undecided.

As a strongly traditional Democrat, Mr. Mondale has had troubles with
independents all year, both in the primaries and in the general election
campaign. According to The Times/ CBS News Poll, his difficulties lie less with
his positions on the issues than with his generally low personal popularity
among independents and their perception of him as a relatively weak leader,
especially in comparison with Mr. Reagan.

In specific areas of leadership, independents are considerably more uneasy about
Mr. Mondale's ability to handle a foreign crisis than is the electorate as a
whole and noticeably more fearful than other voters that the economy will get
worse if he is elected.

On some issues like Central America and Lebanon, independents tend to side more
with Mr. Mondale than Mr. Reagan. But on the overall impact of the Reagan
foreign policy and especially on the central issue of whether Reagan policies
toward the Soviet Union have made the country more secure, the independents give
the President more credit for success than does the electorate at large.

In terms of age groups, Republican strategists have been trumpeting Mr. Reagan's
appeal among voters under 30. But the latest Times/CBS News Poll showed that
while Mr. Mondale still lags among that group, it is no longer his worst
segment.

According to the survey, Mr. Reagan is now scoring best with voters from the
ages of 30 to 44, most of whom were born in the post-World War II baby boom and
came of age in the Vietnam War era. They make up roughly 30 percent of the
electorate.

Like independents, a group they somewhat overlap, the Vietnam generation has a
skeptical view of Mr. Mondale as a leader. But what most powerfully motivates
their Presidential choice is the economy, the survey showed. Two-thirds of this
group cited the economy as more important than any other issue, and those who
did went nearly 7-to-1 for Mr. Reagan.

The latest poll shows that the other half of the Democratic ticket, Geraldine A.
Ferraro, has also suffered a decline in general popularity over the past 10
days, since her debate with Vice President Bush. Mrs. Ferraro's rating has
generally not moved in tandem with Mr. Mondale's in previous polls, and the
latest poll gave no reason for the shift.

The latest survey showed that on balance women had a favorable impression of
Mrs. Ferraro and men an unfavorable impression, leaving her with a narrowly
positive rating over all. Her best region was the West; her worst, the South.
College graduates liked her, on balance, but those with less education were
negative. Independents, like Republicans, were against her, and Democrats were
for her.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graphs of voting polls

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OFFERS OF AID FOR STRICKEN ETHIOPIA ARE POURING INTO RELIEF AGENCIES

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 900 words


The international effort to help famine victims in Ethiopia has accelerated
dramatically in recent days, with governments offering food, transport planes
and other aid, and thousands of ordinary Americans pledging contributions.

In New York, officials of relief agencies yesterday said there had been an
outpouring of donations for the stricken Ethiopians, ranging from the $5 weekly
allowances pledged by two girls to the $10,000 offered by a publisher.

Officials of American relief agencies said it had been years since they had been
so overwhelmed with offers of help. Staff members and volunteers have worked
beyond midnight and over the weekend to handle the deluge of telephone offers.



A Plea to United Nations


''The telephones have been ringing constantly,'' said James Sheffield, president
of the United States Committee for Unicef, which is based in Manhattan. He
estimated that his agency had handled 5,000 calls since Thursday.

The United States Agency for International Development said last week that 6
million of Ethiopia's 30.4 million people were in dire need of food and that as
many as 100 people were dying each day. Two hundred thousand Ethiopians died in
a drought-related famine in 1974.

Dawit Wolde Giorgis, Ethiopia's relief commissioner, was reported yesterday to
be leavin for New York to plead at the United Nations for more aid for his
country.

Meanwhile, Britain yesterday offered two Hercules transport planes to fly food
to Ethiopia and other planes to drop food directly to stricken areas. The Reagan
Administration said earlier last week that it would provide $45 million in food
aid to Ethiopia; the 10-nation Common Market offered $23.4 million in food and
medical supplies, and the Dutch government pledged $3.8 million in famine
relief.

While the famine has been killing Ethiopians for more than a year, relief
officials say, the surge of offers to relief agencies followed graphic film
footage of starving Ethiopian children and adults that was shown on television
starting last Tuesday.

''Many of them are in tears when they call,'' Mr. Sheffield of the United States
Committee for Unicef said.''They've seen television footage and they say it's
horrible and something must be done.

''The crisis goes on all the time,'' he added, ''but if it's not in the media
nobody knows about it.''

Betty Woodward of Save the Children, a relief group in Westport, Conn., said her
agency had received 12,000 phone calls since Tuesday. ''We've never seen
anything like this in terms of a telephone response,'' she said.

She could not estimate the amount of money pledged, but Mr. Sheffield said his
agency had received offers totaling between $65,000 and $75,000. The average
contribution was $40.

Two pledges, he said, were from young girls ''whose allowance was $5 a week and
they want to pledge that.''

A Vietnamese man, Mr. Sheffield said, called and, in English that required
translation by a neighbor, offered $10. The man spoke of how Unicef had helped
him in Vietnam.

Yesterday morning, he said, Joseph Artuso, a baker who runs the Artuso Pastry
Shop in the East Bronx, said he wanted to come to the organization's offices at
331 East 38th Street and deliver $500 he had collected from his employees. He
arrived bearing the money, a large box of coins that his children had saved, and
five dozen doughnuts and pastries to feed the office's staff.

Mr. Sheffield said his agency had not experienced such an outpouring since the
relief effort mounted to aid hundreds of thousands of victims of fighting in
Cambodia in 1979.

''A lot of people who call don't even know where Ethiopia is,'' he said. ''They
don't know how to spell it. But they're really horrified by the tragedy.''

While there have been earlier news reports of the Ethiopian famine, Mrs.
Woodward said the phone calls began Tuesday night after NBC, on its nightly news
program, showed film taken by the BBC of malnourished refugees in a camp in
Korem, Ethiopia.. Save the Children has a food center at the camp.

''There were literally people dying on the screen,'' Mrs. Woodward said.

''It hasn't stopped since then,'' she continued. ''We had people here until 2 in
the morning. We had 40 phones and people were doing nothing but answering
them.''

''People want to talk about it,'' she said. ''It's almost a catharsis. 'Can't we
do more,' they say. 'Can't you airlift people in there.' ''

A spokesman for Catholic Relief Services, another agency involved in relief to
Ethiopia, said it had received 5,000 calls since Thursday.

It was not clear whether the Marxist Government of Ethiopia would accept the
British offer to fly in supplies.  The British Ambassador, Brian Barder, met
Ethiopian officials yesterday to seek approval.

For those interested in making donations, the relief agencies gave these
addresses and tele phone numbers:

The United States Committee for Unicef, Box 3040, Grand Central Station, New
York, N.Y. 10163; (212) 686-5522.

Save the Children, Ethiopia Fund, Box 925, Westport, Conn., 06881; (800)
851-2500.

Catholic Relief Services, P.O. Box 2045, Church Street Station, New York, N.Y.
10008.

Oxfam America, 115 Broadway, Boston, Mass. 02116; (617) 482-1211 or (800)
225-5800.

Church World Service, 475 Riverside Drive, New York, N.Y. 10115.  Lutheran World
Relief, 360 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of famine relief center in Ethiopia

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
DIFFERENT 'FAMILIES'

BYLINE: By Alan Finder and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 232 words


After a slow start, the 15-month- old President's Commission on Organized Crime
used its new powers last week to spotlight the little-publicized growth of Asian
crime organizations in the United States.

Testimony tended to be nonspecific, but the three-day parade of witnesses
through a Lower Manhattan hearing hall lent weight to what local investigators
have been saying for years: Chinese, Japanese and Vietnamese gangs have
established strongholds in New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco and other United
States cities.

Among the surprises, a prominent Chinatown businessman, Edward Tse Chiu Chan,
was identified by two investigators as the leader of the Chinese crime group in
New York.

Significantly, some of the witnesses were Asian. They testified from behind
screens or hidden by cowl-like hoods, but they talked. One testified that Nguyen
Cao Ky, former Prime Minister and Vice President of South Vietnam, is reputed to
head a Vietnamese crime organization in this country.

Both Mr. Chan and Mr. Ky denied the charges.

The commission had held two previous sets of hearings, but neither had broken
much ground. Last week's were the first since President Reagan signed a bill
giving the commission broad new powers including authority to subpoena witnesses
and demand access to wiretap information. A commission spokesman said the new
powers had been ''immensely valuable.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of federal agent escorting hooded witness to a hearing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A., TOO, MAY BE HURT IN NICARAGUA

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Central Intelligence Agency's three-year association with Nicaraguan rebels
has turned into a nightmare for many officials at the agency. With indications
last week that middle-level intelligence aides in Washington may have approved a
C.I.A. manual instructing guerrillas in the ''neutralizing'' of Nicaraguan
Government officials, the agency seemed precariously close to losing its
bipartisan support in Congress. ''The handling of the manual, the conduct of the
whole covert program against Nicaragua, raise very serious questions about the
credibility and ability of the agency,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, a
Vermont Democrat and member of the Select Committee on Intelligence. ''The
seriousness of this goes way beyond the question of the manual.''

Veterans of the mid-1970's, when Congressional investigations produced a
drumfire of revelations of abuses, were reminded of Senator Frank Church's
declaration at the time that the C.I.A. was ''a rogue elephant on a rampage.''
Stansfield Turner, President Carter's Director of Central Intelligence, last
week spoke for many former colleagues concerned lest Nicaragua provoke a new
uproar that ''can only damage the agency's ability to function effectively.''

President Reagan, in his television debate with Walter F. Mondale last Sunday,
said C.I.A. officials in Central America and Washington had edited the primer
before it was printed, deleting material that violated United States policy
prohibiting assassination. Only 12 copies escaped the editing process ''some way
or other,'' the President said. Next day, the C.I.A. informed Senate
intelligence committee members that advice about ''neutralizing'' Nicaraguan
leaders had not been removed during editing; Mr. Reagan had misspoken, White
House officials said.

As investigations got under way in Congress, the White House and inside the
agency, Administration officials said the document had been approved by
middle-level C.I.A. officials. ''Whoever was involved ought to be fired,'' said
Robert C. McFarlane, the White House national security adviser. The
Congressional intelligence committees expanded their investigations to examine
whether the C.I.A. had indeed planned or helped carry out assassinations. The
Senate panel's hearings will begin this week.

The manual and its advocacy of kidnapping and killing would have caused
difficulties at any time. But coming only seven months after the disclosure that
the C.I.A. had mined Nicaraguan harbors, it produced allegations that the agency
was reverting to illegal behavior. Defenders insisted that the agency and
William J. Casey, the Director of Central Intelligence, did only what the White
House had approved. The C.I.A., a Casey aide stressed, ''carries out policy made
by others.'' Said Senator Barry M. Goldwater, Republican of Arizona, the
intelligence committee chairman: ''There's a war going on in Central America and
it's a darn important one to the United States. I'm not so sure there's anything
wrong with a manual like this.'' Aid for the rebels, including mining, was
approved by President Reagan and endorsed by senior policymakers.  But no one at
the White House knew about the manual until it was made public, aides insisted
last week.  The disclosures touched off debate about Mr. Casey's leadership. ''I
have some very serious doubts about the management of covert activities and of
contract employees,'' said Senator Sam Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, an
intelligence committee member. Many C.I.A. employees in Nicaragua, including the
guerrilla- warfare expert who wrote the manual, were military veterans or
retired agents hired on contract in 1982 and 1983, intelligence officials said.
Many of them were trained in an earlier era, predating the Presidential ban on
C.I.A. assassinations.  The Nicaragua operation took less than 1 percent of the
agency's budget until Congress deleted funds for it this year, but it has
dominated discussion, damaging the C.I.A.'s reputation. ''The campaign against
Nicaragua has overshadowed everything else, even the good things that Casey has
done in building up the agency's resources,'' a former intelligence official
said. ''The Nicaraguan operation has struck a strong blow against the bipartisan
coalition in Congress that has supported major budget increases for the C.I.A.
in recent years,'' Senator Leahy warned.  Like the 1970's reports that the
C.I.A. plotted with Mafia chiefs to kill Fidel Castro, conducted drug
experiments on unwitting people and spied illegally on Americans who opposed the
Vietnam War, the Nicaraguan operation has produced bitter divisions inside the
agency. Mr. Casey and some aides have favored the program. But many senior and
middle-level officials throughout the C.I.A. have opposed it, fearing exactly
the loss of Congressional support now threatened by the furor over the manual.
Somewhat ruefully, several intelligence officials recalled that when Mr. Casey
took charge of the C.I.A. in 1981, he said one of his main goals would be to
keep the agency out of the news.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of CIA director William Casey

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR SOME, LOW ROAD IS THE ONLY WAY TO GO

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


The two contenders in the United States Senate race here have long been models
of civility, with a penchant for modest understatement and political generosity.
But this year, in a phenomenon seen in Senate races in several states, they have
become prime exponents of the school of slash and gash.

Both Senator Charles H. Percy, a Republican seeking his fourth term, and
Representative Paul Simon, a Democrat who seeks to unseat him, have abandoned
civility. They exchange almost daily accusations of hypocrisy, distortion and
downright lying.

A recent Percy television commercial offered this Q. and A.: ''Who's publicly
declared to raise our taxes $85 million? Walter Mondale. Who's publicly declared
to raise our taxes $200 million? Paul Simon. Paul Simon doesn't believe that
Walter Mondale went far enough.''

Mr. Simon cried foul. Mr. Mondale's tax plan was for a single year, he said; his
was for four years. Addressing the incumbent in a television debate, Mr. Simon
charged: ''Chuck Percy, you have put on the air a TV ad, a sleazy TV ad that is
crude, intentionally distorts my stand on the deficit, and you know it
intentionally distorts that stand. You have in fact lied to the people of the
state of Illinois.''

Such ''negative'' campaigning is not new. ''People have been going at each other
since Lincoln-Douglas,'' said Robert Squier, a Democratic media consultant whose
clients include Representative Simon. Congressional candidates made memorable
personal attacks on each other at the height of the Vietnam War. What is new is
the intensity and proliferation of such attacks, more noticeable after a period
of relative restraint.

There was a time, not long ago, when candidates rarely mentioned their
opponents' names. If personal attacks were made at all, they were made by aides
or special-interest groups while the candidate stood clear.

In an increasing number of campaign commercials now, the opponent's face stares
from the screen while a voice lists the candidate's alleged inadequacies. A
negative campaign shot of Senator Roger W. Jepsen of Iowa showed him
unattractively sweating.

Negative campaigning is used because it works. Its effects show up immediately
in public opinion polls.

The strategy is to make one's opponent the issue, thereby saving oneself the
trouble of substantive thought. Some candidates privately argue that nobody
cares about issues anyway, that confrontation is the key to making the evening
news. Verbal political violence has become a strategy to attract the same
viewers who are enthralled by violence in other television fare.

Curiously, incumbents as well as challengers have turned nasty this year.
Senator Percy is one example; Senator Jepsen, also a Republican, is another.
Senator Jepsen's early commercials described his opponent, Representative Tom
Harkin, a Democrat, as a ''liberal activist.'' That might sound tame in some
quarters, but in conservative Iowa it is a fighting pejorative.

Tough But EffectiveNegative campaigning also helped Representative Harkin
overcome a nine-point deficit and gain a five- point lead. One Harkin commercial
showed a hog snorting loudly while a voice intoned: ''When two Iowa farmers
drove a tractor all the way to Washington to talk to him about farm debt, Roger
Jepsen fell asleep.''

''That's pretty tough stuff,'' said David Yepsen, political editor of The Des
Moines Register. ''Iowans aren't used to it. People resent it.''

But the polls showed that it worked. Similarly, in North Carolina, incumbent
Republican Senator Jesse Helms overcame an early 20-point deficit by showing his
opponent, Gov. Jim Hunt, in the company of noted liberals. The company Governor
Hunt kept, Helms commercials repeatedly claimed, showed him up as a
''free-spending liberal.''

Governor Hunt, in turn, attempted to link Senator Helms to the Salvadoran death
squads. Senator Helms had supported Roberto d'Aubuisson, the Salvadoran rightist
who has been accused of directing death squads. Hunt commercials showed
death-squad victims. The commercials helped him break a standoff.

''The trend is unmistakable,'' said Mitch Daniels, executive director of the
Senate Republican Campaign Committee. ''As people tested the limits of the old
taboos, they found that the public is prepared to believe ill of public
officials. If left unanswered, a negative ad can do great damage.'' Negative
campaigning also simultaneously exploits and further lowers the already low
regard in which politicians as a group are held. The candidates admit that, but
say they have no choice.

''It's a question of whether or not you have a right to discuss your opponent's
record,'' said Roger Ailes, who works for Republican candidates and prepared
this year's strategy for both Senator Percy and Representative Phil Gramm, a
Senate candidate in Texas. ''The essential thing is that you have to be fair.
The public has a sense of when you're out of bounds.''

One man's honest criticism is, of course, another's slash and gash. A radio
commercial that Mr. Ailes prepared for Representative Gramm exploited a male
strip-show fund-raiser held for his Democratic opponent, State Senator Lloyd
Doggett. ''This commercial,'' the commercial said, ''is about Texas, family
values and Lloyd Doggett's male strip show.'' Mr. Doggett said the fund-raiser
had been held without his knowledge - and in fact he had returned the funds.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MARIJUANA CROP BLOOMING IN STATE'S BACKYARDS

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: GARBERVILLE, Calif.


The hippies, drifters and dropouts who emigrated to the high country of
California's northern coast after the ferment of the 1960's were welcomed
tolerantly, even after it was discovered that some were using nearby forests to
grow marijuana for their own use.

Later, when several began selling part of their crop to others, many residents
seemed to approve of this enterprise. The newcomers were viewed as modern
moonshiners, mom-and-pop entrepreneurs who might bring some fresh cash into an
economy depressed by trouble in the fishing and timber industries.

But much of the old tolerance for marijuana growers is gone now. The hippies
have largely been replaced by ex-convicts, members of motorcycle gangs and
others who have turned parts of the wilderness into vast gardens for illicit
marijuana cultivation - and, sometimes, into a vicious battleground, unsafe even
for hikers who accidentally discover the backwoods drug farms.

The marijuana plantations of California are part of what law enforcement
officials say is a booming nationwide industry, a problem that is causing
increasing embarrassment to the Reagan Administration. Calling the control of
drug trafficking one of its foremost priorities, the Administration, through the
State and Justice Departments, has long concentrated its enforcement efforts
against the flow of narcotics from abroad. It has put pressure on Colombia,
Peru, Mexico and other countries to take steps to halt drug cultivation. But all
the while, the huge domestic industry has flourished.

Moreover, the ingenuity of the growers in the United States has produced
marijuana that many say is of higher quality than the product the Government has
been trying to stop at the border. It is called ''sinsemilla,'' which is Spanish
for ''without seeds.'' This hybrid plant with seedless buds, law enforcement
officials say, contains at least 10 times as much of the narcotic agent THC as
the drug imported from Colombia, previously considered the source of the most
potent marijuana.

No one knows how big the domestic marijuana industry is, although there is no
disagreement that it is large. The National Organization for the Reform of
Marijuana Laws, a Washington-based group that seeks to legalize the drug,
estimated the 1982 illegal harvest at $10.4 billion.

The drug can be grown almost any place that is remote and that has a favorable
growing season. Besides northern California, Hawaii and Oregon are thought to be
the largest producers. They are followed by Kentucky, Missouri, Arkansas,
Oklahoma, Washington, Idaho, North Carolina, Georgia, Tennessee and Virginia. In
the Northeast, the largest areas of marijuana growing are in upstate New York,
New Hampshire and Vermont, drug- enforcement officials say.

R. Max Peterson, chief of the United States Forest Service, said that in 1982
marijuana was found growing at 6,000 sites in national forests. More than half
of the illegal marijuana plants are cultivated on Federal land or in remote
areas of private property rarely visited by the owners, Federal officials say.
''With a little bit of seed and the use of somebody else's land, there is high
profit and no taxes,'' said Frank H. Meyers, head of the Wisconsin Department of
Justice. ''And even if we get it, they haven't lost much.''

About a year ago, the Government began to pay closer attention to the domestic
marijuana industry, although many say its efforts are still not enough.

Here, in the heart of California's marijuana business, Justice Department and
Internal Revenue Service agents have been busy this fall trying to pinpoint the
big growers by plotting the flow of money through banks and merchants. Federal
agents and the local police have collaborated in an airborne effort to eradicate
plants during the harvest. Financed by a $2 million Federal grant, the operation
relies on fixed-wing spotter planes with special sensors to find the fields and
on helicopters, which bring in police units equipped with chain saws and axes as
well as automatic weapons for protection. The effort is regarded at least as a
tentative success and some officials are optimistic. ''We really feel the
commercial marijuana industry is a dinosaur in this state,'' said Bill
Ruzzamenti, a Drug Enforcement Administration official.

He and other officials say the operation could be a model for use elsewhere,
although it has encountered some criticism. Although violence connected with the
drug trade has stirred greater demand to control the marijuana industry, some
residents here say the helicopter raids by the police dressed in fatigues are
reminiscent of the Vietnam War. And, 10 days ago, a Federal judge in San Jose,
Calif., issued an order prohibiting the use of helicopters for surveillance in
raids on private property without search warrants. The Government says it may
appeal the decision.

Soon, some drug control agents say, it may not matter if and how often they can
raid the woods and fields. The marijuana growers are moving indoors, tinkering
with their hybrid sinsemilla plants so they can grow hidden away from the
searching eyes of airborne patrols.

''It doesn't take too many plants to grow a good crop,'' said John Rooney,
director of the Idaho Department of Law Enforcement. ''Why take the chance of
growing in fields as opposed to growing inside a garage, or in the attic, or in
a shop under artificial lights where it is not easily detected by the police or
nosy neighbors?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: insert graph; photo of a North Carolina farmer with marijuana crop

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POLICY QUESTIONS FOR MONDALE

BYLINE: By Eugene V. Rostow ;
Eugene V. Rostow, professor of law emeritus at Yale University, was director of
the Arms Control and Disarmanent Agency from 1981 to 1983.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 801 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


I find it difficult to see how Walter F. Mondale can hope to persuade us before
Election Day that he is part of the foreign policy tradition of Woodrow Wilson,
Franklin D. Roosevelt, Harry Truman, John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson - a
tradition of bipartisan consensus whose first political priority was a deep
concern for national security.

So far, Mr. Mondale has given most disturbing signals in the campaign in his
speeches and staffing decisions and in the foreign and defense policy planks of
the Democratic Party platform. The platform, among other things, endorses the
isolationism of Senator Gary Hart.

As a Democrat in the Wilsonian tradition, I suggest several questions that the
Democratic candidates will have to face if they wish to restore their party as
an alternative governing party.

The first foreign policy item in Mr. Mondale's campaign has been to reproach
President Reagan for not meeting with any of the three ailing Soviet leaders
with whom he has had to deal, as if summit meetings between Soviet and American
leaders were a kind of political Lourdes, accomplishing marvelous cures. That
Mr. Mondale has pushed such a trivial matter erodes confidence in his judgment.
Does he think we have forgotten that Mr. Reagan and his associates have often
said that he is more than willing to engage in summitry and that few summit
meetings with Soviet leaders have done more good than harm?

Secondly, which issue do the candidates consider the most important facing us,
the nuclear arms negotiations or the Soviet policy of indefinite expansion based
on the illegal threat and use of force? What forms of Soviet aggression do they
think America and its allies should oppose? What nuclear policy would make
American deterrence credible in the face of Soviet expansion and the Soviet arms
buildup?

In his speech accepting the nomination, Mr. Mondale said he took a ''sober
view'' of Soviet policy. But he then said we should not use force to oppose
Soviet-sponsored aggression in the Middle East or the Caribbean, two areas where
American security interests are obvious and important. Instead, he argued, we
should rely on ''negotiation'' and ''quarantine.'' What does he mean by
''quarantine?''

Mr. Mondale has told us that the worst mistake of his political life was that he
supported Vietnam War ''too long.'' Does he mean that he now thinks that
Presidents Kennedy, Johnson and Richard M. Nixon should have won the Vietnam war
quickly and decisively, or that they should have refused to carry out our
obligations under the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization pact?

Thirdly, do the Democratic candidates realize that the Soviet nuclear arms build
up of the last 25 years is designed primarily to compel American neutrality
while the Soviet Union gains control of the Eurasian land mass, Africa and even
the Caribbean through the use of conventional forces, terrorism and subversion?
How would they reconcile Soviet success in such an effort with our Government's
duty to preserve the world balance of power?

In the context of these questions, the promise and the risks of the nuclear arms
negotiations become clear. Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York had made it appear that
America, not the Soviet Union, had walked out of the Geneva negotiations. And in
the second debate with the President, Mr. Mondale claimed that America had
rejected a promising sketch of a compromise - the ''walk in the woods'' formula
- suggested by the Soviet and American ambassadors. In this, as Mr. Reagan
pointed out, Mr. Mondale was in error. America did not reject the walk in the
woods approach but wished to pursue it in the negotiations and made several
subsequent proposals based on the idea of the compromise.

The only significant issue in the Geneva talks is whether a nuclear arms
agreement should be based on the principle of equality between the two
countries. Are the Democratic candidates prepared to accept the Soviet
negotiating position, which calls for equal reductions, not reductions to equal
Soviet and American levels? An agreement based on the Soviet approach would make
the crucial Soviet advantage in ground- based ballistic missiles even bigger and
more ominous than it is now.

In their zeal for balancing the budget, the Democratic candidates promise severe
reductions in the military budgets. How would such reductions square with the
fact that the Soviet lead over America both in conventional and in nuclear arms
has continued, albeit more slowly, to grow?

the days when Britannia ruled the waves, it was British policy to build a navy
equal to the sum of all the other navies in the world. Are Mr. Mondale and
Geraldine A. Ferraro willing to accept a comparable posture on the part of the
Soviet Union, both for conventional and for nuclear weapons?



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS Oct. 28, 1984Fiction*1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1385 words


1

THE TALISMAN, by Stephen King and Peter Straub. (Viking, $18.95.) Two parallel
worlds and a young boy who can travel between them.  *2

111

THE FOURTH PROTOCOL, by Frederick Forsyth.  (Viking, $17.95.) A London jewel
robbery leads to plots and counterplots behind the Iron Curtain.  *3

2

4

GOD KNOWS, by Joseph Heller. (Knopf, $16.95.) King David describes his life in
comic and anachronistic style.  *4

3

5

STRONG MEDICINE, by Arthur Hailey.  (Doubleday, $16.95.) A strong woman rises in
the pharmaceutical industry.  *5

5

2

LOVE AND WAR, by John Jakes. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, $19.95.) The Civil War
rages in this saga of a Pennsylvania family and a South Carolina family, begun
in ''North and South.'' *6

4

20

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  *7

8

13

FIRST AMONG EQUALS, by Jeffrey Archer.  (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.)
Three young men vie to be chosen Prime Minister of Britain.  *8

6

7

CRESCENT CITY, by Belva Plain. (Delacorte, $16.95.) Life in 19th-century New
Orleans, seen from the viewpoint of a Jewish woman.  *9

7

19

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency.  10



1

STILLWATCH, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.) A woman's search
for her past puts her life in peril.  11*

9

6

ROLE OF HONOR, by John Gardner. (Putnam, $11.95.) James Bond leaves Government
service to become a private spy.  12

11

9

JOB: A Comedy of Justice, by Robert A. Heinlein.  (Del Rey, $16.95.) A bigoted
yet lovable religious man has his faith tested in a series of tribulations in a
variety of alternate worlds.  13*

12

3

SUPERIOR WOMEN, by Alice Adams. (Knopf, $16.95.) Five friends at Radcliffe and
after.  14

10

10

TOUGH GUYS DON'T DANCE, by Norman Mailer.  (Random House, $16.95.) A murder
mystery set in Provincetown, Mass.  15

15

33

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.





























































































  Nonfiction*1

19

LOVING EACH OTHER, by Leo Buscaglia.  (Slack/Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $13.95.)
Suggestions for ''setting our priorities right in order to enjoy life to the
fullest.'' *2

28

THE BRIDGE ACROSS FOREVER, by Richard Bach. (Morrow, $16.95.) The author of
''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' recounts his search for a true love.  *3

43

MOSES THE KITTEN, by James Herriot. (St.  Martin's, $9.95.) A waif kitten is
adopted by a pig; illustrated.  *4*

37

PIECES OF MY MIND, by Andrew A. Rooney.  (Atheneum, $12.95.) More essays by the
journalist and television commentator.  *5

52

HERITAGE, by Abba Eban. (Summit, $30.) An account of Jewish history by the
Israeli diplomat who hosts the PBS show of the same name.  *6

7

2

''THE GOOD WAR,'' by Studs Terkel. (Pantheon, $19.95.) World War II as
remembered by men and women who lived through it.  *7

6

6

HEY, WAIT A MINUTE, I WROTE A BOOK!  by John Madden with Dave Anderson. (Villard
Books, $14.95.) An anecdotal autobiography of the popular television sports
announcer.  *8

9

4

CLOSE ENCOUNTERS, by Mike Wallace and Gary Paul Gates. (Morrow, $17.95.) A
memoir by the ''60 Minutes'' reporter.  *9

10

8

''THE REST OF US,'' by Stephen Birmingham.  (Little, Brown, $19.95.) Success
stories of American Jews from Eastern Europe.  10

8

18

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit,
$20.95.) The dark as well as the glamorous sides of four generations of a
prominent family.  11

15

101

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $13.50.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  12

14

34

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard, $10.) The novelist recalls
her childhood in Mississippi.  13*

11

5

THE WENDY DILEMMA , by Dan Kiley. (Arbor House, $15.95.) Why some women
inappropriately mother their men.  14*

12

2

THE WEAKER VESSEL, by Antonia Fraser.  (Knopf, $19.95.) Woman's lot in
17th-century England.  15*



22

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.


 And Bear in Mind

(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BLOODS: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans,

by Wallace Terry. (Random House, $17.95.) The recollections of 20

black American soldiers, the title taken from the label black G.I.'s

gave themselves. Brilliantly edited by a correspondent in the war.

BLOW YOUR HOUSE DOWN: by Pat Barker. (Putnam $13.95.) Set, like Pat Barker's
fine first novel, ''Union Street,'' in Britain's grimy Northeast, this new work
offers a remarkable portrait of women for whom prostitution is a matter of
practical economics.

FROST: A Literary Life Reconsidered, by William H. Pritchard.

(Oxford, $15.95.) A compact, sympathetic rendering of Frost's life

as a poet that, unlike Lawrance Thompson's biography of 1980,

puts the emphasis where it belongs - on Frost's powerful art.

HOME BEFORE DARK, by Susan Cheever. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) John Cheever's
daughter has written an intimate, deeply felt and often harrowing memoir of her
father that illuminates the conditions of his work and the painful price he paid
to achieve it.

IN HER OWN RIGHT: The Life of Elizabeth Cady Stanton, by Elisabeth Griffith.
(Oxford University, $17.95.) This biography is an important step toward gaining
the recognition she deserves for one of the most original-minded figures in the
women's movement.

PAYBACK, by Joe Klein. (Knopf, $17.95.) A perceptive document of

the post-Vietnam War lives of five Marines by an author whose

interest was stimulated by a news story about a former soldier in

Indiana who was shot to death by police after he went berserk.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous*1

16

WHAT THEY DON'T TEACH YOU AT HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL, by Mark H. McCormack.
(Bantam, $15.95.) Notes and tips of a ''street-smart executive.'' *2

231

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  *3

32

THE ONE MINUTE SALES PERSON, by Spencer Johnson and Larry Wilson. (Morrow, $15.)
Advice on increasing selling skills. *4

44

MARY KAY ON PEOPLE MANAGEMENT, by Mary Kay Ash. (Warner, $15.50.) The head of a
cosmetics company applies the golden rule. *5

530

WEBSTER'S NINTH NEW COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A
standard work updated in 1983.

 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.  *An asterisk before a
book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling
industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 726 words


Oct. 28, 1984Fiction*1

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  *2

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.  *3

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  *4*

SINNERS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) Sex and scandal in Hollywood.  *5

MORETA: Dragonlady of Pern, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.) On a
distant planet, humans and dragons fight a spore invasion.  *6

BLOOD AND ORCHIDS, by Norman Katkov.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four Hawaiian youths
are accused of raping a Navy officer's wife.  *7

FIREFOX DOWN, by Craig Thomas. (Bantam, $3.95.) A sequel about the theft of a
secret Soviet warplane.  *8

WHEN LOVE COMMANDS, by Jennifer Wilde.  (Avon, $3.95.) An Englishwoman in the
clutches of a sadistic Russian count.  *9

GRANDMASTER, by Warren Murphy and Molly Cochran. (Pinnacle, $3.95.) Two chess
prodigies in the world of espionage.  10

DARKFALL, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $3.95.) Ratlike creatures escape from
hell to leave a trail of disfigured corpses in this tale of horror.  11

FIRST LOVE, WILD LOVE, by Janelle Taylor.  (Zebra, $3.75.) An innocent beauty
finds rapture in the arms of a Texas cattle baron.  12

MISTRAL'S DAUGHTER, by Judith Krantz.  (Bantam, $4.50.) The art world of the
20's and the fashion business of the 80's.  13

MANDARIN, by Robert Elegant. (Pocket, $4.50.) Asian intrigue and European
tradition in China during the latter 19th century.  14

THE WICKED DAY, by Mary Stewart. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) King Arthur, fulfilling
a prophecy of Merlin, falls into an incestuous relationship.  15

HOLLYWOOD WIVES, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) The struggle for money and
power in Tinseltown.















































































































 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.  *An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.

Nonfiction

General *1

MOTHERHOOD, THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION, by Erma Bombeck. (Dell, $3.95.) Humor
by the syndicated columnist.  *2

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) Americans flee an
Iranian prison.  *3

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) Why some men never grow
up. *4

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy League
graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  *5

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  *6

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  *7

INTREPID'S LAST CASE, by William Stevenson.  (Ballantine, $3.95.) How the famous
spymaster looked for a mole in British intelligence.  *8

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) A helicopter pilot's Vietnam
experiences.  *9

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.  10

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

BYLINE: By George Leonard. (Simon & Schuster, $14.95.)By Catherine Marshall.
(McGraw-Hill, $15.95.)By William E. Holland. (Delacorte, $15.95.)By John
Gardner. (Putnam, $11.95.)By Rhoda Lerman. (Holt, $16.95.)By Virginia Held.
(Free Press, $22.95.) By David Littlejohn. (William Abrahams/Holt, $22.95.)By
Sabina Shalom. (Dodd,
Mead, $15.95.) ''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2569 words

Just lucky more than plucky,'' Sabina Shalom writes in ''A Marriage
Sabbatical,'' an account of her journey around the world with a pack on her back
and $1,500 in a belt around her waist. But pluck is what she's got, and it took
her far. It enabled her to wheedle her husband of almost 30 years into granting
her a ''sabbatical'' from their marriage, with back pay for her years of
service. It also enabled her to find useful friends, low-cost or free
accommodations, enviable invitations and free film and candy bars. Her pluck
helped her gain a private audience with Indira Gandhi, to be the guest of the
Mayor of Sydney, Australia, and to be presented to the King of Tonga (from whom
she tried but failed to win an invitation to go fishing). Unfortunately, she
also took on her journey a mind stocked with cliches. All her experiences were
tested against banal expectations and forced to yield up either a yea or a nay.
In Iran, having been rescued from a night alone in the streets of Teheran by
several strange men, she worried about kidnapping, rape and terrorism. In New
Guinea, having been served a local stew, she fretted about its contents and had
visions of cannibalism. In India she was entranced by the Taj Mahal (''a massive
jeweled crown, resting on velvet tiers of marble'') and revolted by the poverty,
filth and disease. And on Easter Island the huge stone figures caused her to
think of the infinite and inscrutable and brought this epiphany: ''I sensed the
presence of unearthly things. I was at one with myself. I felt at peace.''
Mercifully, the monotony is frequently relieved with some terrifically bad
writing. My favorite sentence is: ''The road, like an unwinding ribbon,
stretched ahead, carved carelessly through the incredibly high and narrow thighs
of the mountainsides.'' - Barbara Fisher Williamson

* TECHNO-BANDITS. By Linda Melvern, Nick Anning and

David Hebditch. (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95.) Anyone who has followed the fitful
attempts of the United States to control the spread of advanced technologies
understands two things - the enormous stakes involved in the unauthorized
dissemination of high technology (much of it relating to nuclear weapons
systems) and the extraordinary difficulty of achieving international cooperation
in controlling it . ''Techno-Bandits'' describes dozens of cases in which
European and American businessmen have sought to avoid various government
restrictions and helped the Soviet Union and its allies obtain computers and
computer components. The book disappoints, however, because it barely mentions
the very real questions and problems that surround the efforts to limit the
spread of advanced computer technology. Is it possible to control something at
which so many individual entrepreneurs and nations are so hard at work? Will
restrictions on the exporting of high technology ultimately hurt the United
States by reducing the creative energies of the engineers and scientists of
Silicon Valley in California and Route 128 in Massachusetts, and will those
restrictions undermine the freedoms guaranteed by our Constitution? While jammed
full of incidents of skulduggery, the book fails to offer an overall assessment
of whether and how the technological banditry it describes has affected the
world's strategic balance. One irony not noted by the authors - Linda Melvern,
Nick Anning and David Hebditch, all British journalists - is that, while the
Reagan Administration has worked quite hard to control the spread of computer
technology, it has taken a far more casual attitude about the dangers of nuclear
proliferation than either the Ford or the Carter Administration. - David Burnham

George Leonard's second novel is distinguished by its innovative plot and its
power to evoke darkly ambivalent feelings. The hero, Mark Kessler, is a Long
Island clammer, a loner in his mid-30's who has been disowned by his father, a
successful plastic surgeon. After Kessler, in self-defense, kills a hunter who
terrorizes birds on the marsh preserve, he finds that he is without remorse.
Later, smitten by anomie and craving excitement, he begins killing for sport and
his own curious sense of self-righteousness, taking five victims in all. As the
bodies are discovered, a reward is offered and soon the police and a large group
of bounty hunters arrive at Kessler's icebound retreat. With diving equipment
and underwater weapons, Kessler descends to the topsy-turvy world beneath the
ice of Great South Bay to make his last stand. His cunning and nature's
inexorable process - a freezing wind and thin ice - defeat the bounty hunters
and put them to rout. And then, by an act of will, Kessler seals his fate and
decides who will get the bounty. Mr. Leonard's handling of the climax is superb;
the imagery is sharp and brilliant; the writing is always economical and
suspenseful. The major characters - Kessler, Ellen Smith, a girl of 14 whom he
treats as a daughter, and her father, who is killed by Kessler for turning Ellen
into a prostitute - are well- rounded and believable, and their behavior
effortlessly and naturally propels the plot along its harrowing course. Mr.
Leonard presents a vision of man as a natural hunter and killer, which is set
against the novel's underlying theme of greed and retribution.Although the book
is primarily focused on the brutal aspect of man's nature, the author shows
that, when tempered by love and understanding, these primal instincts may be
overcome. ''The Ice Cathedral'' is a startling novel that both repels and
attracts as it illuminates the sinister side of human nature that may emerge
when an individual is forced by isolation and loneliness to rely only on his
personal sense of social responsibility and of right and wrong. -

FICTIONTHE ICE CATHEDRAL. Bert Atkinson

* JULIE.

Fans of the late Catherine Marshall's best-selling novel, ''Christy,'' will not
be disappointed by ''Julie.'' The setting is Alderton, Pa., a flood-prone steel
town suffering through the Great Depression, and the heroine - in whose
compassionate voice the story is told - is the ambitious, spunky 18-year-old
Julie Wallace, who fiercely wishes to become a writer. Julie's father, a former
minister struggling to regain his faith, buys The Alderton Sentinel in hopes of
rescuing both the newspaper and his family from total bankruptcy. Julie learns
that the nearby dam, owned by the McKeevers, the local steel magnates, is
dangerously unsafe. Through The Sentinel, she and her father (whose faith
returns) launch a daring crusade against the powerful steel barons, exposing the
danger of the dam. Readers will turn pages to learn if the next flood will
destroy the dam and who, if anyone, will survive. In the midst of this
adventure, Julie captures the hearts of three devoted suitors - Spencer Meloy,
the fiery preacher who opposes the McKeevers and loses his congregation; Graham
Gillin, the earnest high school football player who battles McKeever thugs, and
Randolph Wilkinson, the glamorous Englishman who ''spies'' for the McKeevers.
The novel does slow down, however, with excessive information about dam
construction and steel plants, and with Miss Marshall's didactic delivery of her
prescription for salvation. Nevertheless, readers will be moved by the Wallace
family's triumph, through hard work and unstoppable faith, during a critical
time in America's history. - Janice Eidus

* LET A SOLDIER DIE.

''Let a Soldier Die'' is a first novel by a former helicopter pilot in the
Vietnam War. It is, in some ways, reminiscent of Tim O'Brien's Vietnam book,
''Going After Cacciato,'' but lacks Mr. O'Brien's admirable talent for
allegorical fantasy. William E. Holland focuses on a platoon of American
gunships that accidentally attacks friendly troops in the jungle below; the
disaster marks the beginning of a psychological crisis for the hero, Troll, who
finds himself evacuating the wounded from a company he has just now helped to
decimate. One might expect this episode to be fashioned by the author into a
comprehensive moral or political symbol - so much has been written about
''friendly fire'' - but in context it amounts to nothing more than a cautionary
anecdote about the failings of individuals. Mr. Holland's book has a confined,
ahistoric feel to it; even the 1968 Tet offensive is downplayed, as if to
emphasize the classic truths of soldiering over the particulars of the Vietnam
conflict itself. Personalities and situations are conventional, moving in the
medium of a curiously old-fashioned rhetoric (''He laid snares for Glory, but
always she continued to elude him,'' ''Happiness fled with its tail unsalted'').
The characters' everyday reality, if banal, at least has a predictable shape;
not so the narrator's larger vision, so fundamentally, alarmingly chaotic that
at one point a helicopter's searchlight is likened to the star of the Magi.
There are small beauties, even so. Mr. Holland is at his best in the lyrical
evocation of helicopter gunships in flight (they move like ''jolting metal
wombs''; the rush of the turbines sounds ''like fire in a distant chimney'').
But his protagonist is made to feel only the barest curiosity about the larger
machinery of nations, the political and economic forces that have caused men to
fight, suffer and perish in this alien sky. - William Ferguson

* ROLE OF HONOR.

James Bond is back, living out ordinary people's fantasies. Who else, in a mere
50 pages, could manage to be relieved of tedious office work, inherit a fortune
and get sent to Monte Carlo on business? (Bond even becomes teacher's pet - the
willowy ash-blonde who briefs him for his next assignment on Her Majesty's
Secret Service gives extra credit for Phys. Ed.) This time it's the world of
friendly microcomputers that the forces of evil are manipulating for their own
dastardly purposes. To thwart the terrorist coup of the decade, Bond has to
pretend to enter the employ of his own old arch enemy, SPECTRE - the Special
Executive for Counterintelligence, Terrorism, Revenge and Extortion. Even this
staged betrayal of his country is painful for Bond, but he consoles himself with
women who say things like, ''Come and bore the pants off me, darling.'' At last,
in a Goodyear blimp high above Lake Geneva, Bond gets to display his true mettle
and risk his life for democracy. Not to worry - of course, no disaster occurs.
And after all the danger he's been through, Bond is granted the two top-choice
wishes of every good playboy - a second round of ''sweetness'' with his favorite
blonde and the freedom, once he's had his fill, to follow the eternal siren call
of ''new dangers - and new sweetness.'' John Gardner was selected by Ian
Fleming's executors to revive the Bond series. Though he does an adequate job,
Fleming fans will find that the gleam is off the prose. Mr. Gardner's writing
isn't as taut or witty or sexy as his predecessor's. But he has included every
traditional ingredient - souped-up cars, cool violence, gambling, gadgets and
women. If you want the tried-and-true formula, here it is.- Richard Smith

* THE BOOK OF THE NIGHT.

This collage of ''Yentl,'' ''The Empire Strikes Back,'' ''Dr. Dolittle'' and
''The Gnostic Gospels'' is long on obscure metaphor and short on narrative
power. The earnest author takes readers back to the 10th century and the Celtic
island of Iona where good wars with evil, passion vies with intellect, and pagan
forces sap Christian conscience. The arcane, almost precious language is
counterpointed with fantastical flash forwards to the present. The result is a
sometimes glittering but often confusing mishmash of ideas and images. The
narrative structure consists of journal entries alternating between the voice of
the monk Generous and that of the main character, who undergoes various
metamorphoses. The protagonist begins as a lonely young girl, Celeste. Celeste
masquerades as a young man, Cu Roi, so that she can apprentice in a monastery.
Eventually Cu Roi falls in love with the abbot. She turns herself into a cow to
avoid being banned from the monastery. Thus, much of the book is narrated by a
small white cow. The author of three previous novels, including the
well-received ''Call Me Ishtar,'' Rhoda Lerman creates in ''The Book of the
Night'' a fantastic narrative voyage that is as unpredictable as an acid trip in
which one's imagination is the primary determinant of reality; it is replete
with luscious detail and intriguing wordplay - ''Now this Enlightened One
descends to Naught, Nicht, Noch, Not.'' The shimmering symbols and sparks of
originality, however, can't compensate for the lack of a credible, engaging
story. Ultimately, readers finish the book - or don't - confirmed in the
understanding that, as with all acid trips, you had to be there to understand
it.- Valerie Miner


NONFICTIONRIGHTS AND GOODS: Justifying Social Action.

In ''Rights and Goods,'' Virginia Held, a professor of philosophy at the City
University of New York Graduate Center and Hunter College, sets out to prove
that morality, like science, can progress through a systematic testing of
theories in the crucible of experience. If it can, we ought to be able to
develop a better approach to morality than those dreamed up by, say, Plato and
Aristotle. Mrs. Held's diagnosis of the ''pathetic state'' of moral theory is on
the mark: ''At present, a multitude of persons make unconnected moral judgments,
while a few philosophers construct moral theories of such abstraction as hardly
to touch on experience.'' Her contribution has won praise from philosophers, but
her book is tough going for those not steeped in the jargon and methodology of
her discipline. She argues at some length that a moral principle that seems like
a good idea in the realm of pure theory should be refined or discarded if it
doesn't feel right in real life. Like much in the book, this conclusion seems so
unremarkable that nonphilosophers may puzzle over why it is necessary to define
so many terms, construct such an edifice of assumptions and work through so many
deductions to get there. And Mrs. Held makes pronouncements about the real world
that owe at least as much to political orientation as to systematic moral
inquiry: the United States' role in the Vietnam War was a moral outrage; women
have always been exploited by men and should get a better deal; the environment
should be preserved; the Freedom of Information Act should be protected against
''the Reagan Administration's proposal to gut'' it. And - a point repeated every
few pages - the moral right to freedom includes a guarantee of ''sufficient
property and economic resources for each person to be a free and independent and
self-respecting citizen.'' Mrs. Held makes some perceptive observations, but
they are undercut by her tendency to repeat her convictions rather than engage
questions that might be raised by those who disagree with her. Would a
comfortable guaranteed income for all destroy the economic incentives necessary
to produce the wealth she wants to spread around, for example? Mrs. Held
apparently thinks not, but she doesn't say why. - Stuart Taylor Jr.

* LISA BIRNBACH'S COLLEGE BOOK.

 (Villard, Cloth,

$18.95. Ballantine, Paper, $9.95.) Lisa Birnbach, of ''The Official Preppy
Handbook'' fame, visited 186 colleges and universities, met with students and
staff and (bravely) ate in cafeterias to assess the ''the social life, the
atmosphere, the political climate, the guys, the girls, and the clothes at every
school.'' The result is ''Lisa Birnbach's College Guide,'' which avoids mention
of median S.A.T. scores and focuses on the worst and best study spots, the worst
and best dorms and the campus drugs of choice. Not for a minute do I question
Miss Birnbach's perceptions. The first thing I did was look up my own alma
mater, the University of Michigan, and everything checked out down to the
restaurant cited as having the best pizza. The reader also learns that Hamilton
College is such a ''country club'' that ''you'd think people paid dues instead
of admission'' and that graduation from Hobart and William Smith Colleges hinges
on passing a swimming test. So far, fine and frequently amusing. The problem is
with Miss Birnbach's self-described ''silly and immature charts, graphs and
quizzes, sprinkled throughout like confectioners' sugar.'' They are silly and
immature, and the scattershot overviews of religion (''Bus Your Trays If You
Love Jesus''), homosexuals on campus (''From the Closet to the Quad'') and the
like are merely offensive. And here is Miss Birnbach's description of campus
feminism: ''Now at most colleges, 'girl' has made a stunning comeback sort of
like Lena Horne on Broadway.'' Troublesome too is her love affair with herself.
Readers are treated to such chapters as ''Ask Lisa,'' ''The Lisa Birnbach
College Date Line,'' ''Lisa Birnbach's Collegiate Bestseller List'' and ''The
Lisa Birnbach College Book List of Lists.'' Miss Birnbach toots her own horn
summa cum loudly. - Joanne Kaufman

* ARCHITECT: The Life and Work of Charles W. Moore.

The life of Charles W. Moore is hardly gripping: a precocious childhood in
Battle Creek, Mich., college at the University of Michigan, architectural
practice, an Army stint in Korea, graduate work at Princeton and the
chairmanship of the architecture departments at Berkeley, Yale and U.C.L.A.
Indeed, through much of ''Architect,'' David Littlejohn, a professor of
journalism at the University of California, Berkeley, and the author of novels
and nonfiction, has difficulty making a biography out of what is essentially a
curriculum vitae. Mr. Littlejohn actually admits that Mr. Moore ''has no private
life whatsoever.'' The book is either a portrait of a person who has escaped
into his career or one of modern man in a careerist age. But even as the story
of a career, the book is uneven. The author does manage to portray architectural
practice, demystifying the act of creating a building by showing, for example,
designing in progress. And Mr. Moore's career becomes quite human at times -
when, for example, he wonders if the ''problem of parlaying a limited amount of
energy into a large and influential body of work is not really the central
problem of the professional practitioner.'' But Mr. Littlejohn fails to convey
the qualities of Mr. Moore's work that are finally the only justification for
the book, and the writing does not rise to the occasion, even though Mr. Moore's
is a subjective architecture - comfortable-looking buildings full of allusions
and recollections - that lends itself to description. ''Architect'' has none of
the charm that characterizes Mr. Moore's work. There is a vast amount of facts,
descriptions and interviews, but the material is not shaped with a convincing
vision. - Joseph Giovannini

* A MARRIAGE SABBATICAL.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TWO-FISTED SELF-PITY

BYLINE: By Anatole Broyard

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1443 words


Anatole Broyard is an editor of The Book Review.  YOUNG HEARTS CRYING

By Richard Yates.  347 pp. New York: Seymour Lawrence/Delacorte Press. $16.95.

THERE seems to be an element of relief in some of the critical praise given to
the novels and short stories of Richard Yates. William Styron called
''Revolutionary Road,'' Yates's first novel, ''classic'' and Ann Beattie used
the same word for ''Liars in Love,'' his second collection of stories.
''Realistic'' and ''craft'' are two more terms that are often applied to his
work. The way these words are used is interesting: they are the visible half of
an implicit opposition, suggesting that most novels and stories are not so
conspicuously classical, realistic and well crafted.

Mr. Yates is seen as turning the tide, or holding the line, against a general
moral and esthetic deterioration. We know where we are with him: in the American
mainstream. Hemingway and Fitzgerald are waving from the banks of the stream and
they can be heard in Mr. Yates's pages. Like Hemingway's heroes, Mr. Yates's
male protagonists worry about their masculinity and talk at length about the
integrity of art. Like Fitzgerald's men, they care about style and status and
drink a lot to keep up their courage.

Mr. Yates's heroes are classical in the nature of their adversary relation to
culture, for it's not the war in Vietnam or the civil rights struggle that
arouses their moral indignation, but the mediocrity, emptiness and conformity -
all Mr. Yates's words - of American life itself. When, in ''Revolutionary
Road,'' Frank Wheeler talks of throwing up his job at the Knox Business Machine
Company and ''finding himself'' in Europe, he is closer to Henry Miller and the
expatriates of the 1920's than to the people of John Updike, John Cheever or
Donald and Frederick Barthelme. In fact, he may be closer to Theodore Dreiser
and Thomas Wolfe.

Mr. Yates's characters still go from innocence to disillusionment, while people
in more ''contemporary,'' less classical fiction begin in disillusionment and
wonder where else there is to go. In Mr. Yates's attack on phoniness, there is
something of the evangelist and of Archie Bunker too. His men are exasperatingly
anti-intellectual, almost phobic about large ideas. They're apologetic even
about liking literature. In ''Young Hearts Crying,'' Mr. Yates's sixth novel,
the painter Tom Nelson says ''I like the hell out of

Wilfred Owen,'' the colloquial ''hell'' balancing the ''feminine'' taste for
poetry. Michael Davenport, the protagonist of the new novel, almost always adds
an expletive or an obscenity, like a beer chaser, to his esthetic
pronouncements.

While characters in contemporary fiction often suffer from a kind of
agoraphobia, a fear of all the psychological space at their disposal, Mr.
Yates's people are trapped in ordinary lives from which they try desperately to
escape. But even when they do, they carry their trapped feeling along with them.
Lucy, Michael's first wife, is presumably free after she leaves him, yet she
can't seem to move out of the ordinariness she dreads. She tries acting,
painting and writing, only to prove, as someone said, that an insufficient
talent is the cruelest of all temptations.

If art always runs the risk of phoniness or failure, and life without it never
transcends the ordinary, where is there for Mr. Yates's people to turn? The
answer is that they can turn only as the worm turns, and this is the pathos, the
dying fall, of his fiction. His ordinary people lack the idiosyncrasy that
redeems the narrow lives in, say, Frederick Barthelme's work. They are designed
to be defeated or humiliated in carefully crafted scenes. In a sense, they are
literary cannon fodder.

Mr. Yates's men enjoy sex, drinking and talking: they suffer art. When Michael
Davenport meets a new woman, he immediately thinks of her in bed. She must be
''pretty,'' have ''good legs,'' find him ''marvellous'' as a lover. He calls his
women ''baby.'' Carl Traynor, a novelist who is Lucy's creative writing teacher,
also calls women baby. Both he and Michael like to confide in their various
women, but they dislike even the most constructive criticism.

After Michael and Lucy marry, she tells him that she has, in her own right, $3
million or $4 million. When he refuses to touch her money or to let her use it
in their life together, we are invited to regard him as admirable, independent
or proud, but after we learn that her money threatens his ''manhood,'' we begin
to wonder. It may also be possible to see him as rigid, insecure or
unimaginative in his response to money. A psychoanalyst might even say that he
is afraid of the freedom it can bring.

Mr. Yates's men are compulsive talkers and tellers of stories. There's a
wonderful moment in ''Revolutionary Road'' when Frank Wheeler reaches the end of
a full-blown anecdote only to realize that he has told it to these same people
before. In ''Young Hearts Crying,'' Michael is always telling stories that take
longer than he had expected and that almost invariably show him in a bad light.
He seems to have a passion for bad lights.

Though Michael is a published poet, we never see a single line of any of his
poems, and this is odd and unconvincing. He doesn't talk like a poet, even less
so, in fact, than Hemingway did, and we wonder where he keeps his poetry hidden
about his personality. We read only that he is working on a new poem ''that gave
every promise of excellence.'' In another passage, he reflects that ''the things
he'd learned about professionalism over the years could be sensed on every
page.''

As even admiring critics have pointed out, Mr. Yates's men are terribly
self-conscious, always striking poses and rehearsing their emotions. It's
tempting to say that only their mistakes are spontaneous. And what mistakes -
these at least are of heroic proportions. Michael, a boxer when he was in the
army, twice trades punches to the belly with other men at parties, and inspite
of his drinking and sedentary life, he knocks both of them ''unconscious'' with
a single hook. This is macho with a horseshoe in the glove.

Several critics have praised Mr. Yates's ''precision'' and his style. It's not
clear in the context what precision means. A devil's advocate might say that his
characters are so simple and unambiguous that they can be ''precisely''
described. So far as style is concerned, there doesn't seem to be any, and
perhaps this is by design, an emblem of Mr. Yates's realism, his refusal to
embellish or distort his characters with authorial eloquence.

The main question in Mr. Yates's work is whether we are being asked to see
around, or beyond, the characters to some kind of symbolism - or to take them
literally. Are we supposed to forgive their shortcomings and their failures as
God does, or are they being offered up as intrinsically interesting, without
extenuation? Is his perspective metaphysical or entomological? His characters
seem shrunk by realism, robbed of invention and reduced to bleak and repetitive
rituals.


IN one of his philosophical meditations, A. S. Eddington remarked that to be or
not to be is a primitive

form of thinking. In the same mood, we might ask

whether, in the 1980's, we have not passed beyond what we are accustomed to
refer to as the real, or whether this is still a useful term in writing about
fiction. There is a similar difficulty with the word classical. What does it
mean now?

''Young Hearts Crying'' fails for the most fundamental of reasons: because
Michael Davenport is not an interesting or appealing man. He is so self-pitying
that there is no room for our pity. He has few ideas, and he explains them too
much - to himself and to us. Like the bad poet in T. S. Eliot's description, he
is conscious when he should be unconscious, and unconscious precisely when he
should be conscious. Michael is sentimental without being loving and vain
without being proud. As his second wife, Sarah, says, he lets his rhetoric run
away with him - and it runs away with the book as well. If it were better
rhetoric, that might help, but it isn't.

Just as Raymond Carver's characters, or Frederick Barthelme's, may exasperate us
with their improbability, so Mr. Yates's people may try our patience too, for
the contrary reason. The modern reader is in the position of Buridan's logical
jackass, immobilized between two equidistant bales of hay. It seems that our
writers either go too far, or not far enough. Since the too far is gaining on
us, we should be grateful to Richard Yates. Even if his flues need cleaning, he
does try to keep the home fires burning.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GUILELESS AND MACHIAVELLIAN

BYLINE: By William V. Shannon

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1921 words


THE AMERICAN POPE

The Life and Times of Francis Cardinal Spellman.  By John Cooney.  Illustrated.
364 pp. New York: Times Books. $19.95.

FRANCIS CARDINAL SPELLMAN, who was Archbishop of New York from 1939 until his
death in 1967, was a major figure in American political life and the history of
the Roman Catholic Church. In both the political and the ecclesiastical arenas,
he sought power avidly and used it aggressively. He was the confidant, adviser
and sometime agent of Presidents from Franklin D. Roosevelt to Lyndon B.
Johnson. And he was influential in New York politics. As the Catholic military
vicar to the American armed forces - a post separate from but complementary to
his position as Archbishop - he supervised chaplains around the world and was a
familiar visitor to battlefields during World War II and the wars in Korea and
Vietnam.

John Cooney, a freelance who previously wrote a book about the Annenberg
publishing family, has written a gossipy, iconoclastic and absorbing biography.
His bias against Spellman is clear, but he sets forth the Cardinal's personal
strengths as well as his weaknesses, the considerable accomplishments as well as
the misjudgments and defeats.

Mr. Cooney says: ''Spellman presented two distinct faces to the world. The one
he wore most often in public was that of a cherubic, humble man who smiled
often, spoke softly, and struck people as being not overly bright. The other
face was that of a tough, demanding man who pushed hard, let little stand in his
way, and ran roughshod over friend or foe to get what he wanted. His polar
personalities shifted from guileless to Machiavellian.'' This is not meant to
suggest that Spellman was a hypocrite. The kindliness and good humor were as
genuine as the ambition and toughness. The Rev. Robert Gannon, the Jesuit who
was Spellman's longtime friend and official biographer, praised the Cardinal at
his 75th birthday dinner as ''fearless, tireless, and shrewd . . . but at the
same time . . . humble, whimsical, sentimental, incredibly thoughtful, supremely
loyal, and, above all, a real priest.''

Mr. Cooney does not seriously dispute this description. Rather, he stresses the
other sides of the personality and character of a complex man. He shows Spellman
being severe and sarcastic as well as sentimental toward the priests who served
under him, loyal to his friends but also calculating in his cultivation of the
rich and the influential, thoughtful in remembering people's birthdays and doing
kindnesses but also devious and manipulative in his relationships.

In the final version of his book, Mr. Cooney has wisely abandoned his attempt to
argue that Spellman was a homosexual, reducing his mention of the matter to a
paragraph. His original discussion of the allegation, based on anonymous
sources, occupied a few pages of the galley proofs that were circulated to
reviewers before the book was published, and it naturally attracted press
attention. ''For years rumors abounded about Cardinal Spellman being a
homosexual,'' he now writes. ''As a result many felt - and continue to feel -
that Spellman the public moralist may well have been a contradiction of the man
of the flesh.'' But prurient interest

William V. Shannon, a former American Ambassador to Ireland, is University
Professor of history and journalism at Boston University and the author of ''The
American Irish.'' in the sex lives of public figures serves no useful purpose.
What matters about them is what they did in the public sphere, and rarely can it
be demonstrated that their sex lives, heterosexual or homosexual, promiscuous or
inhibited, affected their policies and actions.

On certain incidents in Spellman's life, Mr. Cooney also has to rely on
anonymous sources. This was inevitable, but the author would have diminished
uneasiness about his use of them if he had erred on the side of understatement
rather than overstatement. This is not a great biography, because the important
issues are not weighed judiciously enough and the writing is not careful and
nuanced. Nevertheless, in his aggressive, prosecutory style, Mr. Cooney is
convincing on the major themes of Spellman's career.

Spellman was the oldest son of a well-to-do grocer in Whitman, Mass., a small
town south of Boston. The harshness in his personality appears to have come from
his dour father, to whom he was not close. In later life he often quoted in
self-deprecating fashion his father's nasty advice: ''Son, always associate with
people smarter than yourself, and that shouldn't be hard to do.''

His father's money enabled Spellman to have a better education and more chances
for advancement in the church than if he had been a working-class boy attending
a local seminary. He graduated from Fordham University in 1911 and then spent
five years at the North American College in Rome. Since he was a mediocre
student, the education he received mattered less than opportunities Rome
presented. He used his time there to ingratiate himself with important clerics
in the Vatican Curia and wealthy American Catholic expatriates. These Roman
connections proved crucial in his career.


Returning to the Boston archdiocese in 1916, he spent nine years as a priest
under the baleful eye of William Cardinal O'Connell, a tyrant of legendary
proportions. Having taken an instant dislike to Spellman, O'Connell delighted in
giving him a series of dusty assignments. Spellman, who had a volcanic temper,
had to learn the practice of humility to survive. Rescued by well-placed friends
in the Vatican, he returned to Rome for several years. Then, to O'Connell's
dismay, the Pope named him Auxiliary Bishop of Boston in 1932.

Spellman's most important friend in Rome was Eugenio Pacelli, the future Pope
Pius XII. It was an extraordinary stroke of good fortune that when the
archbishopric of New York was vacant in the winter of 1938-39 and seemed about
to be filled by another candidate, Pope Pius XI died. Once Pacelli was elected
Pope, he appointed his friend to New York. Spellman would have been a prominent
but much less significant figure if, as expected, he had merely inherited
O'Connell's job in Boston. ''New York was potentially the richest diocese in the
world. Access to men and women of prominence in every field was open to him. New
York was the nation's financial center and the world media capital, and the
front doors of the archbishop's residence opened into the heart of it. The job
was made for a man such as Spellman,'' Mr. Cooney writes.  From several points
of view, Spellman was an outstanding success. A restless workaholic, he was a
deft and forceful administrator, choosing able subordinates, cutting costs and
negotiating advantageous real estate deals. Inheriting a huge debt, he proved a
highly succesful fund-raiser. In one five-year period, from 1955 through 1959,
he spent $168 million building 15 churches, 94 schools, 22 rectories, 60
convents and 34 other institutions. In short, he had the native qualities of a
successful businessman, qualities that the steadily expanding American Catholic
Church has often needed and sought in its leaders.  Throughout the nearly 20
years of the reign of his friend Pius XII, Spellman also showed himself to be an
astute diplomat. He did much behind the scenes to develop a much closer
relationship between the Popes and successive American Presidents and other men
of power in the Government and the business establishment. Why did he become
such a bitterly controversial figure?  Spellman was deeply reactionary in his
theology and secular politics. He was, for example, hostile to ecumenism,
liturgical reform (including saying the mass in English) and all intellectual
attempts to take account of the truth that the church actually thrives in
America's pluralistic and officially secular society. Instead, he belittled the
separation of church and state as ''a shibboleth.'' He opposed First Amendment
freedoms with the obsolete theory that ''error has no rights.'' After Bertrand
Russell had been hounded out of a job at the City College of New York in 1940,
Spellman publicly challenged ''the wisdom of subsidizing the dissemination of
falsehood under the guise of liberty. Falsehood has no more legitimate claim to
be freely disseminated than have the germs of a disease a right to formal
cultivation in the bloodstream of the individual.''

In American society as well as the Catholic Church (as Vatican II was to
demonstrate in 1962-65), Spellman was moving against the tides of opinion and
practice. The longer he wielded power the more stubborn, opinionated and
aggressive he became in trying to impose his views and the wider the gap became
between him and prevailing practice.

A turning point came in 1949. Spellman led seminarians in the digging of graves
and thereby broke a strike of gravediggers, all of whom were poorly paid
Catholic workingmen. Later that same year, he made a public and extremely
personal attack on Eleanor Roosevelt for her opposition to Federal aid for
church-related schools; when one reads again what he said, it seems astonishing
in its ferocity. In 1951 he led a temporarily successful campaign to ban Roberto
Rossellini's film ''The Miracle'' in New York.

Each of these interventions proved a disaster for Spellman. The gravediggers'
strike impaired his credibility as a friend of the workers and the poor. Having
publicly declared that he would never again acknowledge Mrs. Roosevelt, Spellman
was forced by the Vatican to call on her and in effect apologize. The Supreme
Court not only overturned the ban on ''The Miracle'' but also extended the
protection of the First Amendment to films, thus destroying the legal basis for
the kind of censorship Spellman favored. But Spellman could not learn from these
misjudgments. He went on backing one loser after another. He publicly endorsed
Senator Joseph R. McCarthy's fraudulent campaign against Communism. He
identified himself and his church excessively with the Vietnam War.

Spellman loved publicity and relished controversy. Equally important, he was the
leader of an institution in which there are few restraints on the arbitrary
exercise of power. Like a large business corporation, the Catholic Church in the
United States is hierarchical in its organization and authoritarian in its
ethos. Spellman's autocratic style resembled that of many successful corporate
chieftains. The difference is that a successful businessman is judged by the
profits he earns, while a cardinal is judged by the highly visible example he
provides of what it means to be a Christian.

Only a prelate who cultivates the virtues of prudence, tolerance and civility
can successfully shoulder the dangerous burdens of ecclesiastical power. In
American Catholic Church history, James Cardinal Gibbons of Baltimore is the
great exemplar of this kind of prelate. There have been and are others.

Spellman's enduring accomplishments were his personal acts of kindness toward
individuals and the religious and charitable institutions he founded or
strengthened. By contrast, his power plays against opponents, his attempts to
tell Catholics how to vote, his conniving with politicians and his bullying of
dissenters accomplished nothing in the long run. Because he yielded to the
temptations of power, his good works as a priest and a bishop are overshadowed
in history.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cardinal Spellman, John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 28, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN 'THE KILLING FIELDS,' A CAMBODIAN ACTOR RELIVES HIS NATION'S ORDEAL



BYLINE:
By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2165 words


During ''The Killing Fields'' - a film about friendship, separation and reunion
set against the Khmer Rouge's genocidal revolution in Cambodia - the central
character, a Khmer Rouge captive named Dith Pran, grows a small tomato plant.
Its feeble fruit is part of survival amid rice gruel and endless labor. Then, as
Dith Pran watches in impotence, a girl soldier of 12 or 14 rips the plant out of
the earth.

When that moment was filmed, Dr. Haing S. Ngor, who portrays Dith Pran, ran off
the set screaming. ''Khmer Rouge, Khmer Rouge,'' he insisted to Roland Joffe,
the director. ''She is Khmer Rouge.'' The girl, Mr. Joffe assured him, was a
Thai who had been hired on location. But in her flat, dead eyes - the eyes of
the thousands of children in the Khmer Rouge - Dr. Ngor saw again the horrors
both he and Mr. Dith had actually endured.

Dr. Ngor (he puts his surname last in American fashion) never acted before being
cast as Mr. Dith, the assistant and friend to The New York Times correspondent
Sydney Schanberg, the winner of a Pultizer Prize for his reporting on Cambodia.
But to say that Dr. Ngor acted, that he merely played a role, is woefully
inadequate. To an eerie degree, his experiences in Cambodia after the Khmer
Rouge takeover in 1975 parallel those of Mr. Dith.

''For me, movie not different,'' Dr. Ngor said, still trying to master the
language of his new land. ''I have enough experience in Communist times. I put
emotion into the movie. We have a lot of scenes like in Khmer Rouge time.
Everything the same.''

''One thing I know,'' said Mr. Dith, who is now a photographer for The Times,
''this is a true story. Only someone who got trapped like me could do this part.
Haing did well because he lived like me. When I see the movie, I try to say,
'That's past. That's past. Don't give away your tears anymore.' I try to pull
myself out, but you cannot pull all the way out. You say, 'Oh my God, I am there
again.' ''

Although it takes some artistic liberties, ''The Killing Fields,'' which opens
Friday at Cinema 1, essentially follows the true story of Mr. Dith and Mr.
Schanberg. It is based upon Mr. Schanberg's 1980 article in The Times's Sunday
Magazine, entitled ''The Death and Life of Dith Pran.'' Like the article, the
movie shows how Mr. Schanberg (played on screen by Sam Waterston) and Mr. Dith
collaborated to cover the Cambodian civil war and the ultimate triumph of the
Khmer Rouge.  When the American Embassy is evacuated as the Khmer Rouge advance
on Phnom Penh, Mr. Dith's family leaves. But Mr.  Dith and Mr. Schanberg,
thinking mistakenly that the killing will soon end, stay. Instead, Khmer Rouge
soldiers soon capture and prepare to execute Mr. Schanberg. Only Mr. Dith's
pleas convince the soldiers to free Mr. Schanberg, and the men reach the safety
of the French Embassy. But when the Khmer Rouge demand that all the Cambodians
in the embassy be surrendered to them, Mr. Schanberg cannot save Mr. Dith. Mr.
Schanberg returns to New York guilt-ridden, Mr. Dith vanishes into the tragedy
of Cambodia, and the friends do not reunite until Mr. Dith's escape to Thailand
more than four years later.

''The Killing Fields'' represents the first attempt by a commercial film to
grapple with the Cambodian genocide. In the name of their ''peasant
revolution,'' the Khmer Rouge drove the two million residents of Phnom Penh,
among them Dr. Ngor and Mr. Dith, into the countryside. Other cities, like
Kompong Speu, were literally bulldozed out of existence. By the time the
Vietnamese ousted the Pol Pot regime in 1979, anywhere from one million to three
million Cambodians, out of a population of seven million, had perished, some by
starvation, some by murder. The Cambodian Genocide Project, an American group
researching the Khmer Rouge atrocities, in 1982 read the scrupulous records of
executions at Tuol Sleng political prison; inmates were clubbed to death, the
Khmer Rouge wrote, because ''bullets could not be wasted.''

The parts of Dith Pran and Sydney Schanberg are co-equal in ''The Killing
Fields,'' but it is Mr. Dith who is, perhaps, the emotional center of the film,
for he personifies the suffering of millions of his countrymen. As Gregory
Stanton of the Cambodian Genocide Project once put it, ''After you've gotten to
know people in Cambodia and heard their stories - and everyone has lost someone
- you begin to realize how personal mass murder is. Impersonal to the murderer,
but personal to the victim.''



The search for someone to play Dith Pran consumed months. Both Mr. Joffe and Pat
Golden, the casting director, realized that they could not cast a Caucasian in
the role. But most of the Cambodian and Thai actors they met were trained in the
highly stylized Asian theater tradition, one ill-suited for a realistic film. It
fell to Miss Golden to scour the Cambodian expatriate communities in California,
New York and Washington, D.C., and between January and April 1983 she
interviewed 300 prospective Dith Prans. None fit.

Dr. Ngor, meanwhile, had heard about Miss Golden's efforts. A fellow Cambodian
in southern California kept telling Dr. Ngor to audition and Dr. Ngor kept
resisting. ''I didn't think I'm a movie star,'' he said. ''The producer or
director want to choose a handsome, young guy. I think I have 100 percent no
chance. I am not handsome. I am too old.''

Miss Golden did not think so. Her casting search took her to a Cambodian wedding
in Oxnard, Calif., at which Dr. Ngor was a guest. She asked him to remove his
glasses and took his picture. He resembled Mr. Pran closely enough to merit a
screen test, which was essentially a series of improvisations. In one, Dr. Ngor
and Miss Golden acted out an argument between Mr. Dith and Mr. Schanberg. In
another, Dr. Ngor had to react as if his wife had just been killed.

''It was the most astonishing thing,'' Miss Golden said. ''I'd never seen
anything like it.'' When Mr. Joffe, the producer David Puttnam and others
watched footage of the screen test in London, there were tears. The authenticity
should not have been surprising. Dr. Ngor's fiancee died under the Khmer Rouge,
as did virtually all of his relatives.

So close was Dr. Ngor's experience to Mr. Dith's that - although Mr. Waterston,
for instance, spent almost a week with the real Sydney Schanberg and read all of
his notebooks and dispatches from Cambodia - Dr. Ngor never even met the man he
would recreate on film. Like Mr. Dith, Dr. Ngor was a relatively Westernized
Cambodian, a doctor who spoke fluent French. And like Mr. Dith, Dr. Ngor
realized that his only chance of survival among the Khmer Rouge lay in denying
his past.

On April 17, 1975, the day the Khmer Rouge seized Phnom Penh, Dr. Ngor and a
colleague were in a military hospital, operating on a man wounded in the bombing
of the city. ''I am operating on my patient,'' he recalled. ''I am cleaning out
the intestine. It is 9 o'clock when a Khmer Rouge get into the operating room.
He put a gun on my right ear. He ask me, 'Are you a doctor?' I say, 'No, he just
left by back door. I am not a doctor.' The Khmer Rouge ran away to find the
doctor. So I tell my friend, 'We leave the patient.' He says, 'No, we must
finish.' I say, 'We must leave. If the Khmer Rouge come back, we will be
killed.' ''



But like both the real Mr. Dith and Mr. Schanberg, Dr. Ngor at first
underestimated the ferocity of the Khmer Rouge. When Pol Pot's forces ordered
Cambodians out of Phnom Penh, Dr. Ngor recalled, they said it was only to
protect them from American bombing. Everyone would go back home in three hours.
''We don't know,'' Dr. Ngor said. ''We don't know the Khmer Rouge lying.'' Even
after a three-day march to a Khmer Rouge encampment, Dr. Ngor added, ''We still
think over and over again, maybe the Khmer Rouge call the people back to the
city.''

In the maelstrom, Dr. Ngor somehow found his brother and father, his fiancee and
her mother. Together, on May 28, 1975, they began another march, to a camp near
the Vietnamese border and to the heart of Cambodia's darkness. From 4 A.M. to 1
P.M. every day, Dr. Ngor broke boulders into bits small enough for paving roads.
His tool was a household hammer. At 1 P.M., the workers received their first
meal of the day - ''A little watery rice. One tiny, small bowl. No, not even one
bowl.'' He returned to the rocks until 7 P.M., when he got another bowl of rice.
After that, there was work on an irrigation canal until almost midnight.

In Dr. Ngor's second Khmer Rouge commune, the 7,000 workers received not even
rice; they lived or died on whatever they could forage - insects, mice, lizards,
snakes, scorpions. It is with no trace of irony that Dr. Ngor says, ''If you
have mice to eat, lizards to eat, that's the best food. One hundred percent.''
The real Dith Pran survived by similar desperation; the character in the film
eats small lizards and at one point sneaks into the commune's stable to cut the
skin and then suck the blood from a water buffalo. Caught, he is tortured.

That, too, harkens to Dr. Ngor's experience. The Khmer Rouge jailed him three
times, trying to wring from him the admission he was a doctor. Having seen two
other doctors executed, Dr. Ngor refused to tell. ''The Khmer Rouge ask me all
the time, 'Are you a doctor or not?''' he remembered. ''I say, 'I am no doctor.'
They still didn't believe me. I tell them I was a taxi driver. I change my
name.'' The Khmer Rouge then tortured Dr. Ngor, once binding his limbs until
they went numb, once searing his leg with an ember and once putting a plastic
bag over his head until he almost suffocated - a torture reenacted at points in
''The Killing Fields.'' Ultimately, Dr. Ngor escaped into Vietnamese-held
territory and then to Thailand, the same path Dith Pran followed. The two men
crossed the border within months of each other in 1979.



The film makers went to great lengths to evoke life under the Khmer Rouge, as
well as in Phnom Penh before the takeover. First, Mr. Puttnam - best known as
the producer of the Oscar-winning ''Chariots of Fire'' - selected in Mr. Joffe a
director who had made his career in documentaries. Mr. Puttnam, Mr. Joffe and
the screenwriter Bruce Robinson all interviewed Mr. Schanberg and Mr. Dith on
several occasions and the director met with Cambodian refugees in the United
States, Europe and Thailand. The depiction of life in the Khmer Rouge camps was
drawn from refugees' recollections and from Yugoslav and East German film
footage. Mr. Joffe also talked to United States State Department experts on
Cambodia and read the writings of Pol Pot.

The film speculates on the reasons for the rise of the Khmer Rouge. Several
times Mr. Joffe juxtaposes footage of President Nixon - in one case denying the
invasion of Cambodia, which was already underway - with scenes of the Khmer
Rouge's horrors. Mr. Waterston also gives a speech, based on remarks the real
Sydney Schanberg made to the Overseas Press Club, that criticizes the United
States for intervening in Cambodia and implies that the incursion helped the
Khmer Rouge gain strength.

''The film isn't anti-American; it's anti-ideology,'' Mr. Joffe maintains. But
he went on to say: ''The argument is that the degree of bombing on a peasant
country creates a kind of distress and a fury. The average age of the Khmer
Rouge troops that came into Phnom Penh was 17, and those troops had had 75 per
cent casualties. That would psychologically affect you. What the film is saying
is that the world isn't filled with strange and bizarre acts for no reason.''

Pressed further on the point, Mr. Joffe said that the Khmer Rouge's atrocities -
an almost unparalleled example of genocide committed against one's own people -
grew out of more than American bombing. ''I think the most terrifying thing in
Pol Pot's writing,'' the director said, ''was the outstanding mediocrity and
crudeness. One realized a mind that mediocre couldn't see the ridiculousness of
his ideas. It was close to being psychotic. The other thing I detected in Pol
Pot was an intense nationalism and traces of paranoia - paranoia of the West, of
Vietnam, of Thailand, even of China. Pol Pot had the idea of rebuilding the
ancient peasant empire of Angkor Wat. He became an expression of the terror and
hysteria of a whole country just as Hitler did.''

While Holocaust survivors have helped perpetuate the memory of Nazi infamy, the
Cambodian genocide is already being forgotten. Which is part of the reason Dr.
Ngor decided to play the part of Dith Pran. ''When Pat Golden ask me how much
money I want, I said I don't care about salary,'' he recalled. ''She say $800 a
week. I say I don't care. I want to be this actor. I want to show the world how
the Communists really were. If any country get into a war, people killed by gun.
In Cambodia, we are killed by rice; we are killed by starvation. If I die from
now on, O.K. The film will go on 100 years.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Haing S. Ngor

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: THE JARGON OF CBS TRIAL

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1337 words


A. FARBER

Like the Vietnam War itself, the battle now being waged in Federal District
Court between Gen. William C. Westmoreland and CBS rises and falls with each day
of testimony. And, each day, it winds through verbal jungles as dense as the
lairs in which the Vietcong took refuge 10 to 20 years ago - terms such as
DISUMs and WIEUs, PERINTREPs and SNIEs.

General Westmoreland, who commanded American troops in Vietnam between 1964 and
1968, contends that CBS libeled him in a 1982 documentary, ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' CBS says the broadcast was true. But, no matter
who is right, the witnesses in this much-publicized, $120 million suit are
leading the jury through a maze of intelligence arcana.

The other day, Robert W. Komer, President Johnson's special ambassador in Saigon
in 1967 and 1968, was on the stand recalling a discussion he had had about enemy
strength with George A. Carver, the chief of Vietnamese affairs for the Central
Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Carver, he said, ''told me that the SNIE had run into a snag.''

The jury, the lawyers, the plaintiff and defendants all burst into laughter. The
old SNIE - the SNIE about which everyone was talking so earnestly and so
passionately - was having a problem.

A SNIE was a Special National Intelligence Estimate, a description for the
President of the enemy's capabilities. In 1967, senior military officers and the
C.I.A. fought bitterly over the size and nature of the forces to be included in
the SNIE that year, with the C.I.A. favoring higher figures. Now, for this
trial, the fight is being re- staged. A DISUM was a Daily Intelligence Summary,
put together each morning for General Westmoreland. A WIEU was a Weekly
Intelligence Estimate Update. A PERINTREP was a Periodic Intelligence Report.

All of these esoteric terms, and more, fly like bullets through the
high-ceilinged, third-floor courtroom on Foley Square where the trial will go
into its fourth week today.



Now and again, Judge Pierre N. Leval hauls out a large, criss-crossed board he
calls his ''X-chart'' and explains to the jury that a piece of evidence being
introduced can be considered for both truth and ''state of mind,'' or for one
but not the other. On those occasions, the jurors tend to lean forward in their
seats, but whether they have absorbed this distinction is unknown.

Judge Leval's explanations - ''I feel like a law professor,'' he said -
underscore the complicated nature of the problems the jury faces in dealing with
a libel suit in which virtually nothing of consequence has been conceded by
either side.

To prevail in his suit, General Westmoreland must prove that the documentary's
accusations that he sought to deceive President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of
Staff about enemy strength in Vietnam in 1967 were false - and that CBS knew
they were false or acted with ''reckless disregard'' for whether they were true
or false.

For the jury, that means deciding not only the truth of what took place in
Saigon and Washington in 1967 - including General Westmoreland's ''state of
mind'' - but also the ''state of mind'' of CBS and certain of its employees in
1982.

For example, when David Boies, CBS's lawyer, referred to the findings of a 1976
Congressional report used for the documentary, Judge Leval cautioned the jury to
consider the report, not for its accuracy about the war, but only in connection
with CBS's ''state of mind'' in 1982.

When a 1967 cable from Saigon to Washington was offered as evidence, the judge
initially ruled that it could not be used on the issue of CBS's state of mind
because the network didn't know of its existence during the preparation of the
broadcast. He had to reverse himself minutes later, when Mr. Boies acknowledged
that the network had access to the document after all.



Though it is cited most often as the defendant, CBS is not alone in that
category. And the other defendants, not being corporations, attract the greater
attention in the courtroom.

They are Mike Wallace, the broadcast's narrator; George Crile, its producer, and
Samuel A. Adams, a former C.I.A. analyst who took part in the deliberations over
the SNIE in 1967 and who has said ever since that General Westmoreland's command
reduced the figures on enemy strength to make it appear that America was winning
the war. Mr. Adams's research for a book on the subject - his hundreds of pages
of ''chronologies'' - was used in the preparation of the documentary, on which
he appeared.

At the defense table, Mr. Adams writes on large yellow legal pads with the same
ardor with which he once compiled his ''chronologies.'' A descendant of
President John Adams, Mr. Adams graduated in history from Harvard in 1955 and
spent two years at the university's law school and three years as a naval
officer before joining the C.I.A. in 1963 as an analyst on Congolese affairs.

Next to him sits Mr. Crile, who watches expressionlessly - hand on cheek,
fingers massaging his earlobe - the replaying of ''outtakes'' that are seldom
seen outside a network's studio. To Mr. Crile's right sits Mr. Wallace, who has
missed a few days of court to fulfill his obligations as a correspondent for
''60 Minutes.''

In front of the defendants sits General Westmoreland, his head cocked back,
accenting the jutting jaw that was once an easy target for political
cartoonists. The general doesn't talk now to Mr. Wallace and, when he passes the
defense table, he quickens his pace. But there was a time when General
Westmoreland felt differently about Mr. Wallace.

At the start of the trial, Mr. Wallace showed reporters a passage from his
recent book, ''Close Encounters,'' citing a letter the general had sent him
after a ''60 Minutes'' story on wounded veterans.

''I just want to tell you it was a first class piece of reporting,'' General
Westmoreland had written in March 1972. ''I have never seen better.''



If there were no other way to tell the general's lawyer from the network's -
both are men of medium physical stature who often seem professorial in their
questioning - one could look to see which smiles. Only Mr. Boies, an urbane
litigator who has become increasingly aggressive and pointed in his
cross-examination for CBS, smiles with any regularity. Dan M. Burt, General
Westmoreland's lawyer, is as tense as a tight wire. Each lawyer has 150 hours to
present his case, and Judge Leval, with a watch resting on his bench, is keeping
time.

Both lawyers are solicitous of the jury and the witnesses - Mr. Boies once
lapsed into calling Walt W. Rostow, a former Presidential assistant, ''Your
Honor'' and Mr. Rostow replied: ''Yes, your excellency.'' But, while Mr. Burt is
calling ''friendly'' witnesses on direct testimony, virtually certain of their
answers, Mr. Boies, on cross-examination, has the burden of eliciting contrary
testimony without appearing hostile.

Mr. Burt is fond of referring to the five segments - separated by advertising -
of the 90-minute CBS documentary as five ''acts,'' as if they were theater
rather than fact. But the lawyer's frequent complaint before the trial that his
Capital Legal Foundation lacked the resources to compete with Mr. Boies's elite
corporate firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore now seems dated.

A few feet from Mr. Burt, in a green leather armchair against a wall of the
courtroom, sits an unobtrusive figure with a pad on his lap and an eye on the
witness. He is George S. Leisure Jr., a senior partner of one of the nation's
leading law firms - Donovan Leisure Newton & Irvine. Mr. Leisure, an experienced
litigator, is there to advise Mr. Burt, an international tax specialist who has
never tried a case before a jury. And since August, he has provided office space
at his firm for Mr. Burt, and the full-time assistance of two law associates.

''I wouldn't take the case away from Dan under any circumstances,'' Mr. Leisure
said the other day. ''But if he didn't listen to me, I'd go back to doing
something else.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A. MANUAL IS LINKED TO VIETNAM WAR GUIDE

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 28


A manual on guerrilla warfare prepared for Nicaraguan rebels by the Central
Intelligence Agency was drawn from material used to train United States Special
Forces troops during the Vietnam War, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said
today.

The New York Democrat, who is deputy chairman of the Senate Select Committee on
Intelligence, said that the manual included ''word for word'' passages from
guerrilla warfare instructions developed by the United States Army in 1968.

Mr. Moynihan said the instructions, used to train the Special Forces troops also
known as Green Berets, at Fort Bragg in North Carolina, were provided to the
intelligence committee last week by the C.I.A. and had been located in the
agency's library.

The C.I.A. manual has come under intense scrutiny and criticism since its
existence was disclosed two weeks ago, with most attention focused on the
booklet's comments on how to ''neutralize'' Nicaraguan leaders.

Assassinations Prohibited


The intelligence agency is prohibited by Presidential order from directly or
indirectly planning or carrying out assassinations.

Mr. Moynihan said the Army material included advice about how to ''remove''
civilian leaders as part of a campaign of psychological warfare. He said that
the term ''remove'' was clearly meant to be synonymous with assassination and
that the instructions were apparently modeled on terror techniques that he said
were used during the Communist takeover of China in the 1940's.

''They were talking,'' Mr. Moynihan said, ''about a specific technique of the
Chinese Communists. Every time they came to a village they identified somebody
as a landowner, an oppressor. They got everybody together in the village and
they formally shot him.''

A Senate aide said the Army material mentioned by Mr. Moynihan came from
''lesson plans'' developed in 1968 by the psychological operations department of
the United States Army Special Warfare School at Fort Bragg.

Response From the Pentagon


Lieut. Comdr. Charles D. Smith, a Defense Department spokesman, said a review of
lesson plans since 1972 ''has revealed no reference to assassination being
condoned or encouraged.''

He said the Pentagon had not yet located the 1968 plan uncovered by the Senate
investigators.

The Senate aide said that one of the lesson plans, No. 643, was entitled ''Armed
Psyop.'' Psychological warfare operations are known in military jargon as
''Psyops.'' The subtitle, according to the aide, was ''Implicit and explicit
terror. Psyop by selected use of armed force.''

Under that heading, he said, the plan included these ''teaching points'':

''Carefully selected, planned targets - judges, police officials, tax
collectors, etc - may be be removed for Psyop effect in an Unconventional
Warfare Operations Area, but extensive precautions must insure that the people
'concur' in such an act by thorough explanatory canvassing among the affected
populace before and after conduct of the mission.''

'Selective Use of Violence'


The C.I.A. manual has a section entitled ''Implicit and explicit terror.'' In a
section called ''Selective Use of Violence for Propagandistic Effects,'' it
says:

''It is possible to neutralize carefully selected and planned targets, such as
court judges, police and state security officials, etc. For psychological
purposes it is necessary to take extreme precautions, and it is absolutely
necessary to gather together the population affected, so that they will be
present, take part in the act, and formulate accusations against the
oppressor.''

Senator Barry M. Goldwater, Republican of Arizona, the chairman of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, said an investigation of the C.I.A. manual by the
intelligence agency's inspector general would not be completed until the end of
the week. The Senate panel has tentatively scheduled hearings on the manual this
week.

Mr. Goldwater and Mr. Moynihan made their comments in telephone interviews and
on the ABC News television program ''This Week.''

Author Not Publicly Identified


A member of the House Select Committee on Intelligence, which is also
investigating the manual, said the committee had asked the C.I.A. to order the
author of the booklet, who has not been publicly identified, to appear before
the panel within two weeks.

The lawmaker, a Democratic member of Congress, said the staff had determined
that the author borrowed much of the information in the manual from the 1968
instruction material used at Fort Bragg. ''It seems that most of what he did was
translate the stuff into Spanish rather than write much that was original,'' he
said.

Mr. Moynihan said it was not clear whether the C.I.A., which paid the manual's
author to prepare the booklet, had known until recent days that much of its
contents had been taken from Green Beret training materials.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEW AIRPORT, STILL UNFINISHED, IS OPEN IN GRENADA

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1538 words

DATELINE: ST. GEORGE'S, Grenada, Oct. 28


The big jet airport that Cuba began building and that the United States is
helping to complete opened today with two-thirds of the terminal unfinished,
most of the roads unpaved and acres of raw dirt waiting to be landscaped.

It also opened without any regularly scheduled jet service by any airline and
with the island's few hotels and guesthouses filled with government officials,
businessmen and journalists.

But the several thousand Grenadians who braved sporadic outbursts of rain to
listen to speeches and festive music and watch the first commercial passenger
planes land on the 9,000-foot- long runway after the opening did not seem to
mind that some new problems were raised and that completion of the project was
still nearly a year away.

They were clearly delighted that finally, after engineering studies and debates
going back to the mid-1950's, the island had in operation an airport that could
accommodate the largest jet aircraft that fly, day or night and in any kind of
weather.

Link to Anniversary Seen


Many Grenadians said the Reagan Administration had been determined to get the
airport in operation this week so as to have a major tangible accomplishment on
the anniversary of the United States invasion of the island Oct. 25, 1983.

In a letter to the Governor General, Sir Paul Scoon, that was read over Radio
Grenada Saturday night, President Reagan recalled the events of a year ago and
said: ''It is good to recall on this promising and happy occasion that the
objectives of the rescue mission were achieved.''

Grenadian officials put the eventual total cost of the airport at more than $80
million, including about $19 million from the United States.

In the main address, the Governor General called the airport ''a dream come
true.'' He thanked the United States and Canada for their help with the airport
but he did not mention the Cubans who, according to Grenadians familiar with the
work, completed about 65 percent of the project before the United States troops
arrived.

'A Good and Magnificent Thing'


John Francis, a 49-year-old farmer in the crowd, said he did not know who
deserved the most credit for the airport. But, he said, ''to all of those who
helped us, we are glad and thankful. This is a good and magnificent thing for
bringing business to this country.''

''It's going to be fantastic for everything, tourism, trade, everything,'' said
Michael McIntyre, who runs a soft-drink bottling company that opened last May,
the first major business started since the invasion.

No disorders were reported during the celebration today. But a handful of women
in their early 20's quietly held hand-lettered posters indicating they thought
the airport should have been named ''Maurice Bishop International Airport,'' in
memory of the late Prime Minister who was killed on Oct. 19, 1983, six days
before the invasion. The signs also thanked the Cubans.

Sir Eric Gairy, a former Prime Minister who is backing a slate of candidates for
the coming election on Dec. 3, has said that if his party wins he plans to
rename the airport ''Ronald Reagan International Airport.''

Replaces Old, Distant Airport


The airport is now named Point Saline International Airport, after its location
at the southern tip of the island. It replaces the short, unlighted Pearls
Airport, which opened on Jan. 16, 1943. The new airport, set alongside a
sparkling sea, is a drive of about 25 minutes over mostly level ground from the
capital, compared with the old airport, which was about an hour away via winding
mountain road.

For months there had been speculation that President Reagan might attend the
opening. But, as announced, he sent as the United States representative M. Peter
McPherson, Administrator of the United States Agency for International
Development, which has coordinated the airport work since shortly after the
invasion.

''This is a day of celebration,'' Mr. McPherson said at a news conference today
at the oceanfront hotel that serves as the United States Embassy. ''It's a proud
day for freedom.''

Reagan Cited Military Potential


During the time that as many as 650 Cubans were working on the airport under the
leftist Government led by Mr. Bishop, President Reagan maintained that the
airport was intended primarily for military purposes and that it constituted a
menace to security in the region. In March 1983 the President went on national
television and cited construction of the airstrip as evidence of what he called
''Soviet-Cuban militarization'' of Grenada. ''Grenada doesn't even have an air
force,'' he said, showing a satellite photograph of the airstrip. ''Who is it
intended for?''

Many Grenadians say that they are not sure what the Cubans had in mind, but that
from the earliest studies by British engineers nearly 30 years ago, the
Grenadians always saw the airport as a boon to tourism and development.

Airport workers say that for months, more than a half-dozen long-range United
States military jet and turboprop transport planes have been landing at the
airport each week with supplies and equipment for about 250 United States
soldiers who are still patrolling the island and helping to train a new
Grenadian police force.

Landing Rights Discussed


As the airport opened, the appointed interim Government that has been governing
Grenada since shortly after the invasion was still discussing landing rights
with Pan American World Airways, American Airlines and British West Indian
Airways.

Some officials of B.W.I.A. said they hoped to begin operating a DC-9 jet that
could carry 112 passengers between Miami and Grenada next week. But other
B.W.I.A. and Government officials said approval might not come before December.

In the meantime, the new airport will be operating with the same 12 daily
flights from nearby islands that were being handled at Pearls.

The new airport, with sophisticated lighting and navigational systems, will
operate into the night so that with connecting flights, passengers can reach
Grenada from much of the world in a single day. Operations at Pearls Airport
ended as the new airport opened.

Some critics have said that the airport, which has a concrete terminal more than
150 yards long and four stories tall, is more elaborate than is appropriate for
Grenada and that operating expenses could further hamstring the island's
crippled economy.

Recommended Since 1955


Ron Smith, the Grenadian project manager for the airport construction, said
colonial engineers recommended in 1955 that the government buy land for an
airport at Point Saline. He said he drew the first plans for it in 1966. But, he
said, Grenada could never raise the money to start the project until Maurice
Bishop and other leftists took over the Government in early 1979 and obtained
assistance from Cuba. The Bishop Government said other countries also aided the
project, including Canada, Mexico, Venezuela and Algeria. Work began in early
1980, Mr. Smith said.

Mr. Smith said construction crews sent by Cuba spent most of their time doing
''earthwork,'' leveling ridges, filling in valleys and laying down 10 inches of
asphalt for the runway. United States officials acknowledge that a company from
Fort Lauderdale, Fla., dredged and filled the bay under contract to the leftist
Government and that other American companies provided the asphalt for the runway
and designed the huge fuel storage tanks that the Reagan Administration has
often cited as evidence of military intentions.

Starting last summer, United States officials said, the firm of Morrison-
Knudsen of Boise, Idaho, which was part of a consortium that did much of the
government construction work in Vietnam, put down the final two inches of
asphalt on the runway and brought two of the six bays of the terminal to within
95 percent of completion.

A British Company, Plessey Airports Ltd., working on a $10 million contract,
supplied the wiring, finishing materials and furniture for the terminal. It also
built the power-generating plant and provided the air-conditioning. A Finnish
company installed the airfield lighting and set up fire and rescue equipment.
According to United States official, Canada is providing $7 million for
finishing some parts of the airport and for training in security, maintenance
and airport management.

The first commercial passenger plane to land, at 6:28 A.M., was a 48- seat,
twin-engine Leeward Islands Air Transport turboprop from Barbados with 30
passengers aboard.

The first passenger off the plane was Robert Francis, the chief of the
international division of the Federal Aviation Administration. He said four
American air traffic controllers were in the control tower working alongside
Grenadians in a training program.

The pilot, Trevor Neckles, a 38-year- old Grenadian, said the landing at Point
Saline was ''very different'' from landing at the old Grenada airport, where
''you had to fly into a mountain and then down into a valley to get into the
airport.''

Twenty other passenger planes landed, including four jets, one of them a Pan Am
flight from New York and another a charter from Frankfurt and London.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of women carrying signs

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SAVE FOR VIETNAM WAR, MONDALE BACKS RECORD

BYLINE: By DAVID E. ROSENBAUM

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2730 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 28


In 12 years as Senator and four as Vice President, Walter F. Mondale compiled a
record that forms the basis for his Presidential candidacy.

In his campaign, he has renounced his own record in public office on only one
matter, his long support of the Vietnam War, a stand he calls ''the worst
mistake of my entire career.''

But he has modified his positions to bring them more in line with the current
political and economic climate. He proposes none of the sweeping new social
legislation he regularly offered as a Senator, emphasizes the dangers of a
Federal budget deficit and advocates increased military spending.

Congressional Quarterly, an authoritative source of research on Congress,
characterized Mr. Mondale's Senate record as ''one of orthodox liberalism and
faith in Government activism.''

He Was an 'Appellate Court'

As Vice President, according to Finlay Lewis, author of ''Mondale,'' a
biography, Mr. Mondale was regarded by liberal White House staff members ''as an
appellate court just below the Oval Office, offering them their best hope of
ultimately reversing policies, particularly those involving domestic spending,
that conflicted with their agenda.''

But Mr. Mondale's liberalism has usually been tempered with political
pragmatism.

In the Senate, he supported the war in Vietnam as long as the man he calls his
mentor, Hubert H. Humphrey, was Vice President. Mr. Mondale rarely used his
position on the Finance Committee to challenge tax breaks for businesses, and he
invariably took the side of Minnesota farmers in legislative battles against
consumers. A word often used to describe him in those years was ''cautious.''

On only one issue, civil rights, did Mr. Mondale take politically risky stands.
He led the successful fight for open-housing legislation in 1968 when the
Johnson White House and most of his normal allies in Congress believed it to be
a lost cause. And he was perhaps the Senate's staunchest defender of busing as a
way to desegregate public schools despite strong opposition at home in
Minnesota.

Influential in the Role

By almost all accounts, Mr. Mondale as Vice President was more influential in
setting policy than anyone who had held the office. Periodically, he disagreed
with the policies President Carter adopted. For example, according to records of
the Carter Administration's internal deliberations, Mr. Mondale opposed the
grain embargo against the Soviet Union, a plan for mobile deployment of the MX
missile and a decision to sell Saudi Arabia equipment to enhance the offensive
ability of F-15 fighter planes.

In many such instances, Mr. Mondale stressed the domestic political implications
of foreign policy. Zbigniew Brzezinski, President Carter's national security
adviser, said Mr. Mondale's ''most important substantive contribution'' to the
Carter Administration ''was his political judgment.''

In any event, however strong his opposition inside the White House, in public,
Mr. Mondale always supported Administration stands. In his memoirs, ''Keeping
Faith,'' President Carter wrote of his Vice President, ''Whenever I made a final
decision, even when it was contrary to his own original recommendations, he gave
me his full support.''

Early in his Presidential campaign, Mr. Mondale said in an interview that his
record in public office was not nearly so important as the positions he now
espoused.

''I'm running on my policies for the future,'' he said then. ''I'm not running
on my Senate record. I'm not running on history. History is instructive. But I'm
running as a principal in my own right to be President, and it is on those
policies that I seek the support of the American people.''

What follows is an examination of Mr. Mondale's record in office and how it
compares with his positions in the campaign.

Economic Policy

Mr. Mondale's concern about the Federal deficit, the cornerstone of his campaign
against Mr. Reagan, was hardly in evidence during his years in the Senate and
the Vice Presidency.

In 1967, defending the Johnson Administration's war on poverty, he declared in a
speech to the Senate, ''The benefits and responsibilities of being an American
do not have a price tag on them.''

Arguing for higher pensions in another Senate speech that year, he said, ''Mr.
President, I am in favor of increased Social Security benefits at almost any
cost.''

A review of Mr. Mondale's Senate voting record on closely contested issues
turned up no instance in which he voted against creating a new social program or
enlarging an old one.

Opposed to Law on Budget

So far as can be determined, Mr. Mondale never expressed public concern about
budget deficits in his years in the Senate and the Vice Presidency. He opposed
then, as he does now, the idea of requiring the Government to have a balanced
budget, saying that sometimes deficits are needed to stimulate the national
economy.

The difference now, he has said in his campaign, is that the deficit under Mr.
Reagan has been so much higher than any the nation experienced in the past.

For a time, Mr. Mondale was the only Democratic Senator with seats on both the
Budget and Finance Committees, placing him in a position of unusual influence on
fiscal matters, but he rarely took a leading role on either committee.

When he won his seat on the Finance Committee, liberal tax reformers hoped he
would lead their battles against the panel's conservative chairman, Senator
Russell B. Long, Democrat of Louisiana. In many respects, Mr. Mondale proved to
be a disappointment to them.

He Sought Minimum Tax

He often denounced the tax system as one that allowed wealthy Americans to avoid
taxes through legal loopholes, and he argued strenuously for a minimum tax on
the rich regardless of their deductions. But when push came to shove on such
controversial issues as the 1975 drive to repeal the oil-depletion allowance,
Mr. Mondale did not go to the mat with Senator Long.

Mr. Mondale was more active in trying to reshape tax legislation to give greater
benefits to low-income and middle-income families, a position reflected in his
campaign promise for a tax increase that would be heavily weighted toward higher
taxes on the wealthy.

He lost a fight to change the anti-recession tax cut of 1974 in a way that would
have been of more help to the poor, but he succeeded two years later in blocking
an effort by Senator Long to reduce the maximum tax rate on investment income.
He regularly advocated tax credits rather than deductions, since credits affect
all taxpayers equally, while deductions carry greater benefit for those in
higher tax brackets.

On the Budget Committee, which sets spending priorities, Mr. Mondale regularly
advocated more money for social programs and less for the military.

Throughout his years in the Senate, he was known as an opponent of trade
restrictions, a position favored by his export-minded constituents in farming
and high technology industries. He was influential in obtaining legislation that
lifted some impediments to trade with Communist countries, and he voted against
measures to allow import quotas.

Pressure for U.S. Trade

In late 1974, he said on the Senate floor: ''Protectionism is no solution to the
economic problems we face. A highly industrialized country like the United
States would suffer greatly if the doors to international commerce were
closed.''

As a Presidential candidate, however, Mr. Mondale has advocated import quotas on
steel and has favored legislation requiring automobiles sold in the United
States to contain a specified percentage of parts made in this country. Those
measures are strongly supported by organized labor.

Last year, he promised the American Federation of Labor and Congress of
Industrial Organizations, ''I will match other countries' export subsidies
product-for-product and dollar-for-dollar.'' Mr. Mondale as Vice President was
instrumental in obtaining Government loans to the Chrysler Corporation to help
the company avert financial disaster, a position he used to his advantage in the
primary campaign this year. In 1971, however, he voted against a similar loan to
the Lockheed Corporation.

Social Policy

From the middle 1960's to the middle 1970's, no other Senator was more active
than Mr. Mondale in pressing for more programs and larger benefits for poor
people in general and children and the elderly in particular.

''There are so many human problems in the midst of our wealth that need a
country that cares and a Government that tries,'' he told Elizabeth Drew of The
New Yorker in 1973.

In recent days on the campaign stump, he has been emphasizing that view in
almost the same words.

Mr. Mondale was a co-sponsor of much of President Johnson's Great Society
legislation, including the law that created Medicare and Medicaid in 1965. He
was instrumental in obtaining higher food stamp, welfare, child care and
education benefits, creation of the Federal Legal Services Corporation and
establishment of Government social services for the poor.

In 1969, he held widely publicized hearings that exposed the plight of migrant
workers, and in 1973 and 1974, he organized similar hearings on the problems on
children.

Backed Nixon on Welfare

In 1970, he broke with many Democratic colleagues and supported President
Nixon's unsuccessful effort to revamp the nation's welfare system in a way to
eliminate much Government control and provide a guaranteed annual income to poor
families.

Presidents Nixon and Ford found some of Mr. Mondale's social proposals so
sweeping that they vetoed the measures, and other proposals died in Congress.

A 1971 measure to provide money for health care, nutrition, education and social
services for children was vetoed by Mr. Nixon, and a plan to apply strict
Federal standards to day-care centers was vetoed by Mr. Ford five years later.

Among proposals that were too broad even for the Democratic Congresses of the
day was one to require a ''family impact statement'' that would have forced the
Government ''to make a study of everything it does in light of what it does to
families.'' Another such proposal would have created a Council of Social
Advisers similar to the President's Council of Economic Advisers.

Uneasiness in Last Years

Accounts of Mr. Mondale's Vice Presidency say that he was most uncomfortable
with White House efforts in the last Carter years to limit Government spending
on social programs. He was said to have been actively involved in developing the
Administration's proposals to redesign the welfare system and limit hospital
costs, both of which failed, and to create the Department of Education, which
succeeded.

Some of Mr. Mondale's earlier positions, such as the proposal to require a
family impact statement, were a product of the times, and he does not bring them
up now. But in his Presidential campaign he has made no secret of his support
for a full range of Government social programs.

He promises to restore $30 billion in domestic program cuts made by President
Reagan and would recoup $8 billion of that by ''reducing the rate of increase by
about half for programs not selected for enhancement.'' He has not made clear
which cuts he would restore or where he would reduce increases by half. But
except in the area of education, where he proposes spending several billion
dollars to promote ''excellence,'' he has not offered new forms of social
programs.

Civil Rights

In the area of civil rights more than any other, Mr. Mondale took the lead away
from more timid liberal colleagues in the Senate. One accomplishment was his
leadership in a 1968 drive for Federal legislation to outlaw racial
discrimination in the sale and rental of housing.

Consideration of the measure came after the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. and during a summer of rioting in the nation's cities. Southern
senators conducted a filibuster and the Democratic leadership in the Senate
believed there was little chance of enactment. But Mr. Mondale persevered and
won the battle, a victory he later called a ''miracle.''

Two years later, he gained the chairmanship of a new, temporary Senate
committee, the Select Committee on Equal Educational Opportunity, and he used it
as a forum to press for school desegregation and against legislation to restrict
busing.

The Mondale committee, with a young staff, was the Congressional focal point for
civil rights forces in those days. Year after year, antibusing measures arose.
But no effective one was ever passed, in large part because of Mr. Mondale's
resistance.

''Busing,'' he told the Senate in one debate, ''is the means, and at times the
only means, by which segregation in public education can be reduced.''

Foreign Affairs

As a Senator, Mr. Mondale concentrated almost exclusively on domestic issues.
Once he turned against the war in Vietnam after the 1968 election, he voted with
the mainstream of liberal Democrats on foreign policy issues but rarely took a
leadership role.

His record shows several votes to limit the fighting and expenditures in
Southeast Asia and to reduce the number of American troops stationed in Europe
and elsewhere in the world.

Mr. Mondale was the Senate sponsor of two arms control measures in 1973, one
providing for an international conference and the other limiting the sale of
advanced weapon systems. He has tried to make the quest for arms control a
central element of his Presidential campaign.

As a member of the Senate Intelligence Committee, he supported restrictions on
the activities of American intelligence agencies and close Congressional
scrutiny of those agencies. Later, he was influential in persuading the Carter
Administration to drop plans to seek criminal penalties against people
responsible for disclosing secret documents.

He Got Access to Data

After his election to the Vice Presidency, Mr. Mondale became more active in
foreign policy. He was given unlimited access to confidential national security
material and apparently served as a key adviser to the President.

In his memoirs, President Carter wrote that Mr. Mondale ''objected strenuously''
to the grain embargo against the Soviet Union on the ground that it would cause
''injury to American farmers.''

In his campaign this year, Mr. Mondale has stressed his opposition to the
embargo, but in 1980, in the Democratic primary race in Iowa, he suggested that
Senator Edward M. Kennedy was being less than patriotic by not backing the
embargo.

On the Middle East, according to several accounts, Mr. Mondale expressed concern
inside the Carter Administration about what he viewed as a shift away from the
interests of Israel. The Israeli Prime Minister at the time, Menachem Begin,
gave Mr. Mondale public credit for being influential in obtaining the Camp David
accords in 1978.

Mr. Mondale was often at odds with Mr. Brzezinski, the national security
adviser. In an unflattering portrait of the Vice President, Mr. Brzezinski wrote
in his book, ''Power and Principle,'' that Mr. Mondale almost always thought of
foreign policy in terms of domestic political prospects.

Military Policy

In the Senate, Mr. Mondale often voted against expenditures for military
equipment and space exploration. In his campaign, he has proposed increasing
military spending, though not by so much as President Reagan, and has argued the
defense of the country cannot be assured merely by spending money for everything
the Pentagon wants.

Some of the weapons systems he now advocates, cruise missiles and Trident
submarines, for example, he opposed in the Senate. He says now that the
expenditures were premature when he voted against them in the Senate.

As Vice President, Mr. Mondale opposed the Carter Administration's imposition of
stand-by draft registration and objected to the plan to install MX missiles on a
track in Western states. Now, he wants to scrap the MX program altogether.

Mr. Carter wrote in his memoirs that Mr. Mondale led a ''near rebellion'' in the
White House on draft registration, arguing that it was an ''overreaction to the
Afghanistan invasion and politically damaging.''

Mr. Mondale now says he is in favor of retaining stand-by draft registration.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Mondale

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN IS ENDORSED BY SEVERAL PAPERS; MONDALE BY OTHERS



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 392 words


President Reagan won endorsements for re-election yesterday from The Daily News
of New York, The Miami Herald, The Chicago Tribune, The Hartford Courant, The
Omaha World- Herald, The Sunday Oklahoman in Oklahoma City and The Oregonian in
Portland.

Walter F. Mondale won the support of The New York Times, The Philadelphia
Inquirer, The Detroit Free Press, The Minneapolis Star and Tribune, The
Milwaukee Journal The St. Petersburg Times and The Washington Post, which
endorsed Mr. Mondale in today's issue.

The Daily News in New York said, ''By almost all standards, we are better off
than we were four years ago.''

''Reagan's vision of an industrious, decent America embodying traditional values
revived spirits bruised by years of discouragement over Vietnam, Watergate and
the Iran hostage crisis,'' The Omaha World-Herald said.

The San Francisco Examiner praised the economic recovery under Mr. Reagan's
''magnetic leadership.'' It criticized Mr. Reagan as ''wrong to allow the
placing of 'firecracker' mines in Nicaraguan harbors,'' but said his invasion
''rescued Grenada against the expansion of Eastern bloc totalitarianism.''

The Philadelphia Inquirer said Mr. Mondale's candidacy promised ''a celebration
of the pluralism, a nourishment of the dignity of all Americans on which the
greatness of the United States has been built - and which is suffering erosion
under Reagan's stewardship.''

The Post said it endorsed Mr. Mondale ''enthusiastically and without apology''
and called him ''unambiguously the better candidate.''

The Detroit Free Press said ''the Reagan prosperity is the prosperity of living
on borrowed money.''

Reagan Programs Endorsed

In endorsing Mr. Mondale, The Minneapolis Star and Tribune said: ''We hope that
Mondale if elected will match his wisdom with the willingness to continue sound
Reagan programs, especially in domestic affairs. We fear he might not.''

The Times said Mr. Reagan's domestic program was ''repugnant'' and his diplomacy
dangerous. Mr. Mondale ''most of all,'' The Times said, would bring to the White
House ''the will to control nuclear weapons.''

The Milwaukee Journal's endorsement praised Mr. Mondale's promises to bring down
the deficit by raising taxes, his social programs, his promise to protect the
environment and his call for stronger public education.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT BOSTON

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 28


The ''Mammoth.'' That is what The Boston Globe is called in a new novel about
Boston politics, ''A Saving Grace,'' by Ken Hartnett, a crusty former reporter
and editor for both The Globe and The Boston Herald.

''The 'Mammoth' was more than just a newspaper,'' Mr. Hartnett says. ''It was
also a social gyroscope that kept Boston from teetering into the wrong hands. It
had kept its leverage, despite the changing tides of population, by the prudent
exercise of power. The Irish could take control of City Hall; the Jews could
dominate the city's commerce; but the 'Mammoth' held the city's soul in its
grip.''

There is more than a whiff of novelistic license in Mr. Hartnett's description.
But in recent years The Globe has indeed emerged as a pre- eminent force in
Boston, particularly in politics.

''If you talk about the impact of metropolitan papers on their readers, I think
we are second to none,'' said Matthew V. Storin, the managing editor.

Two years ago, for instance, a single article by The Globe devastated the
campaign of John Lakian, a Republican candidate for Governor. The paper detailed
a series of exaggerations Mr. Lakian had made about his personal background. Mr.
Lakian has since sued The Globe for $100 million.

Conservatives Dislike It

Feeling against the generally liberal Globe among conservatives runs so strong
that Raymond Shamie, the Republican candidate for the Senate in this November's
election, recently said he was ''really running against two opponents, The
Boston Globe, which represents the establishment, and the opponent that's on the
ballot.''

Mr. Shamie has declined to give any interviews to The Globe, or even to answer
questions from Globe reporters at news conferences. This month he read a 15-page
statement denouncing The Globe for ''distortion'' and challenged the paper's
editor, Thomas Winship, to a debate. The Globe printed his statement in full.

Mr. Winship was in the news again last week when The Globe announced his
long-expected retirement on Jan. 1, 1985. He reaches the mandatory retirement
age of 65 next year. His successor will be Michael C. Janeway, an urbane,
articulate 44-year-old former executive editor of The Atlantic Monthly and
Sunday editor of The Globe.

Mr. Winship's departure marks the end of an era at The Globe. For the past 30
years the editor's chair at the paper has been occupied by a member of the
Winship family, first by Mr. Winship's father, Laurence L. Winship, now dead,
and since 1965 by Thomas Winship.

When he took over, The Globe was one of eight papers in Boston. It was trusted
but dull, with lackluster writing, and did not have the social cachet of The
Herald, the paper of the Yankee upper class.

Editor Is Revered in Newsroom

Mr. Winship, a man with a quick wit, a warm, generous manner and an abiding love
for politics, changed all that. Under his stewardship, The Globe hired a series
of talented writers, like Ellen Goodman, now a syndicated columnist, and Peter
Gammons, one of the premier baseball writers in America, who has helped make The
Globe sports pages a reader's delight. It also won 11 Pulitzer Prizes, the most
for any paper in that period except The New York Times.

Around The Globe's block-long newsroom, Mr. Winship is revered with deep
personal affection. ''That man gave me my job when I was 33 years old and had
only written 12 stories,'' recalled Robert Lenzer, now the paper's chief
business writer.

''He also backed me up when the heads of corporations in Boston came round to
try to get a story killed,'' Mr. Lenzer continued. ''He just smiled at them and
said to me, 'Be sure you get your facts straight.' ''

Paper Prospered Under Winship

Under Mr. Winship, The Globe has increased both the number of its news columns
and its advertising linage two and a half times, according to William O. Taylor,
the publisher. Despite a trend among other papers in the United States to cut
back on their number of foreign correspondents, in the past year The Globe has
also opened its first foreign bureaus, in London, Tokyo, Jerusalem and Central
America.

With these changes has come increased circulation. The daily paper has risen
from a readership of 380,000 when Mr. Winship took over in 1965 to 520,000,
while the Sunday paper has climbed to 793,000 from 440,000.

At the same time, all The Globe's competitors have dropped out of business
except The Herald, which has since been transmogrified into a tabloid and
acquired by Rupert Murdoch, the Australian publisher who owns The New York Post,
among other American properties.

Vietnam Coverage a 'High Point'

As The Globe became increasingly influential, Mr. Winship infused it with his
own activism and political liberalism. ''Probably our high point was covering
the Vietnam War,'' said Mr. Winship, sitting in his glass- walled corner office
in a pink buttondown shirt and a red bow tie.

Each week during the war The Globe ran a front page box recording the casualty
totals and the tonnage dropped by American warplanes, a reminder to its readers'
consciences.

''We did our job so well that when Nixon went to China, we were the only
qualified paper not to get a seat on his plane,'' Mr. Winship said.

But The Globe's viewpoint angered many working-class residents of areas like
South Boston, an antagonism that was exacerbated when The Globe strongly
supported a Federal court's order to desegregate the Boston schools in 1974. The
order set off a racial crisis.

''I have no regrets about defending the court's order,'' Mr. Winship said. ''But
I do have regrets that before it went into effect we didn't try to make it a
more practical plan.''

John O'Brien, a taxi driver, said it was busing that turned him against The
Globe. ''It's too liberal for me, always backing those social programs. I think
someone should go in there and shake up their editors.''

''They don't live in the same city I do,'' Mr. O'Brien asserted.

Occasional Criticism

There are other occasional criticisms against The Globe: that it can be too
quirky, perhaps reflecting Mr. Winship's personality, that it has too many
columnists and that it does not do a good job of covering the major intellectual
institutions in its territory like Harvard University and the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology. ''They cover Harvard like some town government, missing
all the fascination of ideas,'' said Steven Pearlstein, the publisher of The
Boston Observer, a monthly review.

Despite Mr. Winship's impending departure, his family's ties to the paper will
continue through his wife, Elizabeth, who writes an advice column for teen-agers
titled ''Ask Beth.'' It is the best-read feature in The Globe.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Thomas Winship and Michael Janeway

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 878 words


MONDAY, OCTOBER 29, 1984 International

A cut in oil production by all 13 members of the Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries was recommended by the group's oil markets committee to prop
up sagging prices. The key committee also urged the group to address some basic
problems in its oil price structure. But the proposals, to be be considered in
an emergency OPEC meeting in Geneva today, were dealt a setback when Nigeria
refused to cut its oil production or raise its discounted price. (Page A1,
Column 6.)

An economic crisis in Israel has come to preoccupy the nation more than any
immediate military threat for the first time since its founding in 1948. The
crisis, economists say, arises not only from military burdens but also from the
structure of Israel's political system, the economic restraints of Zionism, and
years of living beyond the nation's means. (A1:2-3.)

Terrorists fired an antitank rocket at a crowded Arab bus in central Jerusalem,
killing one Arab youth and wounding 10 other passengers. The Jerusalem police
chief said the attack may have been carried out by Jews seeking revenge for the
killing last week of two Jewish students in the West Bank. Three men, all Jews,
were being held for questioning, but no arrests were made. (A4:3-6.)

An outdoor mass in Warsaw was held for a pro-Solidarity priest who the Interior
Ministry said was kidnapped and possibly killed by three ministry officers.
Church officials said 50,000 people attended the mass for the priest, the Rev.
Jerzy Popieluszko, and Lech Walesa, the Solidarity founder, urged calm.
(A3:1-3.)

A spectator may have saved Pope

 John Paul II in 1981 by shoving the arm of the Turkish gunman convicted of
shooting him, according to Judge Ilario Marella, who investigated the purported
plot to assassinate the Pope. (A3:4-6.)

India's untouchables no longer bow

 automatically to the will of those above them on the Hindu social ladder. In
India's lush Ganges plain and other parts of the country they are refusing to do
the bidding of the Brahmans and there is tension and frequent violence.
(A2:3-6.)

Peru was accused of ''fighting terror with terror'' by Americas Watch, a human
rights group, in its effort to combat a guerrilla movement that has been active
since 1980 in Indian villages surrounding Peru's Ayacucho region. (A5:1.)
National

Voter registration drives added millions of new names to election rolls this
year, according to election officials. As a result, a steady 20-year decline in
the percentage of eligible voters who turn out for Presidential elections may be
reversed. (A1:4.)

Walter F. Mondale's record from 12 years as a senator and four as Vice President
forms the basis for his Presidential candidacy, an examination of his record
shows. In his campaign, he has renounced only one part of his record, his
support of the Vietnam War, though he has modified other positions. (A18:1-2.)

A wave of gang killings is sweeping Los Angeles after several years of declining
gang violence, and officials say it is tied to narcotics trafficking. Since Oct.
12, 12 people have been killed in incidents the police suspect are gang-related
and there are now an estimated 40,000 youths who claim affiliation with 420
gangs in Los Angeles County. (A1:1-2.)

Interest in foreign languages is reawakening in the nation's schools and
colleges, paving the way for what educators hope will be a breakthrough in the
resistance to learning a second language. Colleges are reinstituting language
requirements abandoned in the late 1960's and high schools are finding it easier
to prod students into foreign language courses. (A1:3-5.)

After receiving a baboon's heart, a 16- day-old infant known only as Baby Fae
remained in critical but stable condition at Loma Linda University Medical
Center in California. Doctors said she was ''doing remarkably well.''
Nevertheless, Dr. Leonard L. Bailey, the pediatric surgeon who performed the
five-hour operation, said, ''She may be in for a very long battle in the weeks
ahead.'' (A15:1-4.) Metropolitan

Orlando Pizzolato of Italy won the New York City Marathon in 2 hours 14 minutes
53 seconds, ignoring the need for a more realistic pace to cope with intense
heat and humidity and overcoming stomach and leg pain that forced him to stop
eight times. Grete Waitz of Norway became the women's champion for the sixth
year in 2:29:30. Each won $25,000 plus a Mercedes-Benz automobile valued at
$22,000. (A1:1.)

A magnetic fare-card system in New York City's subways that could be installed
over the next four years is being sought by the chairman of the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority. The chairman, Robert R. Kiley, said he would ask the
M.T.A.'s board of directors to approve a $40.8 million plan before the year's
end. (A1:5.)

A $12.3 million city effort to reduce the size of first-grade classes in the New
York City public school system to an average of 25 pupils this fall has
succeeded in only a handful of school districts, according to teachers and
administrators. Those districts that met the goal did so at the expense of other
programs, they said. (A1:6.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 29, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NBC NEWS PLANNING VISIT TO VIETNAM

BYLINE: By SALLY BEDELL SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 856 words


Buoyed by the recognition it achieved for a series of programs from Moscow last
month, NBC News has begun discussions with Vietnamese officials about
originating some of its broadcasts from Vietnam for a week next April in
conjunction with the 10th anniversary of the American withdrawal from Vietnam
and the fall of Saigon to Communist forces.

If all goes according to plan, there would be a weeklong visit by the ''Today''
show to Vietnam, as well as a news special, reports on the ''NBC Nightly News''
and ''NBC News at Sunrise,'' and a special installment of ''Meet the Press.''

''There is no question we are exploring constructing a week of programs around
the anniversary'' said Lawrence K. Grossman, president of NBC News. ''We are
working on it as one of our full-court press efforts.''


New Role on 'Cover Up' After Death of Actor

CBS has at last resolved the dilemma it has faced since the death a week ago of
Jon-Erik Hexum, one of the stars of the new prime-time adventure series, ''Cover
Up.'' Mr. Hexum died after accidentally shooting himself in the head while
toying with a gun loaded with blanks.

The series stopped production immediately. But the network still had to
determine how it would replace Mr. Hexum's character on the series, which has
been doing moderately well in the audience ratings on Saturday nights at 10 P.M.

CBS first determined that a new character would be introduced with a different
name but similar role. Like Mr. Hexum, he would be a male model who poses for an
internationally acclaimed photographer, played by Jennifer O'Neill. Together,
the model and photographer work for a United States Government agency helping
American citizens who are in distress overseas.

But the question remained as to what sort of actor would play the part.

''I felt uncomfortable when the first group who came in were very similar to him
in appearance,'' said Harvey Shephard, senior vice president of programs for CBS
Entertainment, describing the audition process.

It was then that Mr. Shephard decided ''we had to come in with someone unique.''

''The audience had responded very well to Jon-Erik Hexum, but we knew they would
never go for an imitation,'' he said.

Instead, CBS chose Antony Hamilton, a model turned actor who appeared last year
in the television movie, ''Samson and Delilah'' on ABC. ''He is from Australia,
is very rugged and has his own personality, all of which will bring a uniqueness
to the property,'' said Mr. Shephard.

The first episode with Mr. Hamilton will appear on Nov. 24.


'AfterMASH' Is Dropped; 'Too Much Heavy Drama'

CBS has made some other decisions about its prime-time schedule in the past week
as well. Although the network has been first in the ratings for three out of the
four weeks of the fall television season, it has already dropped two shows,
''AfterMASH'' and ''Dreams'' and rescheduled two others. Starting on Nov. 7,
''Charles in Charge'' and ''E/R'' will run from 8 to 9 P.M. on Wednesdays.
Tuesday evening, where they now appear, will be used for holiday specials
through December.

''AfterMASH,'' a sequel to the long- running comedy favorite, ''M*A*S*H,'' had
started out with high ratings last fall, but steadily declined over the past
year. Mr. Shephard said he felt the show suffered from a ''tendency toward too
much heavy drama.''

''We had some of the people from ''M*A*S*H,'' but we were obviously missing a
key element,'' he said. ''The balance between comedy and drama on ''M*A*S*H''
was extraordinary.''

Even a last-ditch effort to inject some ''M*A*S*H''-style zaniness into the
character of Max Klinger failed to work. During the first several years of
''M*A*S*H'' the character, played by Jamie Farr, wore women's dresses in a
futile attempt to get discharged from the service. For ''AfterMASH'' he married
a Korean woman and worked in a veteran's hospital.

In an effort to make the show funnier, the Klinger character began to dress like
a woman again - this time to evade the police. But the gimmick came too late,
according to Mr. Shephard. ''Too many viewers who had been fans were
dissatisfied with the show,'' he said. ''The damage was done. We couldn't get
them back.''


NBC Stands Pat for Now With Its Fall Schedule

With CBS's recent prime-time shifts and similar moves by ABC three weeks ago,
NBC remains the only network standing pat with its fall schedule. NBC has
surprised industry analysts with the popularity of its shows this season,
sending ABC into an unaccustomed spot in third place.

Brandon Tartikoff, president of NBC Entertainment, said changes in the Saturday
night schedule could come this week if the ratings he receives today for the
most recent telecast of NBC's two new Saturday evening programs - ''Partners in
Crime'' and ''Hot Pursuit'' - don't improve.

Mr. Tartikoff, who last year had to cancel all nine of his network's new shows,
has shed the gloom that usually surrounds him at this time of year. ''Our
schedule is working so much in so many other places,'' he said. ''I have become
enough of an optimist to think the ratings will go up even on Saturday night.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A. MANUAL: A POLICY IS UNDERMINED

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1027 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 29


A controversy over the Central Intelligence Agency's manual for Nicaraguan
rebels has focused on the issue of political assassinations. But what has been
largely overlooked is that the dispute has also drawn the Administration - and
by implication, President Reagan - into endorsing a campaign to overthrow the
Nicaraguan Government.

For more than two years the Administration's objectives in Nicaragua have been a
point of major debate with Congress, with critics contending that the President
was bent on doing away with the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua, and the
Administration saying publicly that its goals were more limited.

Both Democrats and Republicans assert that the manual sheds new light on the
Administration's real goals.

The President has said the manual was written by a C.I.A. contract employee and
reviewed by C.I.A. officials here and in Central America ''before being
printed.'' On Sunday, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said the manual was drawn
from material used in the training of United States Special Forces during the
Vietnam War. The New York Democrat, who is deputy chairman of the Senate Select
Committee on Intelligence, said the manual included ''word for word'' passages
from guerrilla warfare instructions developed by the Army in 1968.

In his debate with Walter F. Mondale eight days ago, President Reagan said he
objected to passages in the manual that advocate and give advice about political
assassinations. He said that this violated an executive order he issued in 1981
and that, after an internal C.I.A. investigation, the people responsible would
be removed.

Manual's Basic Message


But the President raised no objections during the debate - and has not since
then - to the basic message of the manual, which describes guerrilla war as a
form of political war that in Nicaragua is intended to spread throughout the
population to foment open revolution to overthrow the ''Sandinista structure.''

The manual contains several sections setting out techniques and objectives for
the Nicaraguan Democratic Front, a group backed by the C.I.A. In the published
version of the manual available here, there are several assertions such as
these:

''When the infiltration and internal subjective control have been developed in a
manner parallel to other guerrilla activities, a commandante of ours will
literally be able to shake up the Sandinista structure, and replace it.''

''The mass assemblies and meetings are the culmination of a wide base support
among the population and it comes about in the later phases of the operation.
This is the moment in which the overthrow can be achieved and our revolution can
become an open one, requiring the close collaboration of the entire population
of the country.''

President Reagan, by reporting that the manual had been reviewed and edited to
delete objectionable passages, first by the C.I.A. ''man in charge'' in Central
America and then by C.I.A. headquarters in Washington, indicated that the
published version had official approval.

Some critics read Mr. Reagan's remarks as his own implied endorsement of most of
the manual, but White House officials said he had not seen it.

Comments From Both Parties


''It's significant that the President is confirming what the critics of his
policy have been saying all along, that his policy is to get rid of the
Sandinistas,'' said Representative Michael D. Barnes, Democrat of Maryland and
chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere
Affairs.

Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr., a Maryland Republican and a senior member of
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, agreed, saying, ''If what we are reading
here is the finished product and our Government has approved it, the policy
implied is the overthrow of an established Government.''

White House officials decline to talk for the record. But privately, they report
that President Reagan has still not seen the manual. One senior official said
that ''we'll be at a loss on any fine points,'' such as the policy implications
of the manual, until the C.I.A.'s internal investigation is completed.

For the last two years President Reagan has expressed strong moral support for
Nicaraguan ''freedom fighters'' and asserted his desire to see democratic
changes in Nicaragua. But he has denied backing a revolutionary overthrow of the
Sandinista Government.

For example, addressing Congress on April 27, 1983, Mr. Reagan said, ''Our
purpose, in conformity with American and international law, is to prevent the
flow of arms to El Salvador, Honduras, Guatemala and Costa Rica.'' But referring
to the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua, he said, ''We do not seek its
overthrow.''

What Congress Authorized


Congress originally authorized the C.I.A. to have Nicaraguan rebel groups try to
check the arms flow from Nicaragua to leftist guerrillas in El Salvador. But
rebel operations spread to include raids against Nicaraguan oil installations
and tobacco farms and eventually to the mining of Nicaraguan ports and harbors,
and critics in Congress said the C.I.A. was pursuing broader aims.

In late 1982, the House of Representatives, led by Representative Edward P.
Boland, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the intelligence committee,
enacted a ban on the use of American money to overthrow the Sandinistas. The
Senate followed suit.

In September 1983, the Administration won Senate backing for a somewhat broader
mission to allow the C.I.A. to support both interdiction of the Nicaraguan arms
flow and rebel harassment of the Nicaraguan Government to get it to stop
exporting revolution.

With some political embarrassment for the Administration, Nicaraguan rebel
leaders have said publicly that their goal is a revolution to oust the
Sandinistas. In response, Administration officials have said that Washington
could not control rebel statements and maintained that American objectives were
different. But now, members of both parties in Congress contend that the
guerrilla manual has undercut President Reagan's ability to maintain that
distinction.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

MASSACHUSETTS SENATE RACE NARROWS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Oct. 29


In an acrimonious fight for the Senate, Raymond Shamie, a conservative
millionaire businessman who has wrapped himself in the mantle of President
Reagan's policies and popularity, appears close to overtaking Lieut. Gov. John
F. Kerry, a liberal Democrat.

Although registered Democrats outnumber Republicans in Massachusetts by 4 to 1,
Mr. Shamie appears to have made deep inroads among working-class Roman Catholic
voters, the backbone of the Democratic Party here, by echoing the President. Mr.
Shamie's message has been simple, pledging to oppose tax increases and abortion,
and calling for a stronger national defense.

Both President Reagan and Walter F. Mondale, the Democratic nominee, will
campaign in Boston later this week, and with the Senate race so close, their
visits could have a critical impact on the outcome, aides to the Senate
candidates say.

The latest public opinion poll, released Saturday by The Boston Globe, showed
Mr. Kerry running ahead of his Republican challenger, 50 percent to 40 percent,
with 10 percent undecided. But the race may be closer than that, because the
poll also found that among the more likely voters Mr. Kerry led by only four
percentage points, 48 percent to 44 percent.

Primary Showed Shamie's Appeal


Mr. Shamie demonstrated his appeal in the Republican primary last month by
winning 62 percent of the vote against Elliot L. Richardson, the former United
States Attorney General.

The general election campaign has been bitter, with Mr. Shamie repeatedly
accusing Mr. Kerry of lying and Mr. Kerry attacking Mr. Shamie for being vague
and not answering questions in debates. Mr. Shamie has also asserted repeatedly
that Mr. Kerry would vote to raise taxes, an assertion Mr. Kerry has denied.

An uncertain factor is how much Mr. Shamie, 63 years old, the chairman of a
high-technology company, has been hurt by disclosures about his past association
with the John Birch Society and persistent questions about his efforts to
indoctrinate his employees with his conservative ideology through the
distribution of literature.

Todd Domke, Mr. Shamie's campaign manager, said in an interview that the reports
about his candidate's ties to the John Birch Society were ''left-wing
McCarthyism, the old guilt by association smear tactics.''

Questions Have Intensified

But the questions intensified after Mr. Shamie defended the John Birch Society
as ''decent people from the mainstream of America.''

''That is an insight into Ray's thinking,'' said Mr. Kerry, 40 years old, a
graduate of Yale University. ''If you know they've called Dwight Eisenhower a
member of the Communist conspiracy, you can't say they are part of mainstream
America.''

Mr. Shamie also came under criticism last week at a meeting with a Jewish group
in Sharon, the Boston suburb where his company, the Metal Bellows Corporation,
has its headquarters.

Members of the audience pointed out that the Anti-Defamation League of B'nai
B'rith had denounced the John Birch Society for being anti-Semitic and quizzed
Mr. Shamie on why he distributed copies of Spotlight, a publication of the
right-wing Liberty Lobby, to his employees. The Anti-Defamation League contends
that the Liberty Lobby is one of the most anti-Semitic organizations in the
country.

''You have a responsibility to know what the John Birch Society is all about,''
a woman in the audience said angrily. ''You said they are decent good citizens,
nice people. I don't think they are nice people.''

Heavy Spending by Shamie

John Marttila, a political consultant and adviser to Mr. Kerry contended that
Mr. Shamie was benefiting from two factors: President Reagan's popularity, and
the large sums Mr. Shamie has spent on the campaign.

The Globe poll last week showed that Massachusetts voters preferred Mr. Reagan
to Mr. Mondale, 53 percent to 41 percent, with 6 percent undecided.

So far, Mr. Shamie has spent $935,979 of his own money on the campaign,
according to reports filed with the Federal Election Commission. In 1982, when
Mr. Shamie ran unsuccessfully against Senator Edward M. Kennedy, he spent $1.3
million of his own money.

The most heated moment of the campaign this year came when John McManus, a
spokesman for the John Birch Society, and Maj. Gen. George S. Patton Jr.,
retired, the chairman of a Veterans for Shamie group, charged that Mr. Kerry was
a Communist sympathizer guilty of ''near-treasonous activity'' in the Vietnam
War.

Mr. Kerry, who commanded a Navy patrol boat in the Mekong Delta, was awarded a
Silver Star, the Bronze Star and three Purple Hearts for wounds. But he later
turned against the war and organized the Vietnam Veterans Against the War.

Two Runs for Congress

Searching for a political post, Mr. Kerry ran unsuccessfully for Congress in
1970 and 1972, finally becoming an Assistant District Attorney, and then winning
election to lieutenant governor in 1982.

Mr. Shamie, whose father was a Brooklyn truck driver, dropped out of college
after two years to go to work in a factory. In 1955 he started his own company
to make metal bellows, a device made of tiny pieces of welded metal that is used
in nuclear plants and the space shuttle.

According to his aide, Mr. Domke, Mr. Shamie first got interested in politics in
the early 1970's because of his distress at what he considered the radicalism of
American students. He has said he attended a John Birch Society meeting in 1974
and invited an official of the group to address some business colleagues in
1975.

Mr. Shamie later set up what Mr. Domke termed an ''economic education program''
in his factory that sponsored conservative speakers and distributed right-wing
literature, former employees say. He established a political action committee,
to which his employees could contribute through a payroll deduction plan. It has
given money to conservative candidates such as Senator Jesse Helms of North
Carolina.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Race for Congress; A series of articles on selected 1984 contests

CORRECTION-DATE: November 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
 Dispatches from Boston on Sept. 20 and Oct. 30 about the Massachusetts Senate
campaign misstated the role of John F. Kerry, now a Senator- elect, in Vietnam
Veterans Against the War. He was a leader and spokesman of the organization in
the early 1970's, but he was not a founder. The group was formed in 1967.

GRAPHIC: photo of Lieut. Gov. John Kerry and Raymond Shamie

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE VIETNAM WAR COMES HOME AGAIN, IN BRONZE



BYLINE:
By BARBARA GAMAREKIAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1125 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 29


The three bronze figures, dressed in the gear of the combat soldier, gaze
intently ahead. Their eyes are wary and shadowed. What is it they see? What are
they searching for?

The three figures comprise a military statue that has been added to the site of
the Vietnam Memorial, the simple polished black granite wall engraved with the
names of Americans killed in that war. The statue will be unveiled Nov. 9 and
dedicated Nov. 11, Veterans Day, when more than 300,000 veterans of all wars are
expected here for a round of ceremonies.

The statue was being placed today, along with the United States flag, in a sort
of vestibule entryway to the memorial about 100 feet away. The soldiers are
stepping out of a grove of trees looking in the direction of the wall and its
sea of names.

'As a Kind of a Vision'


''It's as if they had come unexpectedly upon the wall as a kind of a vision, or
a metaphor for the war itself - a brooding, unknowing, unknowable, tragic
presence,'' said Frederick Hart, the Washington sculptor who was commissioned to
execute the statue. ''One marine who saw the model wrote me: 'They are searching
for their own names.' ''

As if also serving as a metaphor for the unpopular war, controversy has
surrounded the Vietnam Memorial from its inception. And it gives no sign of
letting up with the addition of Mr. Hart's statue, which he says has been
criticized as too militaristic and not militaristic enough.

The black wall that is the Vietnam Memorial was designed by Maya Ying Lin, whose
plan won out over those of 1,400 other competitors in 1981. Those other
competitors, incidentally, included Mr. Hart, who was said to be the highest
ranking figurative sculptor in the group.

Some veterans and other critics of Miss Lin's design called the wall ''a black
gash of shame and sorrow'' and said it failed to commemorate the patriotism and
heroic quality of the Vietnam veterans.

At the Vertex of the Wall


When it was decided in 1982, after much more controversy, to add a military
sculpture to the memorial, these same critics favored a plan that would place
the statue and flag at the vertex of the V-shaped wall.

Mr. Hart, having been chosen to create the sculpture, disagreed with that
suggestion.

He said that when he sat down to work on this new project, his main problem was
the stylistic inconsistency between the realistic figures that emerged from his
drawing board and the more allegorical black wall designed by Miss Lin.

''My solution was to put the figures completely away from the wall, to preserve
the autonomy and integrity of that simple, clean design,'' he said, adding that
he had also tried to keep the figures small so as not to compete with the wall
in any sense.

''But that created a problem, too,'' he said. ''You didn't want to create two
memorials as such. You wanted something that was integrated, that had unity with
the wall. My solution was to have the figures looking on the wall.''

The Men in Combat


One of the seven-foot-tall figures is a black, one is fair-haired, and the third
has facial features that Mr. Hart explains as ''ethnic features in a sense - he
could be Jewish, Lebanese, Indian.''

The men are ''about the age of 19,'' Mr. Hart said, ''the average age of the
Vietnam soldier. I tried to portray that intimacy and interdependence and mutual
love that men in combat share for each other, sort of a loose physical contact,
a sense that they are about to whisper to each other about something they see.''

Frederick Hart, called Rick by his friends, is best known in Washington as the
sculptor who, at age 29, was commissioned to create the three huge relief
sculptures carved in limestone inside the portal arches above the doors of the
National Catheral's west front as well as the three biblical figures of Adam,
Paul and Peter that rest on the columns that divide the doorways.

It was a 10-year job and Mr. Hart is still working on one section that he says
''is not quite right.''

He Fell in Love With Rock


It was politics that brought Mr. Hart from Atlanta to Washington at the age of 8
when his father, F. William Hart, became press secretary to Senator Estes
Kefauver, Democrat of Tennessee, in his 1952 Presidential bid.

After graduating from the University of South Carolina and American University
here, Rick Hart apprenticed for three years as a stone carver at the National
Cathedral, where he fell in love with rock.

He entered the competition for the west front sculptures, embodying the theme of
''the creation,'' when he discovered, he said, that cathedral officials were
thinking of creation ''not as a fundamentalist concept, but as an unfolding
universe.''

When his model of the statue for the Vietnam Memorial was unveiled to the
public, it was criticized by architectual purists who wanted the memorial left
untouched and by those who cried out for a more heroic work.

In retrospect, Mr. Hart says, he thinks he was a bit naive about what he would
be able to accomplish.

''I thought my solution was successful enough that people who were opposed to
doing something militaristic and a neo-Iwo Jima kind of thing would be happy
because this sculpture was so humanistically oriented,'' he said. ''On the other
hand, I thought people of the more conservative persuasion would be happy to
have something that represented the true experience of the military - that gave
proper credit to the grunts.

'Nobody Was Happy'


''But just the opposite happened - nobody was happy,'' he said. ''The right wing
didn't like the ambivalence that comes across in this, and the left wing had
pretty much settled into treating it as if it were an Iwo Jima thing even if it
wasn't. People were dug into their positions before I got into the issue, so
they just continued to throw rocks.''

But the final test, he feels, will come when people view the two elements in
place.

''My long vision was never thinking of the sculpture solely as a thing by
itself,'' he said. ''I was trying to create an interactive event between two
inanimate elements that are echoing and resonating back and forth. The wall is
one event and the sculpture is one event, but the two of them together is yet
another matter. What kind of an effect will you get? What kind of interaction?''

He paused, then added: ''If you can image three little figures on a seashore
looking out to the ocean - in the scale of that relationship they are very
vulnerable. This is a similar thing to me. The wall is like a sea of tragedy and
these three figures are there confronting it, but it doesn't make them beaten.
By their very fragility, their interdependence, they have a heroicism that I
think truly did exist among Vietnam veterans.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A dispatch on the Washington Talk page Oct. 30 about the addition of a statue to
the site of the Vietnam Memorial incompletely described the memorial's black
granite wall. It lists Americans missing in action as well as those killed.

GRAPHIC: photo of statue

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

POINT, COUNTERPOINT AND NEEDLEPOINT IN ROOM 318

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 860 words


Katherine Stevens Van Deusen Westmoreland - ''Kitsy'' to her friends - is
certain she will finish the evening bag she is needlepointing before the trial
her husband brought against CBS is over.

Every day since the trial began Oct. 9, Mrs. Westmoreland, stitching away with
threads of gold and silver more glittering than her own bright blonde hair, has
been the centerpiece of the ''regulars'' who frequent the chamber on the third
floor of the United States Court House at Foley Square.

The $120 million libel suit Gen. William C. Westmoreland brought against CBS is
playing to a packed house walled in banker's gray marble and sallow wood carved
with pilasters, medallions and swags, with tall windows on two sides. The law
buffs among the spectators, scribbling notes and kibitzing the performances, are
calling it ''the most important libel and First Amendment case in 20 years.''

The general's lady, a woman of Wagnerian good looks with strong, dramatic
features, is formidable but friendly. ''I'm not supposed to say a single word,''
Mrs. Westmoreland confided the other day to a spectator sitting beside her.
Then, when Judge Pierre N. Leval stepped up to the bench after a recess, she
whispered, ''He's so cute.'' When the jury members filed to their places she
said, ''I'm sorry for them. It's so complicated.''

At one point, a young man came up to her and said, ''If I were your husband, I'd
be fighting mad.'' Mrs. Westmoreland hesitated, obviously loath to discuss any
aspect of the trial. Finally she replied, smilingly, ''He is.''

Swaps Names of Restaurants


From her seat on the center aisle, she swaps the names of restaurants in nearby
Chinatown and Little Italy with reporters covering the trial. She was
particularly delighted when one reporter told her about a Vietnamese restaurant
just behind the Criminal Courts building. She also chitchats with the other
wives ranged along the third row left. The regulars there now call it ''Family
Row.''

Careers and reputations may be in the balance on opposing sides, and lawyers and
witnesses occasionally appear tense, but relaxed politeness seems to reign on
Family Row. Some of the coziest bantering occurs between Mrs. Westmoreland and
Susan Lyne, the wife of George Crile, the producer of the 1982 CBS documentary
that General Westmoreland contends libeled him and one of the major defendants.

Miss Lyne, who kept her maiden name and who runs a film production company,
envies Mrs. Westmoreland's freedom to come to the trial every day. ''I can only
sneak away from work a couple of times a week,'' she said. ''It's fascinating.''

Along with Family Row at the Westmoreland-CBS trial there are the regulars who
show up on what has come to be called ''Woodpecker Row.'' This is the nickname
given the group of artists who jam the first bench on the right of the center
aisle. Their heads are constantly jerking up, down and forward as they sketch
the witnesses and lawyers in colored chalks for television stations and
newspapers.

Pastels and Opera Glasses


They are equipped not only with their boxes of pastels, but also opera glasses.
These are sometimes affixed to the tops of their spectacles, to get greater
detail on the witnesses who face them across the courtroom.

The back rows in the courtroom are usually packed with spectators who tend to
run to young lawyers and law clerks, people looking for a warm place to rest,
one elderly gentleman with catarrh and another who snores. Among the retirees is
Milton Feibusch, who said the trial had saved him from a terminal case of
boredom since he retired from his job as a fabric supplier to the menswear
trade.

''It's better than sitting in a movie,'' Mr. Feibusch said. ''It's the best show
in town.''

Mr. Feibusch's legal mentor is Jerome Maryon, who took the bar exams last summer
and is awaiting the results. The two sit together every day while Mr. Maryon
explains the fine points of the case sotto voce to Mr. Feibusch. He has written
more than 70 pages of notes on his lined yellow pad.

'Idiot Work' in Courtroom 318


Meantime, the diamond ring on Mrs. Westmoreland's right hand flashes under the
bright lights as she stitches on and on and the days and weeks go by in
Courtroom 318. She calls her needlepoint her ''idiot work.'' From time to time,
she puts it away to concentrate on testimony.

During one break, the general's wife, an ''Army brat'' herself, said: ''I met
Wes when I was 9 years old, in 1936. My father was executive officer at Fort
Sill, Oklahoma, and it was Wes's first assignment after graduating from West
Point. We were married 11 years later.''

One observer said that Mrs. Westmoreland was ''timorous'' during the early days
of the trial, approached the railing that separates spectators and protagonists
hesitatingly and spoke across it to her husband during recesses ''as if there
were a glass wall between them.''

She explained the other day that the atmosphere had awed her at first. ''This is
the first time I've ever been in a courtroom,'' she said. ''I'm glad I've got my
needlepoint to do. You see, I'm not a sitter.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM AIDE SAYS POLITICS CAME UP AT TALKS ON ENEMY STRENGTH

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1341 words


Under relentless cross-examination, a witness for Gen. William C. Westmoreland
in his libel suit against CBS testified yesterday that political and public
relations concerns had been injected into a high-level 1967 discussion on enemy
troop strength in South Vietnam.

But the witness, Brig. Gen. George A. Godding, denied that these concerns had
influenced his presentation of figures on enemy troop strength as General
Westmoreland's chief delegate to a conference that year at Central Intelligence
Agency headquarters in Langley, Va.

David Boies, the CBS attorney - drenched with sweat as he pressed his
interrogation - elicited further acknowledgements from General Godding:


- That contrary to General Westmoreland's decision, he believed that Vietcong
self-defense and secret self- defense forces should have been counted and their
numbers made known to American troops.


- That while those forces were no longer counted ''when they were alive,'' they
were sometimes numbered among enemy casualties, thus reducing the size of the
enemy in official statistics.


- That wide distribution was given a 1967 report that said the enemy was losing
more forces than it could replace.

Rapid Cross-Examination


Typical of Mr. Boies's rapid-fire cross-examination, which was tougher than at
any time previously during the trial, was an exchange that followed General
Godding's admission that he did not know how many of the enemy's self-defense
and secret self-defense forces were armed.

Q. Do you know approximately?

A. Somewhere around 10 percent.

Q. Is that based on any study you have ever seen, sir?

A. No.

Q. Have you ever talked to anyone who told you that?

A. No. But in combat, in a similar situation, very few of the old men, women and
children were armed and I went through the European war.

Q. Are you saying that you are basing your answer on what you saw in the
European war, sir?

A. That is one I am drawing on, yes.

Q. Was the European war a guerrilla conflict, sir?

A. It was not.

But General Godding, who was director of intelligence production in Vietnam for
seven months in 1967, likened the Vietcong self-defense forces to elements of
the German home guard.

'Made Aware' of Concerns


On the stand in Federal District Court in Manhattan, General Godding testified
that political concerns should not have been an element of official discussions
of the size and capabilities of the enemy. But he said that while serving as
General Westmoreland's chief delegate to the August 1967 conference at the
C.I.A. headquarters in Virginia, he was ''made aware'' of those concerns by his
superiors.

The 1982 CBS Reports documentary that led to General Westmoreland's $120 million
libel suit maintained that the military command in Saigon had imposed an
arbitrary ceiling of 300,000 on enemy strength in 1967 to give the appearance
that the United States was winning the war.

Between May and August 1967, the official military listing known as the order of
battle carried enemy strength at a total of 297,000: 120,400 regular North
Vietnamese and Vietcong troops; 24,800 administrative personnel; 39,000
political cadre, and 112,800 irregulars - including about 70,000 self-defense
and secret self-defense forces who planted mines, set booby traps and served as
''fifth columnists.''

In May, however, General Westmoreland's chief of intelligence, Maj. Gen. Joseph
A. McChristian, had concluded that the political cadre, the guerrillas and the
self-defense and secret self-defense forces had been heavily underestimated. The
self-defense and secret self-defense forces alone, he said before his departure
from Vietnam in June 1967, were in the neighborhood of 117,000.

C.I.A. Sought Estimate


Around this time, the C.I.A. decided to prepare for President Johnson a special
national intelligence estimate on enemy strength, which would also affect the
figure in the order of battle. And the August meeting attended by General
Godding was intended to set a figure on which the C.I.A., General Westmoreland's
command, and other intelligence agencies could agree.

But a dispute arose because General Westmoreland wanted to eliminate from the
order of battle a figure for self-defense and secret self-defense forces - he
said they lacked offensive combat capability - and some C.I.A. officials wanted
to include an even higher figure for them than General McChristian had arrived
at. Moreover, the C.I.A. wanted to include in the total as many as 90,000
political cadre, while General Westmoreland wanted that category enumerated but
not continued as part of the order of battle total.

At the Langley conference, which did not resolve the dispute, the total advanced
by General Godding was 298,000, perhaps 200,000 less than the total sought then
by the C.I.A.

Last Thursday, on his direct testimony, General Godding said he had taken the
military's ''best estimates'' to the conference. And he adhered to that position
yesterday.

Showed Deposition


But Mr. Boies showed him a deposition he made last year in which he said he was
unaware before the Langley conference of a dispute over the figure to be
included in the order of battle and the estimate for the President. At another
point in his deposition, General Godding said that no one had told him of
''political or public relations aspects'' surrounding the figure either before,
during, or after the Langley meeting.

General Godding, who completed his testimony yesterday and will be followed by
Everette S. Parkins, a former military intelligence officer in Vietnam, said he
had been mistaken in the deposition.

The general now said he had received no ''political or presentational
restrictions or guidance'' from General Westmoreland or anyone else before the
meeting. But once he was at Langley, Gen. Phillip B. Davidson Jr., who had
succeeded General McChristian as chief of intelligence, had alerted him to such
concerns. General Davidson, he said, had also vetoed his request that the
military negotiate a range for enemy strength rather than a single figure.

General Godding acknowledged that General Davidson had sent him a cable at
Langley saying that a figure of 420,000, including the self-defense and secret
self-defense forces, had ''surfaced'' in Saigon and ''stunned the Embassy and
this headquarters'' and was completely ''unacceptable.'' The cable said the
military would ''not accept'' a total in excess of the one then ''carried by the
press'' - 297,000.

Mr. Boies closed in on the witness, his voice rising.

Q. Did you understand that it was your obligation and the obligation of others
to come up with your best estimate?

A. Yes.

Q. Did you understand that it was your obligation and the obligation of others
to come up with your best estimate unaffected by political or public relations
concerns?

A. That's correct.

Mr. Boies then showed General Godding a July 1967 cable from George A. Carver,
the chief of Vietnamese affairs for the C.I.A., to Richard Helms, the director
of Central Intelligence.

In the newly declassified cable, which concerned a possible accord on an enemy
strength figure, Mr. Carver said General Davidson's ''chief problem was
political and presentational one of coming out with brand new set of figures
showing much larger Communist force at time when press knew'' that General
Westmoreland was seeking more troops.

''You see that?'' Mr. Boies said.

''I do,'' said General Godding, still insisting that, whatever had passed
between General Davidson and Mr. Carver, he was unaware of it before August.

On redirect examination, General Godding said that General Westmoreland had
never instructed him to consider press or public relations concerns in
determining intelligence estimates, nor had they governed his actions. To Mr.
Boies, on recross examination, he said that ''the political impact and the press
impact'' were things for General Westmoreland, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the
C.I.A. ''to handle. That was not my problem.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 30, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

EFFECTS OF CRIME HEARINGS

BYLINE: By SAM ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1283 words


The President's Commission on Organized Crime last week treated the galleries to
the melodrama of which gangster B movies are made.

Its hearings on the operations of Asian crime groups in the United States were
enlivened by anonymous witnesses who, hidden under monklike hoods, testified
behind screens and spoke into electronic voice scramblers to protect their
identities.

Investigators, without offering further evidence, identified as organized-crime
figures a Chinatown businessman and the former Prime Minister of South Vietnam,
neither of whom is known to have any criminal record.

Purpose of Forums


Historically, such performances have been dismissed by some officials as mere
theatrics aimed less at eliciting information than serving as forums to present
for public consumption what investigators have learned.

Sometimes, that type of forum helps create a constituency for legislative and
law-enforcement solutions. Similar hearings have been denounced by others for
trampling the civil liberties of targets who have little recourses to defenses.

In that context, questions have been raised about the expectations of this
latest commission and about the degree to which it has met its goals.

Similar to Inquiries in 50's


When President Reagan appointed the commission 15 months ago, he likened it to
the racketeering investigations of the 1950's by Senators Estes Kefauver and
John L. McClellan. Mr. Reagan explained that ''prosecutors by themselves can
never dig out the roots of a problem that reaches so deeply into our society''
and expressed the hope that the commission's revelations could create ''the kind
of public support that is vital'' for eradicating organized crime.

Mr. Reagan named Federal Judge Irving R. Kaufman chairman of the panel. In 1957,
Judge Kaufman presided over the trial of 20 partici pants in the meeting of
crime leaders in Apalachin, N.Y. He enjoys a reputation for rulings extending
civil liberties and rights.

Comparing his mission to ''cancer research,'' Judge Kaufman declared, ''We shall
not witch hunt; neither shall we whitewash.''

For much of its early life, the commission engaged in jurisdictional squabbling
with the Justice Department. It held a hearing to define its goals.

Another hearing, on laundering money, resulted in the commission's first report,
which will be officially released today. It analyzes the flow of heroin profits
through Hong Kong. The hearing last week was the first for which the commission
was empowered to subpoena witnesses.

Last Tuesday, an investigator for the commission and for the Drug Enforcement
Administration identified Edward Tse Chiu Chan, a politically well-connected
businessman, as the leader of a Chinese crime group in New York.

Last year, the Police Department described Mr. Chan, a former Hong Kong police
sergeant, as president of the local chapter of the On Leong tong, which, the
police said, ''is in control of all of Mott and Bayard Streets, including the
gambling houses.'' The police report found that Mr. Chan's ''wealth has enabled
him to become established as a reputable businessman.''

Ky Denies Charge


Mr. Chan responded to a subpoena through his lawyer and has denied the portrait
of him painted before the commission.

On Friday, an unidentified man described as a middle-echelon leader in a
Vietnamese crime gang said he had been told by a supervisor that Nguyen Cao Ky,
a former Prime Minister and Vice President of South Vietnam, headed a Vietnamese
crime organization in this country. Mr. Ky, in an interview from his home in
California, denied the charge, which had previously surfaced.

What impressions were left by the three days of hearings?

''I would say it's fantastic for a television series or a Hollywood movie,''
said Roy M. Cohn, the attorney and the former counsel to Senator Joseph R.
McCarthy's hearings, ''but for something of the prestige of a Presidential
commission, if anything it defers to theatrics rather than substance.''

Question of Fairness

The executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union, Ira M. Glasser,
contrasted the inquiry with a grand jury investigation, in which accusations are
supposed to remain secret unless an indictment is warranted.

''When an investigating commission starts to focus on individual targets, it is
inappropriate and intrinsically unfair,'' Mr. Glasser said. ''To some extent, a
little bit of that inevitably seeps in. It's hard to stop a witness from
dropping a name. The question for us is whether this is a pattern or
inadvertent.''

Had the accusations against Mr. Chan and Mr. Ky resulted from an authorized
disclosure of grand jury proceedings, Mr. Glasser said, ''we and everyone else
involved would've screamed.

''When it comes out through this legislative route, people tend not to perceive
the same thing,'' he added.

In a similar vein, Mr. Glasser recalled his reservations about what in 1971 he
called the ''McCarthyism'' of the Knapp Commission, which was investigating
police corruption in New York City.

Effect of Knapp Panel


Among the officials testifying last week was a deputy state attorney general and
director of the State Organized Crime Task Force, Ronald Goldstock. Asked about
the issues raised by Mr. Glasser, Mr. Goldstock said, ''I would expect that any
commission, especially one headed by a judge, would be sensitive to those
issues, and I would think that they have something there to back it up.''

But Mr. Goldstock also recalled that, despite the prosecution of police
officers, it was the Knapp Commission that ''ultimately turned around the New
York City Police Department.''

''People in the business sort of look at it and laugh - it's a gimmick,'' he
said of hooded witnesses and the like. ''But it's the only thing that draws
attention to a problem that exists. And, unfortunately, we live in a society
that reacts to perceived problems instead of heading off problems without such
prompting.''

The hearings last week did serve several purposes, officials said.

Although the testimony may be legally insufficient to return an indictment, it
did build a case that more resources be devoted to emerging crime groups before
they become as entrenched as traditional organized gangsters.

'To Solicit More Information'


Also, the hearings provided a rare forum for the victims. Relatively little
attention has been paid to those Asian refugees who have been preyed on by
organized gangs in their communities - in part, because their ethnic press has
been intimidated, too.

''The picture is not the least bit complete as of this point,'' the chief
counsel of the commission, James D. Harmon Jr., said yesterday. ''To some
degree, what's occurring with these public hearings is an investigation is being
carried out in public as the pieces fall into place. When we have enough to
begin to paint a coherent picture, one of the reasons to go public is to solicit
more information.''

Mr. Harmon said that unlike grand jury proceedings, the commission would permit
any person whose name was mentioned during hearings to appear before the panel
or to submit a sworn response.

As it approaches the halfway point in its tenure, the commission is expected to
accelerate the pace of its hearings. About 100 subpoenas have been issued, Mr.
Harmon said, and two of the five recalcitrant witnesses judged to be in contempt
have been jailed. That, commission officials suggested, may encourage more
cooperation.

The commission's final report is not due until March 1986. Last week, Judge
Kaufman urged the public to ''be patient.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of witness (page B3)

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 31, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

COLONEL DISPUTES CBS DOCUMENTARY AT LIBEL TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1287 words


A top military intelligence officer in Vietnam testified yesterday that CBS was
wrong when it reported he was ''fired'' in 1967 because he wanted to report
higher North Vietnamese infiltration than the official rate.

Lieut. Col. Everette S. Parkins, the ninth witness for General William C.
Westmoreland in his $120 million libel suit against CBS over a 1982 documentary,
said he was relieved of his duties after a final run-in with a superior, Col.
Charles A. Morris, whom he ''disliked intensely'' and who ''more than
reciprocated'' the feeling.

Colonel Parkins - who said the incident that CBS cited was touched off by his
use of a jeep to go to the PX, but evolved into an argument over enemy strength
- testified that, as far as he knew, the infiltration of North Vietnamese into
South Vietnam in the fall of 1967 was no more than the officially- reported
6,000 to 8,000 a month.

Played Outtakes for Jury


Just after the colonel completed his testimony in Federal Court, lawyers for
General Westmoreland played for the jury ''outtakes,'' or unused portions, of a
1981 interview CBS conducted with of Lieut. Gen. Daniel O. Graham prior to the
broadcast of its documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

In 1967, General Graham was a lieutenant colonel in Vietnam in charge of
estimating current enemy strength. He later became head of the Defense
Intelligence Agency before his retirement in 1976. In the unused portion of the
1981 interview, General Graham ridiculed as ''preposterous'' the charges CBS
would later air about a military ''conspiracy'' to understate the size of the
enemy.

After the outtakes were shown, General Graham took the stand. Anthony S. Murry,
a lawyer for General Westmoreland, began by asking General Graham how many stars
were worn by a lieutenant general.

''Six,'' replied General Graham, pausing. ''Three on each shoulder.''

The courtoom crowd - including, by this definition, the eight-star plaintiff -
broke into laughter.

Dispute on Order of Battle


General Graham, whose testimony will continue today, said that when he arrived
in Vietnam in August 1967, he concluded that the number of Vietcong guerrillas
and other irregulars was being overstated. At the same time, he said, some
analysts at the Central Intelligence Agency wanted to include in the total enemy
strength civilians ''who washed socks for the Vietcong or carried rice for
them.''

These people, he said, did not belong in the official listing of enemy forces
known as the order of battle.

The thesis of the documentary - spelled out at its start by the narrator, Mike
Wallace - was that United States military intelligence officers ''at the highest
levels'' had engaged in a ''conscious effort'' to ''alter and suppress critical
intelligence on the enemy in the year leading up to the Tet offensive'' on
January 31, 1968.

Mr. Wallace said the effect of this ''conspiracy'' was to leave President
Johnson, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the United States armed forces and the
American public ''totally unprepared'' for the size of the offensive.

As part of the conspiracy, Mr. Wallace said, General Westmoreland's command
''systematically blocked'' reports from officers that infiltration of North
Vietnamese into South Vietnam between September and December 1967 was as high as
25,000 a month.

Russell Cooley, a colonel who served in Vietnam at the time, is shown on the
broadcast identifying General Graham as ''the keystone behind this'' supression.

Colonel Cooley also said on the program that Colonel Parkins was ''fired''
because of his efforts to make known the higher infiltration rate. Colonel
Cooley said on the broadcast: The ''message became very clear. You - if you're
going to go the extent of being that forceful - you'll just be removed from the
job.''

Appeared for 21 Seconds


General Graham appeared on the 90- minute program for a total of 21 seconds,
denying that he or anyone else had ''blocked'' any infiltration reports. ''I'm
not that dumb,'' he said.

He also denied a charge by Comdr. James Meacham that, after the Tet offensive,
he had ordered officers to ''tamper'' with computer data on enemy strength as
part of a cover-up.

In the portions of his interview that were not shown, General Graham elaborated
on the reasons why such an order ''doesn't make any sense.'' He said, too, that
his superior, Maj. General Phillip B. Davidson Jr., would have hanged ''me from
the nearest yardarm for trying to screw up the computers.''

General Graham, in the outtakes, mocked the idea that he would have interfered
with infiltration reports. ''For an intelligence guy to say there's a division
coming down and I'm not going to tell you guys about it back in Washington, that
would have been . . . that's preposterous.''

Massing for Attack


The general told Mr. Wallace that at the end of 1967, several divisions of North
Vietnamese were massing for an attack on Khe Sanh, an American base in northern
South Vietnam. But information about the movement of those troops was fully
reported.

''Hell,'' he said, ''everybody in the world knew.''

General Graham also said in the outtakes that he was unaware of any incident
involving Colonel Parkins but that he ''doubted'' he had been dismissed for the
reason stated by Mr. Wallace.

Yesterday, Mr. Murry asked Colonel Parkins whether he had ever submitted a
report on enemy infiltration with a figure as high as 25,000.

A. No, I did not.

Q. Is Mr. Wallace's statement true or false?

A. I believe that statement is false.

Colonel Parkins said he had told ''essentially the same thing'' to CBS before
its broadcast.

Q. When you were in Vietnam, was there ever a limit placed on the figures you
could report?

A. There was not.

Q. Were you ever asked to falsify any figures?

A. I was not.

Took Jeep to PX


Colonel Parkins, a 1951 graduate of West Point who served more than 20 years in
the Army, said that on an occasion in late 1967 he had departed from custom and
hand-delivered a report on some aspect of enemy strength to military
intelligence headquarters in Saigon. He said he took on the role of
''messenger'' to justify his use of the jeep, which he then drove on to the PX.

Colonel Parkins said that, while he was at headquarters, he fell into another in
a long series of heated disputes with Colonel Morris. Colonel Parkins said many
of the arguments with Colonel Morris were the result of ''a personality clash,''
but this one also involved the report on enemy strength.

Soon after this episode, he said, he was relieved of his duties. He left Vietnam
in a matter of months. Colonel Morris testified earlier in the trial that
Colonel Parkins had been ''fired'' for refusing to ''obey a legal order'' to
investigate a new method of counting the enemy.

On cross-examination, David Boies, a lawyer for CBS, referred to an affidavit
that Colonel Parkins had signed in 1983. In the affadavit Colonel Parkins
recalled Colonel Morris saying with regard to the figures in his report: ''This
is not what we are reporting.''

''Colonel Morris,'' the affidavit went on, ''believed the study should report
enemy strength figures lower than the figures I was reporting.''

Yesterday, Colonel Parkins said that his affidavit told ''only part of the
story'' and that he couldn't remember exactly what figures were in his report or
precisely what had ''inflamed'' his superior.

Q. Were you fired for trying to get a report through?

A. I was fired, but not for trying to get a report through.

Q. Have you any explanation for why your friend and close colleague, Colonel
Cooley, would say this?

A. I do not.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 31, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

A CONSERVATIVE WITNESS

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 269 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 30


Lieut. Gen. Daniel O. Graham, who took the stand in the CBS-Westmoreland trial
today, has been associated since his retirement from the Army with several
conservative organizations.

General Graham, whose book, ''A New Strategy for the West,'' was published by
the conservative Heritage Foundation, now heads an a nonprofit corporation
called ''High Frontier'' that is attempting to promote a space-based defense
system.

Although General Graham defends the Reagan Administration's so- called ''Star
Wars'' plan to put missile defenses in outer space, he believes the plan can be
developed more quickly. The Adminstration's plan is to develop interception
methods that are still far in the future. But High Frontier says it is plausible
to use ''off the shelf'' technology to create a reasonably effective immediate
defense against ballistic missiles.

General Graham, who spent most of his career as an intelligence officer, was a
colonel in Vietnam in 1967 and 1968. He went on to attain the rank of lieutenant
general and to become the chief of the Defense Intellligence Agency, He left in
1976 when one of his mentors, James R. Schlesinger, resigned as Secretary of
Defense. General Graham told friends he felt strongly associated with Mr.
Schlesinger and believed he should step down with his chief.

General Graham testified against the second treaty on the limitation of
strategic weapons, in 1979, along with other conservative retired officers,
calling it an unequal and nonverifiable treaty. He has spent the years since his
resignation in positions with several conservative think tanks.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 31, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE ALLIES PREFER OUR INCUMBENT PRESIDENTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 300 words


To the Editor:


Michael Harrison offers a rather too sophisticated analysis of ''European''
thinking (''The Allies Prefer Reagan,'' Op-Ed, Oct. 23). Although he never
reveals how he consulted everyone in Europe for opinions, he appears to be
speculating on the preferences of some Western European leaders and opinion
makers. Since World War II, such leaders and opinion makers have always
preferred the re-election of the American incumbent, with whatever rationale
seems applicable at the time.

They preferred Harry Truman in 1948. With no incumbent in 1952, they preferred
the general they knew, and they wanted him re-elected. In 1960 they preferred
the incumbent Vice President, not the brash junior senator from Massachusetts.
They strongly indicated preference for Lyndon B. Johnson, the 1964 incumbent,
and were shocked when he dropped out in 1968.

For all their criticism of the war in Vietnam, including a chilly reception
accorded Vice President Humphrey in Paris, they still inclined toward him as the
incumbent candidate. In 1972 they openly declared enthusiasm for Richard M.
Nixon, and they seemed to cast their lot with Gerald R. Ford in 1976. And as Mr.
Harrison himself says, they ''had strong doubts about Ronald Reagan in 1980.''

European leaders, of whatever political stripe, are conservative in foreign
policy. They prefer known American quantities, however much they like or dislike
their policies, and they prefer continuity to change. The paean Mr. Harrison has
written to Ronald Reagan's European popularity - and to European perspicacity -
is really a pretentious declaration of Mr. Harrison's own political
inclinations.

ELLIOT J. FELDMAN International Affairs Fellow Council on Foreign Relations
Washington, Oct. 24, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 31, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE RISE OF FACTIONALISM

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 724 words


WASHINGTON This election has dramatized to an

alarming degree the rise of factionalism in American political life. It has not
educated or united the people but demonstrated how separated we are along
regional, racial, religious, partisan and ideological lines.

This has always been true in varying degrees, but while the old conflicts
between labor and management remain with less rigidity, new conflicts have
arisen within and between the parties, between the Frost Belt and Sun Belt
states, between the executive and legislative branches, and within the several
departments and agencies of the executive branch itself.

New centers of power have arisen to challenge the leadership of both the White
House and Congress, weakening them both, along with the authority of the
parties. The result has been that the system of checks and balances has in
recent years produced more checks than balance.

This is the challenge that will face both the President and the Congress that
will be elected next week, and it is the underlying question before the American
electorate: Who has the better chance of easing this political gridlock?

Obviously, no President can or should have the power to work his way with
Congress. If Mr. Reagan had been able to do so in his first term, his foreign
and domestic policies would be in even worse shape than they are today. But
since the disasters of Vietnam and Watergate, which unleashed a storm of protest
against the President and Congress alike, political power has been fragmented
and polarized, leaving both the President and Congress without a consensus or
that spirit of compromise essential to effective democratic government.  From
the end of World War II in the mid-1940's until the end of the 1960's, there was
a consensus among the moderate majorities of both parties. Presidents Truman and
Eisenhower had sufficient moderate support from both parties to create the
United Nations, proclaim the Truman Doctrine to contain the spread of Soviet
influence, launch the Marshall Plan and establish the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization - the most successful security coalition of free nations in this
century.  They could negotiate with the leaders of both parties in Congress with
the assurance that their agreements would be honored in the House and Senate.
Not so today. Presidents Carter and Reagan repeatedly proclaimed the principle
of a bipartisan foreign policy but honored it more in principle than in
practice, and their Congressional leaders couldn't deliver the votes.  It can be
argued, of course, that Congressional opposition to Mr. Reagan's Soviet, Middle
East and Central American policies kept a bad situation from being even worse.
But I know no leader of either party - Mssrs. Reagan and Mondale included - who
do not think the spirit of factionalism has gone too far.

We have Big Labor voting for Mr. Mondale against the wishes of many of the
workers. We have racial voting - 90 percent of blacks for Mr. Mondale in the
South, and a large majority of Southern whites for Mr. Reagan.

More disturbing, we have more so- called religious voting in this election than
at any time since Al Smith was rejected in 1928 as a Roman Catholic - with Jesse
Jackson using the pulpit on behalf of Mr. Mondale, and Mr. Reagan's men
encouraging the fundamentalist electronic preachers to use their churches as
political registration booths.

The regional voting is more significant. Even in this vast continental country
with its different climates and resources, it is not at all clear that the
fundamental interests of the people of the South and West are all that different
from the interests of the people of New England or the industrial states of the
East and Middle West. But clearly a geographical realignment of voting patterns
has taken place.

America's economic and technical supremacy have been challenged in recent years
by nations that have emphasized national unity and cooperation among government,
labor, management and science rather than leaving them separate in competition
with one another.

It was thought by some observers that the 1984 election would bring the nation
closer together. Instead it has put the factions, the races and the regions
against one another and ignored the fundamental problem of correcting the
structural flaws in our political system. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              October 31, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.N. Calls on Vietnam To Leave Cambodia

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Oct. 30


The General Assembly called on Vietnam today to withdraw its troops from
Cambodia and let the Cambodian people ''determine their own destiny.''

The vote in the Assembly was 110 to 22, with 18 abstentions. The United States
supported the resolution.

It was the sixth such vote since Vietnamese forces crossed into Cambodia in
1978. The vote against Vietnam has generally increased each year.

Vietnam, unlike previous years, did not take part in the debate. The three- page
resolution, which was opposed by the Soviet bloc and its allies, did not mention
Vietnam by name, referring only to the Cambodian ''problem'' and calling for the
withdrawal of ''foreign forces.'' The Vietnamese presence in Cambodia is opposed
by a Peking- backed coalition that includes both Prince Norodom Sihanouk and the
Khmer Rouge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 1, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

INTELLIGENCE AIDE DENIES CBS REPORT

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 906 words


A lieutenant general who was a key figure in military intelligence in the
Vietnam War yesterday denied allegations made in a CBS documentary that he
blocked reports of high North Vietnamese infiltration and ordered subordinates
to ''tamper'' with computer data on enemy strength.

Lieut. Gen. Daniel O. Graham, testifying as the 10th witness for General William
C. Westmoreland in his $120 million libel suit against CBS, also said he had
never been ordered by superiors to falsify intelligence during his service as a
colonel in South Vietnam in 1967 and 1968.

The thesis of the 1982 CBS Reports documentary was that officers at the
''highest levels'' of American military intelligence had conspired to ''alter
and suppress critical intelligence'' on enemy strength in Vietnam in the year
before the Tet offensive of January 1968.

The purpose of the conspiracy, according to the documentary, ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' was to make it appear that the United States was
winning the war. The result of the conspiracy, it said, was to leave President
Johnson, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, American armed forces and the public
unprepared for the scope of the Tet offensive.

Says Enemy Forces 'Overstated'


Yesterday, General Graham challenged the proposition that American forces were
either unaware of the coming offensive or not ready for it. If anything, he
said, General Westmoreland's command had ''overstated'' the strength of
Communist forces in Vietnam in 1967.

The Tet offensive, the general said in Federal District Court, was ''a maximum
effort'' by the Communists, but they were able to muster an attack force of only
85,000. That showed, he said, that the enemy strength figure carried by the
American command in Saigon - 250,000 to 300,000 - ''was in the ballpark.''

General Graham, whose testimony will continue today, said the Vietcong had so
''scraped the bottom of the barrel'' for troops for the offensive that it had
taken its own wounded soldiers from hospitals, their stitches from previous
fights unhealed. Some of the weapons used by the Vietcong, he said, were still
smeared with packing grease.

The charges that General Graham had been the ''keystone'' of a military effort
to minimize enemy strength - and that, as part of a later ''cover-up,'' had
ordered the alteration of data in a military computer in Saigon - were made on
the CBS broadcast by intelligence officers who had served in Vietnam at that
time. As he did at the trial yesterday, General Graham denied the allegations in
a brief appearance on the documentary.

During a repetitive and extremely detailed cross-examination by David Boies, a
lawyer for CBS, General Graham denied that the Central Intelligence Agency had a
uniform position in 1967 that favored a substantially higher total for enemy
strength.

The general, who later became chief of the Defense Intelligence Agency before
his retirement in 1976, said he had attended a number of sessions in Saigon in
September 1967 with C.I.A. representatives on the subject of enemy troop
strength.

He said some C.I.A. officials like George Carver, the agency's chief of
Vietnamese affairs, had argued for a figure higher than that advocated by
General Westmoreland's staff.

The general said, however, that only one C.I.A. analyst, Samuel Adams, wanted a
figure nearly double that of the military. Such a total would have included the
enemy's self-defense and secret self-defense forces that General Westmoreland
dropped from the official listing of enemy strength known as the order of
battle.

Mr. Adams - who 14 years later became a consultant for CBS on its Vietnam
documentary - was ''the source for all this uproar'' over enemy troop estimates
at the Saigon meetings, General Graham said. These and other meetings in 1967
were held to arrive at a special estimate of enemy strength for President
Johnson.

But when Mr. Boies questioned whether Mr. Adams was alone in his desire to adopt
a significantly higher enemy strength estimate, General Graham said:

''It wouldn't have been much of a conference if it had just been Sam Adams
against the military. We'd have rolled right over him.''

C.I.A. Sought Higher Total


But Mr. Boies showed the general a 1968 State Department document that said
that, as of a month before the Tet offensive, the C.I.A. wanted to put forward
an enemy strength total ranging between 485,000 and 620,000.

This total, which appeared to be shared by Mr. Adams's colleagues in the agency,
also included an enemy political cadre of 90,000 to 120,000 - compared with the
military's figure for this category of 75,000 to 85,000. General Westmoreland's
command opposed the continued inclusion of the political cadre in the order of
battle, considering them more appropriately placed in an ''appendix.''

General Graham said he believed the political cadre, like some other Vietcong
irregular forces, such as the home guard, were not really fighting forces - a
position that CBS has disputed throughout the trial.

''What did they do,'' Mr. Boies asked, referring to the other irregular forces?

A. Made policy. Well, they collected taxes, made horrible speeches about Marx
and Lenin.

Q. Like the Democrats and Republicans here?

A. Oh no, I think we called them political cadre one day and guerrillas the
next, when they were robbing banks.

Q. They ever shoot people?

A. Probably.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 1, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON REPORTS BEST YEAR FOR QUALITY RECRUITS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 663 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 31


Assistant Secretary of Defense Lawrence J. Korb reported today that the fiscal
year ended Oct. 1 was the best year ever for the armed forces in terms of the
quality of recruits enlisted.

Mr. Korb also said in a news briefing that the number of recruits had dropped
because the retention of men and women already in the service had risen, making
for a more experienced force. The number of women in the military service
reached its highest point since World War II, he said.

The Pentagon made public the results of recruiting and retention for the fiscal
year 1984 showing that 93 percent of all recruits were high school graduates,
the most reliable indicator the services have found for judging the ability of a
young person to be trained and to serve out his or her first term.

The previous record was last year, when 91 percent of the recruits were high
school graduates. In contrast, the largest percentage of recruits who were high
school graduates in the service in the days of the draft in the Vietnam War was
80 percent in 1966.

Graduates in the Services

Mr. Korb, who is in charge of personnel for the Defense Department, pointed out
that the Army, which historically has had the greatest difficulty in recruiting
high-quality people because it has the greatest number of difficult jobs, had 91
percent of its recruits in the high school graduate category last year.

Among the other services, 93 percent of the Navy's recruits had high school
diplomas, as did 95 percent of those joining the Marine Corps and 99 percent of
those who entered the Air Force.

Mr. Korb asserted that the high school graduates had enlisted, despite
inprovements in the civilian economy, because ''people are treated well, they
have better equipment and training, and they have more prestige as society
appreciates what they are doing.''

Recruiting did not become more difficult, as many officials and military
officers had feared, as more job opportunities in civilian life opened up for
young men and women, Mr. Korb contended. ''It's not the economy that's driving
them in,'' he said.

Total of Recruits Dips

The number of recruits for all services dropped from 330,700 in 1983 to 328,500
in the fiscal year that just ended, with the Army and Air Force taking fewer
young people, the Navy the same number, and the Marine Corps up by 3,200
recruits.

Mr. Korb produced charts to show that the number of men and women with more than
four years in the service, and thus beyond the first enlistment, had risen by
121,225 from 1980 to 368,925 in the fiscal that just ended. In comparison, the
entire enlisted force is larger by only 71,027 people.

He also reported that the number of women in the armed forces rose from 171,500
in 1980 to 203,300 a month ago, which he said was the first time that the number
of women in the service had gone over 200,000 since World War II. Almost all of
the women recruited last year were high school graduates.

The Selected Reserves, which consist of men and women in organized units who
attend weekly drills and a two-week summer camp, rose to 1,046,000, a record,
which Mr. Korb said was higher than in the days of the draft when some men chose
compulsory reserve duty rather than go on active duty.

He said that the Army Reserve had grown to 48 percent of the entire Army force,
as against 42 percent four years ago, and said that it would break the 50
percent mark within a couple of years.

About the only less-than-cheerful statistic in Mr. Korb's discourse this
afternoon was the number of young men and women in the entry program in which
the recruit signs up for entry into a service some months hence, say after a
summer vacation.

There were 131,300 such recruits waiting in line at the beginning of the last
fiscal year but that had slipped by 8,000 by the end of the fiscal year. Mr.
Korb asserted that the slippage was not worrisome when compared with the delayed
entry pool of 64,000 in 1980.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 1, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

INDOCHINESE WOMEN FIND LIFE IN AMERICA FRAUGHT WITH BARRIERS

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1270 words


LONG BEACH, Calif.

NAY NGUYEN answers haltingly and smiles shyly when spoken to in English.  For
the last two years, the 35-year-old refugee, who came from Vietnam in 1979, has
been studying English at a community college here in the hope of learning enough
to find a job. Her progress has been discouragingly slow.

''I could not learn English because I missed my country very much,'' she said
with the aid of a friend. The friend said that in addition to Mrs. Nay's
homesickness, she often missed classes because of stomach complaints a doctor
linked to stress.

Refugee women from Southeast Asia are struggling with special barriers to a
smooth resettlement in the United States, according to social- service
professionals. Many of these women are confronting vast differences between
coping in urban America and urban or rural Indochina. They are also unaccustomed
to the new expectations of them in family and society. Here, and in many
communities in California, they are a visible new presence.

There are 256,000 Southeast Asian refugees in California, according to the
Department of Health and Human Services, and a total of 696,000 in the country
as a whole. About two-thirds of those in California are Vietnamese and the rest
are Cambodians and Laotians.

In their progress toward self-sufficiency, many refugees are finding it
difficult to learn to speak English, find work and perform such ordinary but
essential tasks as driving a car.

Dr. Judy Chu, a psychologist associated with the Southeast Asian Studies Program
at the University of California at Los Angeles, said that many problems stem
from the collision of the traditional subordinate role of women in Southeast
Asian societies and their more independent role in the United States. Others
arise simply from the traumas of refugee flight.

Dr. Chu, in a paper on the experience of refugee women, said there was some
evidence of impaired motivation, increased conflict with children, difficulty
finding work, wife battering and a growing divorce rate. The paper is to be
published by the Women's Bureau of the United States Department of Labor as part
of a project on refugee women.

Mrs. Nay, her husband and their five children, 6 to 14 years old, have lived on
welfare since they came to Long Beach from a country village near Nhatrang five
years ago.

For the first 10 or 12 months in America, Mrs. Nay said, ''I never go out unless
I am with my sponsor. I cried all the time.'' Her sponsor, an American, would
either get the family's supplies or take her to the store.

She has not yet looked for a job, considering her English too poor. ''I go out,
some people ask me lots of questions and I can't answer enough,'' she said. Her
husband, who was a policeman in Vietnam and would like to be one here, doesn't
have ''the ambition'' to be one, she said, ''because he knows his English is not
good enough.''

Kim Brigstocke, a counselor at the refugee center at Long Beach City College,
said that, like many of the people she counsels, Mr. and Mrs. Nay ''know they're
not supposed to be on welfare.''

''That's why they feel bad all the time,'' she said. When Mrs. Nay feels very
bad, she does not go to school. A common source of worry, according to Mrs.
Brigstocke, who is Vietnamese, is that if they do take jobs and relinquish
welfare, they may be laid off and have no source of income. Many feel they will
be unable to find jobs with medical benefits comparable to those they are
entitled to on welfare, she said.

Yet, Mrs. Nay, who had five years of schooling in Vietnam, may stick with the
task. In class, she said, while most of the students cluster with their
compatriots, she sits next to a Cambodian to make sure any chatting she does is
in English.

According to Dr. Chu, it is not uncommon for refugee men to remain unemployed
because they refuse to accept jobs below the status they held in Vietnam or
Cambodia. She said it was the Vietnamese men, many of whom were professional or
white-collar workers in Vietnam, who suffered the most severe ''downward
mobility'' after resettlement in the United States.

When the woman assumes the role of breadwinner, the man loses face. Marital
discord has become one of the most frequent sources of refugee problems, she
said.

''Divorce is occurring with greater frequency and appears to be as much the
result of women leaving men as men leaving wives,'' Dr. Chu said.

Wife battering also appears to have increased, although it is seldom reported
because the women remain silent, Dr. Chu said. She cited the caseload of the
Center for the Pacific Asian Family in Los Angeles, which she said showed that
in 1982, one-third of the 1,429 families that reported marital rape and
battering were Indochinese and of those, 95 percent were Vietnamese.

It was considered very unusual when Yang Zang, a mother of four from the
isolated mountain Hmong tribe of Laos, last summer told her counselor that her
husband had been beating her, and took off her clothes to show the marks.

Dr. Chu said that the female refugees have had to try to come to terms with the
conflict of traditional ethics, which institutionalized women's deferential
roles in such ideals as ''cong'' or ''versatile ability in the home,'' ''dung''
or ''subtle beauty,'' ''ngon'' or ''soft speech'' and ''hanh'' or ''gentle
behavior.''

Almost hidden in this refugee population are women burdened by traumas of
flight, not the least of whom are the ''boat people'' who were raped and
otherwise sexually abused by pirates during their often desperate escape
attempts from Vietnam. In light of the violence they endured, Dr. Chu said,
''the trauma of their flight may have left indelible memories which they
hesitate to talk about due to shame, guilt and stoicism.'' She said the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reported in 1982 that 53 percent of the
boat people were subject to rape and abduction.

Less than a year ago Ngoc-Lan Tran left Vietnam crowded into a boat, at the
urging of her parents, a well-educated couple. Her parents thought it was worth
the risk for Miss Lan, then 18 years old, to seek a better life in the United
States.

But after only one day at sea, the boat ran into a fleet of pirate boats, 18 in
all. The Vietnamese women were herded onto one of the vessels and kept prisoner
for a week. Miss Lan said they were raped by the pirates day after day. Her
boyfriend, who had left Vietnam with her, was killed when he tried to protect
her, she said. After two days she tried to escape by jumping into the sea. When
she regained consciousness, she was in a hospital in Indonesia, she said.

After arriving in Long Beach, where a brother and sister-in-law had established
new lives, Miss Lan tried to kill herself. Her brother brought the depressed
young woman to the refugee center, hoping to get her in school to take her mind
off her problems, but to no avail. Finally, Miss Lan obtained the services of a
Vietnamese psychologist in Los Angeles. ''I felt that because of the things that
had happened I was not a good person,'' she said. ''He made me feel I'm a good
person and that life is still beautiful.''

At the refugee center office there is a poster of a castle on the banks of a
misty green river in Vietnam, the citadel of the emperor on the River Huong in
Hue. At the bottom of the poster is a poem. Mrs. Brigstocke, the counselor, said
the message was a reminder that in Vietnam, a woman who leaves her mother's
house to take a husband severs ties, although sometimes she will look back in
longing. Coming to America, she said, often engenders the same feeling.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Southeast Asian women (page C12)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICS AND PRESS BLAMED IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words


A trial that is rearguing the Vietnam War heard a former chief of the Defense
Intelligence Agency say yesterday that the war was won militarily in 1968 and
only lost later because of political decisions and the press.

Lieut. Gen. Daniel O. Graham, who directed the intelligence arm of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff in 1974 and 1975, told the jury in Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS that the enemy in Vietnam was ''whipped''
from the time of its Tet offensive in early 1968.

A hushed room of spectators listened as General Graham testified in Federal
Court in Manhattan that South Vietnam would have prevailed if the United States
had not ''slashed'' military aid to it in 1974 and if the press - in ways that
were not specified - had not contributed to ''defeat.''

''We made political decisions to withdraw just as we were making great
headway,'' General Graham said, ''and, even in the end, had the South Vietnamese
been supported, they would have survived the assault of the North Vietnamese.''

General Graham's statements - underscoring the breadth of issues being aired
publicly, if not actually tried, in this case - were made under cross-
examination by David Boies, a lawyer for CBS. The 58-year-old general, a shock
of white hair jutting over his forehead, answered Mr. Boies's questions on the
outcome of the war with the same deliberation he gave to such subjects as
whether he once planned to join General Westmoreland as a plaintiff in the suit.


Outer Space Defenses

Mr. Boies sought, too, to undermine General Graham's credibility as a witness by
showing that, through his association with the Reagan Administration's so-called
''Star Wars'' program to put missile defenses in outer space, he was still
deeply allied with military interests.

Although General Westmoreland's lawyers maintained that General Graham's present
activities were irrelevant to the suit, Federal Judge Pierre N. Leval had the
witness explain that he is now director of High Frontier, a nonprofit lobby
aimed at ''convincing the country that we must support our space technology for
both security and economic advantages.''

Mr. Boies then asked the general whether he believed the 1982 CBS Reports
documentary that is the basis for General Westmoreland's $120 million suit - and
that accused General Graham of ''blocking'' critical intelligence information on
the enemy in 1967 - had ''adversely affected the reputation of the military.''

A. Yes, I do.

Q. Did the broadcast adversely affect your reputation?

A. Yes, it did.

The documentary - entitled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' -
charged that, in the year before the Tet offensive, officers at the ''highest
levels'' of military intelligence engaged in a conspiracy to minimize the
strength of the enemy to make it appear that America was winning the war.

Data on Enemy Strength

General Westmoreland, who is 70 years old, contends that CBS libeled him by
saying on the broadcast that he had deceived President Johnson and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of Communist forces, leaving them
unprepared for the Tet offensive.

On the program, two former intelligence officers in Vietnam also said that
General Graham - then a lieutenant colonel in Saigon - interfered with the
accurate reporting of North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam and
ordered them to ''tamper'' with computer data on enemy strength.

On the broadcast, as well as at the trial, General Graham denied the
allegations.

Yesterday, Mr. Boies asked General Graham whether he had had any conversations
with General Westmoreland in 1982 about the latter's suit against CBS.

A. Yes.

Q. Did General Westmoreland ask you to join this suit?

A. Yes, he did. I said I would, if it was necessary to prevent a delaying tactic
by CBS until General Westmoreland died, since I was likely to outlive him.

Mr. Boies raised his voice and moved closer to the witness.

Q. Did General Westmoreland tell you there was a possibility this case would be
delayed?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. Did General Westmoreland tell you that his attorneys twice asked for
postponements that were opposed by CBS?

After Judge Leval sustained a plaintiff's objection, General Graham said that
General Westmoreland's attorneys had ultimately ''dissuaded'' him from joining
the case.

The judge later instructed the jury that CBS had caused ''absolutely no delay''
of the trial.

Much of General Graham's testimony yesterday was devoted to a calculation he had
made in September 1967 that the Communist enemy was being depleted faster than
it could find replacements.

The general, who was then in charge of estimating current enemy strength for
General Westmoreland, applied an ''input-output'' analysis to the question of
enemy strength. He concluded, he testified, that, if the enemy totaled 300,000
in the fall of 1967, it must have been as large as 550,000 at its ''peak'' in
early 1966.

Mr. Boies turned to General Graham's pretrial deposition, in which the general
said that enemy losses averaged 5,000 a month. Factoring this figure into the
general's conclusion of 550,000 in 1966, Mr. Boies tried to show that the enemy
had to have been at least 400,000 strong a year to 18 months later.

A key issue in the trial is whether General Westmoreland's estimate of an enemy
of 300,000 in late 1967 - as opposed to higher totals favored by some Central
Intelligence Agency analysts - was honestly arrived at.

General Graham said that Mr. Boies was losing sight of many variables in the
calculation performed in 1967 - including the possibility that the 5,000-
a-month decline in enemy strength fluctuated - and that Mr. Boies's ''nifty
arithmetic'' was not necessarily right. ''I might be simple-minded,'' the
witness said, ''but I'm not that simple- minded.''

General Graham - followed on the stand late yesterday by Robert M. Leverone,
another intelligence officer, whose testimony will continue Monday - said that,
ordinarily, counting the Vietcong was like ''counting cockroaches in a dark barn
with a flashlight.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLITICS AND PRESS BLAMED IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1026 words


A trial that is rearguing the Vietnam War heard a former chief of the Defense
Intelligence Agency say yesterday that the war was won militarily in 1968 and
only lost later because of political decisions and the press.

Lieut. Gen. Daniel O. Graham, who directed the intelligence arm of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff in 1974 and 1975, told the jury in Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS that the enemy in Vietnam was ''whipped''
from the time of its Tet offensive in early 1968.

A hushed room of spectators listened as General Graham testified in Federal
Court in Manhattan that South Vietnam would have prevailed if the United States
had not ''slashed'' military aid to it in 1974 and if the press - in ways that
were not specified - had not contributed to ''defeat.''

''We made political decisions to withdraw just as we were making great
headway,'' General Graham said, ''and, even in the end, had the South Vietnamese
been supported, they would have survived the assault of the North Vietnamese.''

General Graham's statements - underscoring the breadth of issues being aired
publicly, if not actually tried, in this case - were made under cross-
examination by David Boies, a lawyer for CBS. The 58-year-old general, a shock
of white hair jutting over his forehead, answered Mr. Boies's questions on the
outcome of the war with the same deliberation he gave to such subjects as
whether he once planned to join General Westmoreland as a plaintiff in the suit.


Outer Space Defenses


Mr. Boies sought, too, to undermine General Graham's credibility as a witness by
showing that, through his association with the Reagan Administration's so-called
''Star Wars'' program to put missile defenses in outer space, he was still
deeply allied with military interests.

Although General Westmoreland's lawyers maintained that General Graham's present
activities were irrelevant to the suit, Federal Judge Pierre N. Leval had the
witness explain that he is now director of High Frontier, a nonprofit lobby
aimed at ''convincing the country that we must support our space technology for
both security and economic advantages.''

Mr. Boies then asked the general whether he believed the 1982 CBS Reports
documentary that is the basis for General Westmoreland's $120 million suit - and
that accused General Graham of ''blocking'' critical intelligence information on
the enemy in 1967 - had ''adversely affected the reputation of the military.''

A. Yes, I do.

Q. Did the broadcast adversely affect your reputation?

A. Yes, it did.

The documentary - entitled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' -
charged that, in the year before the Tet offensive, officers at the ''highest
levels'' of military intelligence engaged in a conspiracy to minimize the
strength of the enemy to make it appear that America was winning the war.

Data on Enemy Strength


General Westmoreland, who is 70 years old, contends that CBS libeled him by
saying on the broadcast that he had deceived President Johnson and the Joint
Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of Communist forces, leaving them
unprepared for the Tet offensive.

On the program, two former intelligence officers in Vietnam also said that
General Graham - then a lieutenant colonel in Saigon - interfered with the
accurate reporting of North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam and
ordered them to ''tamper'' with computer data on enemy strength.

On the broadcast, as well as at the trial, General Graham denied the
allegations.

Yesterday, Mr. Boies asked General Graham whether he had had any conversations
with General Westmoreland in 1982 about the latter's suit against CBS.

A. Yes.

Q. Did General Westmoreland ask you to join this suit?

A. Yes, he did. I said I would, if it was necessary to prevent a delaying tactic
by CBS until General Westmoreland died, since I was likely to outlive him.

Mr. Boies raised his voice and moved closer to the witness.

Q. Did General Westmoreland tell you there was a possibility this case would be
delayed?

A. Yes, he did.

Q. Did General Westmoreland tell you that his attorneys twice asked for
postponements that were opposed by CBS?

After Judge Leval sustained a plaintiff's objection, General Graham said that
General Westmoreland's attorneys had ultimately ''dissuaded'' him from joining
the case.

The judge later instructed the jury that CBS had caused ''absolutely no delay''
of the trial.

Much of General Graham's testimony yesterday was devoted to a calculation he had
made in September 1967 that the Communist enemy was being depleted faster than
it could find replacements.

The general, who was then in charge of estimating current enemy strength for
General Westmoreland, applied an ''input-output'' analysis to the question of
enemy strength. He concluded, he testified, that, if the enemy totaled 300,000
in the fall of 1967, it must have been as large as 550,000 at its ''peak'' in
early 1966.

Mr. Boies turned to General Graham's pretrial deposition, in which the general
said that enemy losses averaged 5,000 a month. Factoring this figure into the
general's conclusion of 550,000 in 1966, Mr. Boies tried to show that the enemy
had to have been at least 400,000 strong a year to 18 months later.

A key issue in the trial is whether General Westmoreland's estimate of an enemy
of 300,000 in late 1967 - as opposed to higher totals favored by some Central
Intelligence Agency analysts - was honestly arrived at.

General Graham said that Mr. Boies was losing sight of many variables in the
calculation performed in 1967 - including the possibility that the 5,000-
a-month decline in enemy strength was really much higher - and that Mr. Boies's
''nifty arithmetic'' was not necessarily right. ''I might be simple- minded,''
the witness said, ''but I'm not that simple-minded.''

General Graham - followed on the stand late yesterday by Robert M. Leverone,
another intelligence officer, whose testimony will continue Monday - said that,
ordinarily, counting the Vietcong was like ''counting cockroaches in a dark barn
with a flashlight.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN, ON A FINAL SWING, URGES HIS BACKERS TO VOTE

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: LINCOLN PARK, Mich., Nov. 1


President Reagan today began the final push of his re-election campaign by
seeking support for Republican Congressional candidates, warning against
complacency, jousting with hecklers and telling noisy crowds that America would
''never go back'' to its days of decline.

At stops in Boston, Rochester and in this suburb of Detroit, Mr. Reagan drew
loud cheers urging him on, not simply with chants of ''Four more years!'' but
with a new cry of ''Fifty states! Fifty states!'' The cheers reflected
increasingly strong hopes in the campaign that such a sweep was possible.

There was also a wistful, valedictory quality to Mr. Reagan's day, which began
with 2,000 campaign workers seeing the President off at the White House,
followed by his close aides posing with him on the boarding ramp at Air Force
One. Mr. Reagan's five-day, 10-state swing is his last Presidential campaign
trip on his own behalf.

This evening, several thousand supporters stood in the rain and cheered Mr.
Reagan at a sprawling shopping center. The President, wearing a raincoat, cut
his speech short, but he said once more that opinion polls showing him well
ahead ''scare the life out of me'' and urged supporters to be sure to vote
Tuesday.

The Message Is the Same

Except for introductory comments and a few variations tailored to each campaign
stop, Mr. Reagan delivered virtually the same speech he has been giving since
last Friday.

To a lively crowd of 10,000 on a brisk, sunny day at City Hall in Boston, the
President returned to his practice of invoking the name of John F. Kennedy as a
Democrat whose views have been abandoned by Democratic party leaders.

He had dropped such references a couple weeks ago after Walter F. Mondale, the
Democratic Presidential candidate, produced a letter Mr. Reagan wrote in 1960,
when he was a leader of Democrats for Nixon. The letter likened Kennedy's ideas
to those of Marx and Hitler.

There had been a muffled roar of heckling from the fringes of the crowd
throughout Mr. Reagan's noontime speech in Boston, but the heckling erupted into
boos at the first mention of one of the most revered names in Massachusetts
politics.

''I would think that even they would have the respect to listen to the words
that I'm going to say in quoting John F. Kennedy,'' Mr. Reagan said of the
hecklers, his voice rising with indignation. The rest of the crowd roared back
with more cheers of ''Four more years!'' and ''U.S.A.!''

Presidential campaign aides said the trip to Massachusetts was meant not simply
to nail down a traditionally Democratic state that seems to be leaning Mr.
Reagan's way, but also to boost the Senate candidacy of Ray Shamie, a
conservative businessman.

An aide said Mr. Shamie's appeal in his fight against Lieut. Gov. John F. Kerry,
a well-to-do Yale graduate and decorated Vietnam veteran, was ''cultural''
rather than ideological. Apparently emphasizing that view, Mr. Reagan said Mr.
Shamie ''cares about the people,'' is a ''son of immigrants,'' and was ''not
born to wealth and privilege.''

A Stop in Rochester

In Rochester, another crowd of 10,000 was packed into the War Memorial Arena
downtown and also thronged the streets. The aim of stopping there was to shore
up Mr. Reagan's strength in a traditionally Republican part of New York state at
a time when Mr. Mondale could be surging in New York City.

Indeed, the Reagan campaign aides seemed stung today by reports of huge throngs
greeting Mr. Mondale in the garment district this afternoon. That crowd was only
the latest of the large throngs that have been showing up at the Democratic
candidate's appearances.

Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, charged that in the waning days of the
campaign, Mr. Mondale was diverting ''big money'' away from his get-out-the-vote
efforts in order to turn out big crowds at his rallies.

He then dismissed Mr. Mondale's crowds by asserting that Barry Goldwater, the
1964 Republican candidate, had had big crowds toward the end of his campaign.
Mr. Goldwater carried only six states.

Meanwhile, the President's re-election campaign announced today that Mr. Reagan
would give a half-hour address in a television commercial to air Monday evening.
The address, taped earlier this week, will be paid for by the campaign.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan with Ray Shamie at rally in Boston

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COURT-MARTIAL DISCLOSURE HEATS UP A CAMPAIGN IN CALIFORNIA

BYLINE: By JUDITH CUMMINGS

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1007 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Oct. 29


The Republican candidate in a high-visibility State Assembly race here suffered
a large embarrassment over the recent disclosure that he had been
court-martialed in the Air Force in 1967 for drug abuse. But those who have come
to his defense in his race against Tom Hayden include Gov. George Deukmejian.

Mr. Deukmejian, a former California Attorney General with a reputation for being
tough on crime, has said his fellow Republican, David M. Shell, a 38- year-old
lawyer, had paid for his drug offense with time in a military jail and a
rehabilitation program and was well qualified for political office. The voters,
Mr. Deukmejian said after attending a campaign luncheon given last month by
Shell supporters, ought to let bygones be bygones.

Bob Taylor, deputy press secretary to Mr. Deukmejian, said the Governor's
feeling on the matter was that ''society gave Mr. Hayden a chance to reform his
life and that Mr. Shell was entitled to the same opportunity.''

The bygones theme is a familiar one to Mr. Shell's Democratic opponent, who has
had to try hard to advance in the eyes of many voters beyond his own 1960's
vintage background as a radical activist against the Vietnam War. For many the
memory of his role as an antiwar protestor at the 1968 Democratic National
Convention and the visit to Hanoi with the actress Jane Fonda, his wife, are
still strong.

Mr. Hayden, a freshman Assemblyman vying for a second term, released the
damaging information about his rival and with it surprised even Mr. Shell's own
campaign workers.

A District by the Sea

The two candidates are competing for one of the most liberal Assembly districts
in metropolitan Los Angeles and in the state, one that encompasses not only the
quaint beach city of Santa Monica but also glamourous Malibu, eccentric Venice,
commercial Century City, a major motion picture studio, 20th Century Fox, and
miles of upper- income neighborhoods where many in the entertainment industries
live.

The district has a lopsided registration, 59 percent Democratic to 29 percent
Republican. But there are growing signs that Santa Monica is moving further away
from its liberal tendencies.

It is the city where both Assembly candidates keep their offices and where Mr.
Hayden started in local politics through an organization, the Campaign for
Economic Democracy, that won strict city rent controls.

The rent-control issue has been a major battleground in the seaside community,
whose residents are largely retired people and young professionals who have
flocked there for its beaches and restricted rents.

A rent-control coalition has controlled the City Council for four years but now
is in danger of losing its majority. One of its candidates failed to gain enough
signatures to get on the ballot, suggesting some disappointment with the
rent-control platform by voters.

The information about Mr. Shell's court-martial and military drug conviction was
given to reporters last month by two Hayden campaign aides, Bob Mulholland, his
campaign manager, and Stephen Rivers, his press secretary. They maintain that
Mr. Hayden has a 2-to-1 lead and would easily have bested Mr. Shell without such
a disclosure. But they said they disclosed it because Mr. Shell was falsely
heralding his military service in campaigning, an activity that Mr. Rivers said
''calls into question his integrity about what and who he is.''

'Served With Distinction'


Biographical information printed on the letterhead of the Committee to Elect
David Shell, which was distributed to reporters by Hayden staff, said that from
1966 to 1969 ''David served with distinction in the United States Air Force.''

Bill Roberts, Mr. Shell's campaign manager, who has been addressing the matter
for Mr. Shell, called the Hayden campaign's move ''vicious'' and ''shabby.''

''It's something he's paid the price for, and he's been rehabilitated,'' Mr.
Roberts said of his candidate. ''That's what America is about.''

He said Mr. Hayden was ''the last person in the world who should be talking
about someone else's past.''

Mr. Roberts, who managed Mr. Deukmejian's successful gubernatorial campaign
against Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles in 1982, said recently that 67 percent
of respondents in a survey had said they were ''not bothered'' by ''what Shell
had done.''

Mr. Rivers said the military incident had been brought to their attention by
veterans. Mr. Mulholland then obtained Mr. Shell's court-martial documents
through a request under the Freedom of Information Act.

Guilty Plea at Court Martial

According to those documents, Mr. Shell pleaded guilty in April 1967 at a
court-martial at Edwards Air Force base to two drug charges, one for possession
of two grams of amphetamine and another for administering an injection of an
amphetamine compound, methedrine, to himself and another airman. At the time he
was an airman 3d class jet aircraft mechanic.

Mr. Shell, according to documents and interviews with Mr. Roberts, was sentenced
to a year's confinement at hard labor, reduction in grade and a bad-conduct
discharge. After Mr. Shell spent several months in military prison and several
in an Air Force rehabilitation program, he was granted an honorable discharge.

Mr. Rivers asserted in an interview that Mr. Shell's father, Joseph C. Shell, a
former Republican leader of the State Assembly who lost to Richard M. Nixon in
the 1962 gubernatorial primary, ''got the discharge fixed.'' He admitted,
however, that he could not prove such a charge.

Mr. Roberts said the discharge was upgraded as a normal course after Mr. Shell's
participation in the rehabilitation program.

The primary issue in the campaign has been the rent controls in Santa Monica,
which for five years have been the strictest in the nation after the political
effort led by Mr. Hayden.

As the legal director of the Southern California Legal Foundation, Mr. Shell,
who is making his first bid for political office, has challenged the
constitutionality of the controls.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 2, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: TALE OF DEATH AND LIFE OF A CAMBODIAN

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1246 words


ON Jan. 20, 1980, The New York Times Magazine published a remarkable memoir,
''The Death and Life of Dith Pran,'' by Sydney Schanberg, then The Times's
metropolitan editor and today a Times columnist but who, from 1972 until 1975,
was The Times's correspondent in Cambodia, covering the decline and fall of the
United States-backed Lon Nol regime in its civil war with the Communist Khmer
Rouge forces.

Mr. Schanberg received the 1976 Pulitzer Prize and a number of other awards for
his pieces filed from Phnom Penh, but not until ''The Death and Life of Dith
Pran'' was he able, at last, to come to terms with the experience he had lived
through and that, subsequently, haunted him.

Not for nothing does the magazine piece carry the subhead, ''A Story of
Cambodia.''

''The Death and Life of Dith Pran'' is, in Mr. Schanberg's words, about Cambodia
''as a nation pushed into the war by other powers, not in control of its
destiny, being used callously as battle fodder, its agonies largely ignored as
the world focused its attention on neighboring Vietnam.''

That's a large subject but Mr. Schanberg was finally able to comprehend it - and
to allow us to share that comprehension - in his moving, precisely detailed
recollection of a single friendship. The friend was Dith Pran, his Cambodian
assistant for three years, the man who saved his life and those of several other
correspondents when the victorious Khmer Rouge occupied Phnom Penh. Mr.
Schanberg's agony was that he was not able to protect Mr. Dith when the Khmer
Rouge began their systematic purge of all educated Cambodians and especially
those who had worked with the Americans during the previous regime.



While Mr. Schanberg and other Western correspondents were still in sanctuary in
the French Embassy in Phnom Penh in 1975, Dith Pran slipped out of the compound
and disappeared. In the years that followed, almost everybody except Mr.
Schanberg, who returned to New York, eventually assumed Dith Pran to be dead,
one of the estimated three million out of seven million Cambodians who were
either massacred by the Khmer Rouge or died of starvation or disease.

That Dith Pran did survive provided the shape and the heart of the Schanberg
memoir.

All this needs saying by way of introduction to ''The Killing Fields,'' the
ambitious, serious new film that, with great care and respect, has been based on
''The Death and Life of Dith Pran.''

In most of its surface details, ''The Killing Fields'' is a faithful adaptation,
acted with self-effacing honesty by Sam Waterston as Mr. Schanberg, Dr. Haing S.
Ngor - himself a Cambodian refugee - as Mr. Dith, and by the members of the
large, meticulously chosen cast. Photographed mainly on location in Thailand in
jungles, paddy fields and cities made to appear ravaged, the movie looks
amazingly authentic. There's not a cheap shot in the entire film.

Yet something vital is missing, and that's the emotional intensity of Mr.
Schanberg's first-person prose. The movie is diffuse and wandering. It's someone
telling a long, interesting story who can't get to the point.



''The Killing Fields,'' which opens today at the Cinema 1, is less a cinematic
equivalent to the original than a movie about those experiences. It's a story
told in the third-person, which attempts to make conventional, dramatic order
out of the highly dramatic, harrowing, emotional disorder of the memoir. Bruce
Robinson's screenplay makes clumsily explicit those subtly implicit feelings of
doubt and guilt by which Mr. Schanberg's recollections of Dith Pran become, in
fact, ''a story of Cambodia.''

Mr. Robinson and Roland Joffe, the director, never successfully dramatize the
particularity of the events that, over an extended period of time, describe the
rare nature of that friendship. It takes such a long, god- like view of things
that often we're never sure what or whom the movie is about. Mr. Waterston's
Schanberg is on screen most of the time but the camera, instead of convincing us
that it's seeing events through his eyes, keeps looking over him to the wartime
panorama beyond. The story is there but not the personal impact.

The film begins in 1973 and, with a lot of technical virtuosity, creates a vivid
picture of the last, desperate months of the Lon Nol Government. There are Mr.
Schanberg's discoveries of the terrible ''miscalculations'' by which innocent
Cambodians are bombed to oblivion by United States planes, the increasing panic
and high-handedness of American representatives in Phnom Penh and, finally, the
abandonment of Phnom Penh.

Mr. Schanberg makes arrangements for the safe evacuation of Mr. Dith's wife and
children, and when he, with a handful of other correspondents, elects to remain
in the capital, Mr. Dith stays, too.

This decision, which puts Mr. Dith's life on the line, comes to haunt Mr.
Schanberg. It also becomes so curiously overstated by the film that it seems
that the meaning of the friendship, for dramatic expediency, has been vastly
oversimplified and thus, in a way, underrated.



The film is most effective when it takes leave of Mr. Schanberg and follows Mr.
Dith's dogged attempts to stay alive after he leaves Phnom Penh. At one point he
is put into a forced labor camp where he survives on lizards and scorpions and
by sucking the blood from living water buffaloes. Though tortured, he refuses to
die. There's a good but never fully developed sequence in which he's befriended
by a provincial Khmer Rouge official who trusts Mr. Dith to get his small son to
the safety of Thailand.

The movie is not easy to watch. The massacres by which the Khmer Rouge attempt
to reduce the population to manageable size - and to change the character of the
country - are graphically depicted. Prisoners, individually and in odd-lots, are
shot casually. Sometimes they're simply beaten to death - it saves bullets. In a
nightmare scene near the end, the exhausted Mr. Dith finds himself stumbling
through a paddy field whose dikes are composed of human bones.

The performances are uniformly fine. Mr. Waterston possesses the strength, humor
and compassion of the increasingly obsessed Mr. Schanberg, and Dr. Ngor, who's
never acted before, reveals an extraordinary screen presence as the resilient
Mr. Dith. Prominent in the supporting cast are Julian Sands, Craig T. Nelson,
Spalding Gray, Bill Paterson, Athol Fugard and John Malkovich, though, with the
exception of Mr. Malkovich, who plays a prickly sort of news camerman, the roles
are mostly functions of the plot.

Unfortunately, the most moving aspect of ''The Killing Fields'' is not the
friendship, which should be the film's core, but the fact that the friendship
never becomes as inspiriting as the one Mr. Schanberg recalled in his own
searching, unhackneyed prose.



Story of Cambodia

THE KILLING FIELDS, directed by Roland Joffe; screenplay by Bruce Robinson;
director of photography, Chris Menges; edited by Jim Clark; music by Mike
Oldfield; produced by David Puttnam; released by Warner Bros. At Cinema 1, Third
Avenue and 60th Street. Running time: 139 minutes. This film is rated R. Sydney
SchanbergSam Waterston Dith PranDr. Haing S. Ngor Al RockoffJohn Malkovich Jon
SwainJulian Sands Military AttacheCraig T. Nelson United States ConsulSpalding
Gray Dr. MacentireBill Paterson Dr. SundesvalAthol Fugard DougalGraham Kennedy
Ser MoeunKatherine Krapum Chey TitonelOliver Pierpaoli SarunEdward Entero Chey


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dr. Haing Ngor; photo of Sam Waterston

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TELEVISION BAN UPHELD IN WESTMORELAND CASE

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 562 words


A Federal court of appeals yesterday upheld a ruling by the presiding judge in
the Westmoreland libel suit turning down the request of the Cable News Network
to broadcast the proceedings.

Writing for the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, Judge
James L. Oakes said the right of television to broadcast Federal trials had not
yet been established.

''Until the First Amendment expands to include television access to the
courtroom as a protected interest,'' he wrote, it would not be considered a
constitutional right but a ''right created by consent of the judiciary.''

Cable News had argued that the size of the courtroom excluded many people
interested in Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS from getting
anything but second-hand accounts of the trial and that the public had a First
Amendment right to be present.

Judge Oakes responded in his ruling that ''there is a long leap between a public
right under the First Amendment to attend trials and a public right under the
First Amendment to see a given trial televised.''

''It is a leap that is not supported by history,'' he wrote. ''It is a leap that
we are not yet prepared to take.''

First Amendment rights had not yet expanded to ''include television access to
the courtroom as a protected interest,'' he wrote, but continued to be a ''right
created by consent of the judiciary.''

Robert W. Ross, a vice president and general counsel for Cable News, said the
network would consider pursuing the appeal to the Supreme Court.

''We will discuss it with management in terms of expense,'' he said. ''It is
worthwhile trying to establish a principle. It may be we need to wait to see
whether or not this is the correct time to bring the case on or whether we
should wait until there is a greater creation of opinion. We need to create a
constituency.''

The ruling supports a previous one by a Board of Judges in the Southern District
that opposed the waiver of a local rule forbidding television cameras in the
courtroom.

It also supports a decision by Judge Pierre N. Leval, the presiding judge in the
Westmoreland case, who in September said he did not feel he could allow cameras
at the trial even though he personally supported their presence because of its
national importance.

The special counsel for Cable News, Prof. Lawrence H. Tribe of Harvard Law
School, an expert in constitutional law, argued before the Court of Appeals on
Oct. 19 that the right of the public and the press to observe a trial had been
guaranteed by the Supreme Court in 1980. In that case, a Virginia state court
was told it could not exclude the public and press from a murder trial.

In his brief to the Appeals Court, Professor Tribe argued that limiting live
access to the Westmoreland trial to those allowed to sit in the 150 gallery
seats ''denies first-hand, real- time access to the tens of millions of citizens
who are relegated by such a limitation to qualitatively inferior, stale and
wooden interpretations of what occurred.''

Judge Ralph J. Winter wrote that he did not disagree with Professor Tribe that
''access to the courts for the purpose of conveying information to the public
about judicial proceedings falls within the area of protected speech under the
First Amendment,'' but he concurred with Judge Oakes that the local rule could
not be set aside.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 3, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 438 words


Questions appear on page 12.

1. The figures make up a military statue that has been added to the site of the
Vietnam Memorial, the simple polished black granite wall engraved with the names
of Americans killed in that war.

2. The Sikh sect. At least 600 people died when Mrs. Gandhi ordered the army to
storm the Golden Temple at Amitsar, the Sikh's holiest shrine, which had been
occupied by a group of Sikh extremists.

3. Do not care who wins.

4. The voter registration form. Homeless people.

5. The quotation, attributed to Mehmet Ali Agca, the man convicted of shooting
Pope John Paul II in 1981, implicates a second gunman and is taken from the
report of an Italian magistrate on the assassination attempt.

6. A former gas station, described by the commission as in the
''neo-Italian-Renaissance'' style, which was made into a guest room and office.

7. Since Congress has adjourned, it cannot vote to override the Presidential
veto. When Congress cannot act on a Presidential veto, the President simply
refuses to sign a bill, in effect pocketing it, and the legislation dies.

8. For the first time, prize money was openly awarded in the Marathon to the top
male and female runners. The prizes ranged from $25,000 for the winners to
$1,000 for the woman who finished 20th and the man who finished 25th.

9. Would.

10. His portrait is on the new Japanese 5,000-yen note. In an effort to gain
more international appeal, the new currencies do not bear likenesses of
politicians and statesmen but of men of presumably broader fame.

11. A shtetl, the small East European town once inhabited largely by
Yiddish-speaking Jews.

12. A person may be deemed legally dead when the brain has ceased to function,
even if the heartbeat and breathing are maintained by artificial means.

13. The nationalistic ''Mass for the Homeland'' had been celebrated in Warsaw by
the Rev. Jerzy Popieluszko, a pro-Solidarity priest, once a month since January
1982, one month after martial law was imposed. His body was recovered from a
Vistula reservoir 11 days after he was abducted by three security officers of
the Interior Ministry.

14. Unlikely.

15. Fyodor Chaliapin.

16. Willie Hernandez of the Detroit Tigers, who recorded 32 saves out of 33 save
situations and compiled a 9-3 record with a 1.92 earned run average.

17. Economic recovery. The number of jobs increased in all five boroughs for the
first time since 1977.

18. The laundering of illegally gained money to make it appear legitimate, often
by transferring it out of the country and back again.

19. The Cathedral of St. John the Divine.

20. Chile.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Cynthia Coggeshall Is to Marry Dec. 22

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 99, Column 5; Society Desk

LENGTH: 214 words


Dr. and Mrs. Bayard Coggeshall of Mendham, N.J., have announced the engagement
of their daughter Cynthia Coggeshall to Richard Ten Broeck Trask, a son of Mrs.
John Jacquelin Trask of New York and the late Mr. Trask. The wedding is to take
place on Dec. 22.

Miss Coggeshall, who is completing work on a combined B.S.-R.N. degree at the
New York University School of Nursing, graduated from the Westover School and
Wheelock College. Her father is attending pediatrician at the Morristown
Memorial Hospital. The bride-to-be is a granddaughter of Laurence Achilles of
Manchester, Vt., and the late Mrs. Achilles, and of the late Mr. and Mrs. Murray
H. Coggeshall of Morristown, N.J. Mr. Coggeshall was a member of Coggeshall &
Hicks, Wall Street stockbrokers.

Mr. Trask, a vice president of Citibank, graduated from St. Bernard's School and
the Taft School and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. After
serving as a lieutenant with the 101st Airborne Division in Vietnam, he received
an M.B.A. degree from Columbia University. His father was a member of the New
York Stock Exchange and a partner in Francis I. duPont Glore Forgan.

Mr. Trask is a grandson of the late Mr. and Mrs. Donn Barber and the late Mr.
and Mrs. Frederick Kingsbury Trask, all of New York.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

KREMLIN LETS FACTORIES REACH OUT TO THE EAST BLOC

BYLINE: By THEODORE SHABAD

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 17, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 670 words


The Soviet Union, in a move aimed at closer economic contacts with its allies,
has authorized factories to establish ''direct links'' with their counterparts
in other Communist countries.

The contacts could speed the infusion of advanced technology into the Soviet
economy and erode the sweeping powers of the Foreign Trade Ministry.

Konstantin U. Chernenko, the Soviet leader, has generally been viewed as
reluctant to pursue changes in economic organization begun by his predecessor,
Yuri V. Andropov. But the new factory-to-factory dealings appear to be part of a
continuing effort to relax controls and to endow industrial managers with more
initiative.

''Direct links'' is a Soviet catch phrase used for short cuts in the
bureaucratic maze of the highly structured economy. Traditionally factories had
contacts only through the Government ministries that ran them. Foreign
transactions, moreover, had to be channeled through trade agencies.

By letting plants work directly with the technologically more advanced Eastern
Europeans, Soviet planners hope to foster modernization. East Germany and
Poland, in particular, are thought to be ahead in high-tech industries such as
microelectronics.

There are no indications that Soviet plants will be allowed to deal directly
with enterprises in the West.

Under a decree, signed June 7 by Prime Minister Nikolai A. Tikhonov and made
public only recently, Soviet plant managers will be authorized to turn to
Soviet-bloc enterprises for tools, parts and and services. The managers will be
''personally responsible'' for the cost-effectiveness of these deals, and the
Foreign Trade Ministry is to ''facilitate'' such contacts.

The decree applies not only to other members of the Council for Economic Mutual
Assistance, the Soviet bloc's economic alliance, but to Yugoslavia, an
independent Communist country with a market economy.

The alliance comprises the Soviet Union, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany,
Hungary, Poland, Rumania, Vietnam, Mongolia and Cuba. The decree fostering
direct links does not apply to China, North Korea, Cambodia and Laos, none of
which are part of the Soviet-dominated economic bloc.

Provisions for direct linkages have been included in long-term economic accords,
extending to the year 2000, that the Soviet Union has signed with Poland and
East Germany. Late last month, at a meeting in Havana of the heads of government
of the Soviet bloc, Mr. Tikhonov confirmed that factory- to-factory dealings had
already gone into effect with the two countries.

The June edict, which appears in the latest issue of the Collection of Decrees
of the Government of the U.S.S.R., an official gazette, seems to carry out an
idea proposed 20 years ago by Aleksei N. Kosygin, then the Prime Minister.

He suggested in 1965 that Soviet plants be allowed to conduct foreign- trade
operations on their own and to benefit from producing high-grade goods for
export.

Although such decentralization of foreign trade has since been introduced in
some of the Eastern European countries, notably Hungary, it was not carried out
in the Soviet Union, where the authority of the Foreign Trade Ministry remained
firmly entrenched.

The new factory-to-factory links, by fostering subcontracting and other supply
arrangements, are intended to reduce ''unjustified parallel production'' in the
Soviet Union and other countries and to save resources.

By drawing on the technical expertise of Eastern Europe, the decree says, the
Soviet Union is seeking to expand the output of goods that meet world standards
and to retool periodically for new models. There has been a tendency in the
Soviet Union to keep a given design in production over long periods of time, and
Soviet manufactures have not been of high enough quality for the world market.

The closer supplier links with Eastern Europe are also aimed at eliminating
nonessential imports from the West by encouraging the manufacture of more
advanced industrial equipment within the Soviet Union.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA CALLS NEW SOVIET TALKS USEFUL; 6TH ROUND DUE IN APRIL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 440 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Nov. 3


China said today that a fifth round of talks with the Soviet Union on
normalizing relations was ''useful,'' and both sides expressed willingness to
expand economic, trade, scientific and cultural exchanges.

Two weeks of talks concluded Friday in Peking and will reconvene in Moscow in
April, a Foreign Ministry statement said.

China previously issued only terse, nondescriptive dispatches on the
negotiations between the rival Communist powers that began in October 1982.

''The consultations proceeded in a frank, calm and earnest atmosphere,'' the
statement said. ''Both sides considered consultations and dialogues useful and
decided that the next round of consultations would be held in April 1985 in
Moscow.''

There was no mention of what China calls the three major obstacles to improved
relations, which have been strained for more than two decades by ideological and
territorial disputes.

China objects to an estimated 600,000 Soviet troops along the Chinese border,
the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan and Moscow's support for
Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

The talks have been headed by Deputy Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and Deputy
Foreign Minister Leonid F. Ilyichev.

'Some Positive Moments'


Mr. Ilyichev, who left Peking by special plane today for Moscow, told reporters
at the airport, ''There were some positive moments.'' He did not elaborate.

The statement by the Chinese Foreign Ministry said, ''Each side set forth its
position on the normalization of relations between the two countries. Both sides
expressed the desire for improved Sino-Soviet relations and the willingness to
further expand the contacts and exchanges between the two countries in the
economic, trade, scientific, technological, cultural, sports and other fields on
the basis of equality and mutual benefit.''

Despite their differences, both countries have moved to improve relations in
nonpolitical areas since the normalization talks began.

Statistics reported by the official press on Oct. 31 said 10,000 Soviet visitors
came to China in the first nine months of this year, compared with 8,000 in
1983.

The reports also said Chinese-Soviet trade would reach $1.2 billion in 1984, up
60 percent from last year.

China and the Soviet Union were close allies during the 1950's, but disputes
broke out in the late part of that decade over interpretations of Marxist
ideology and frontier boundaries.

The Russians withdrew all advisers and aid to China in 1960, and border clashes
occurred in 1969.

China has said repeatedly that it considers the Soviet Union to be the main
threat to Chinese security.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD LEADERS AT THE GANDHI FUNERAL

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 458 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Nov. 3


Following are the officials who were designated to represent their countries and
international organizations at the funeral today of Prime Minister Indira
Gandhi. The list is based on information from the governments and organizations
and the Indian Foreign Ministry.



Arab League: Clovis Maksoud, United Nations representative

Afghanistan: Prime Minister Soltan Ali

Keshtmand

Algeria: Prime Minister Abdelhamid

Brahimi

Argentina: Vice President Victor Martinez

Bangladesh: President E. M. Ershad

Belgium: Deputy Prime Minister Charles-

Ferdinand Nothomb

Bhutan: King Jigme Wangchuc

Britain: Prime Minister Margaret

Thatcher and Princess Anne

Burma: Ne Win

Cambodia: Heng Samrin, People's Council

President

Canada: Foreign Secretary Joe Clark

Czechoslovakia: Prime Minister Lubomir

Strougal

Cyprus: President Spyros Kyprianou

Finland: Prime Minister Kalevi Sorsa

France: Prime Minister Laurent Fabius

Greece: Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou

Guyana: Prime Minister Hugh Desmond

Hoyte

Ireland: Prime Minister Garret FitzGerald

Italy: Foreign Minister Giulio Andreotti

Japan: Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone

Laos: President Souphanouvong

Libya: Miftah al-Usta, Congress Secretary

General

Madagascar: Didier Ratsiraka, head of

state

Malaysia: Deputy Prime Minister Musa

Hitam

Maldives: Foreign Minister Fathulla Jameel

Mauritius: Prime Minister Aneerood Jugnauth

Nepal: Prime Minister Lokendra Bahadur

Chand

The Netherlands: Prince Claus

New Zealand: Prime Minister David

Lange

Norway: Foreign Minister Svenn Stray

Pakistan: President Mohammad Zia ul-

Haq

Philippines: Imelda Marcos

Poland: President Henryk Jablonski

Portugal: Prime Minister Mario Soares

Soviet Union: Prime Minister Nikolai A.

Tikhonov

Spain: Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez

Sri Lanka: President J. R. Jayewardene

Tanzania: President Julius K. Nyerere

Turkey: Deputy Prime Minister Kaya

Erdem

Uganda: President Milton Obote

United Arab Emirates: Sheik Hamdan ibn

Muhammed al-Nuhayyan

United Nations: Secretary General Javier

Perez de Cuellar

United States: Secretary of State George

P. Shultz

Vietnam: Truong Chinh, State Council

Chairman

West Germany: Foreign Minister Hans-

Dietrich Genscher

Yemen: Prime Minister Abd al-Aziz Abd

al-Ghani

Yugoslavia: President Veselin Djuranovic

and Prime Minister Milka Planinc

Zambia: President Kenneth D. Kaunda

Zimbabwe: Prime Minister Robert Mugabe


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of India; photo of Mohammad Zia ul-Haq

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

ROOSEVELT HOSPITAL IS FAULTED AGAIN BY V.A.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 65, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 513 words

DATELINE: MONTROSE, N.Y., Nov. 2


A new report on the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Veterans Administraion Hospital
here says ''insufficient progress'' has been made in psychiatric and nursing
services since January, when the hospital was first reviewed.

The inquiries by the Veterans Administration followed the death last Dec. 2 of
Karl Lerchenmueller Jr., a patient from the hospital who hanged himself in the
Peekskill Jail.

Mr. Lerchenmueller, a Vietnam War veteran suffering from post-traumatic stress
disorder, had been arrested while on a day pass from the hospital and charged
with disorderly conduct.

Mr. Lerchenmueller, who had been known to become suicidal while under the
influence of alcohol, drank heavily after leaving the hospital on Dec. 2. He was
arrested by the Peekskill police when someone complained that he had become
unruly at a nearby train station.

Hospital Director Retires


The first report, which was critical of the hospital administration, was
followed by the retirement of the hospital director, Corydon F. Heard Jr., and
the reassignement of the chief of staff, Gaston Trigos.

The first report said the nursing and psychiatry services at the hospital were
poorly administered and overburdened.

The new report said: ''Insufficient progress has been made in overall management
of psychiatric and nursing services. Additional improvements are possible.''

The second report said that ''closer attention needs to be given to psychiatric
therapy functions as well as mental status exams.'' Security in the psychiatric
unit needs to be improved as well, it said.

Although there have been improvements in nursing services, mostly in the form of
more staff members, tours of duty need to be shortened and paperwork reduced,
the report said.

'Impressive Accomplishments'


The study praised the ''impressive accomplishments'' in improving communications
with nearby Peekskill and within the hospital itself. It also cited the
hospital's ''180 degree'' improvement in community relations.

Dr. Dewey Robbiano Jr., who was appointed Mr. Heard's replacement in May, said,
''There's nothing in the report I'd disagree with.''

''There are areas discussed in it that I'm extremely concerned about,'' he said.
''But I feel we have made many strides and improved in many areas, and I'm
confident that we will continue to improve.''

Dr. Robbiano said the hospital had recruited more than 50 registered nurses in
the last four months. A new chief of nursing, Roselle Knight, was hired last
week and will join the staff at the end of December, he said.

Commenting on the criticism of the the post-trauma stress unit, Dr. Robbiano
said it was difficult to modify the program ''midstream.'' But he added that
reorganization plans were under way and would probably take effect in January.

He also said the hospital had added more ''work restoration programs'' to
counsel veterans in searching for jobs.

The next review of the hospital is expected in May, according to Dr. Robbiano.
The hospital has more than 1,000 patients, two-thirds of them psychiatric
patients.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 8, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A headline on Sunday with an article about the Veterans Administration
misidentified the hospital criticized in a report to the agency. It was the
Franklin Delano Roosevelt Hospital in Montrose, N.Y., unrelated to Roosevelt
Hospital in Manhattan.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE AIDE HAS TAKEN ODYSSEY OF VIEWS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 93, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 3


David Ifshin's personal political odyssey has taken some unusual twists and
turns as he has moved from college antiwar activist to campaign aide to Walter
F. Mondale, the Democratic Presidential nominee.

Mr. Ifshin, general counsel to the campaign, is a former activist against the
Vietnam War who has worked for Democratic candidates in every Presidential
election year since 1968. He has been wooed unsuccessfully by Republicans who
thought his fears of expanding Soviet power made him ripe for political
defection.

''To move and to change is not easy,'' Mr. Ifshin said in a recent interview.
''I grew up wanting a military career.''

''I would hate to think I haven't grown,'' he added.

Remarks Broadcast by Hanoi


Mr. Ifshin, who is 36 years old, does not apologize for his opposition to the
war, but he expressed regrets about antiwar statements he made on a trip to
North Vietnam in 1970 when he was 21 years old. The remarks, urging opposition
to the Vietnam War among American G.I.'s and United States withdrawal from
Southeast Asia, were broadcast by Hanoi at the time.

''I'm as appalled as anyone else by it,'' he said of the broadcast.

He said that at the time he made the remarks he expected to be drafted, was
politically immature and was reacting emotionally to the loss of good friends
who died fighting in Vietnam.

''I almost felt when I made that cassette I was talking to myself - in some way
speaking out about how wrong it was,'' Mr. Ifshin said of the war.

Impressions at Tender Age


At that tender age, Mr. Ifshin says now, he was unable to see the dangers the
Soviet Union poses to third world nations. ''It's a tragedy - Vietnam is a
Stalinist country now,'' he added.

His views over the years evolved to the point that some Republicans thought he
might change party allegiance. In 1979, as a lawyer with a Washington firm, he
helped represent the Republican National Committee in a suit challenging Federal
campaign finance regulations. But he rejected Republican overtures and has
continued his string of working for Democratic aspirants to the Presidency.

Among those he supported was Senator Henry M. Jackson of Washington state in his
unsuccessful 1976 drive for the Democratic Presidential nomination.

The Scoop Jackson Tradition


President Reagan's campaign has courted supporters of the late Senator, whose
views on Soviet expansionism were close in some ways to those the Republicans
hold.

Mr. Ifshin said Mr. Mondale was in the ''Scoop Jackson tradition'' of favoring
increased military spending, a strong foreign policy and a willingess to
negotiate with the Russians for arms control.

Mr. Ifshin, a native of Wheaton, Md., where he was a member of his high school's
state championship track team, said he had been ''a red, white and blue kid.''
At Syracuse University he signed up for the Reserve Officers Training Corps but
later became an opponent of the Vietnam War.

In 1968 he attended the National Student Congress, where he met leading antiwar
figures of the day. On his trip to Hanoi, he was shown victims of United States
attacks, and his broadcast remarks, he recalled, were part of ''romantic notions
about the third world.''

'My Analysis of War Was Wrong'


''My analysis of the war was wrong,'' he added. ''But like a lot of 21-year-old
kids I was impressed by what I heard or saw five minutes ago.''

After graduation from Syracuse, where he was elected student body president, Mr.
Ifshin obtained a deferment, worked on a kibbutz in Israel and then enrolled at
Stanford University Law School in 1974. Now married, he has practiced law in
Washington since 1977.

Mr. Ifshin is not alone among antiwar activists who see the world differently
now. David A. Stockman, Mr. Reagan's budget director, was a leader of the
antiwar movement while attending Michigan State University in the late 1960's.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RECENT RELEASES

BYLINE: By Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26, Column 5; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 192 words


The Boys of Summer VidAmerica 90 minutes. $39.95

Often optioned for movies that were never made, Roger Kahn's best-seller about
the Brooklyn Dodgers of the Jackie Robinson era has made its way to the home
screen.

In the dozen years since the book was written, some of the boys - Billy Cox, Gil
Hodges and Robinson - have died. And the lives of others have changed: Clem
Labine's embittered son Jay lost a leg in Vietnam but found the love of his
father; Duke Snider has gone from failed avocado farmer to broadcasting for the
Montreal Expos; Carl Furillo, a leukemia victim, has gone from Manhattan
construction worker to night watchman in his native Pennsylvania.

The film clips of the glory years are here. The old ballplayers are still
interesting to listen to in various ways, especially Carl Erskine, with his
sense of history, eye for detail and way with an anecdote. Sid Caesar handles
the narration.

All that is missing - and it is a definite loss - is Mr. Kahn himself, with his
lovely evocation of what it was like to grow up in Brooklyn, root for the
Dodgers and be a young man covering baseball for The New York Herald Tribune.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENTS-CONSERVATIVE, FERAFUL

BYLINE: Bernice Buresh is associate professor of journalism at Boston
University.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 243 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Republican analysts say young voters are leaning toward President Reagan because
they believe the nation is heading in the ''right'' rather than the ''wrong''
direction. Mr. Reagan's pollster, Richard Wirthlin, thinks today's youth ''have
not had disillusioning events in their lives.'' None of this rings true to me. I
teach journalism, and the impression I get of the students' mood is not one of
confidence but of calamity.

Scratch the surface of what is sometimes described as student self- centeredness
and you see young people terrified about a world that seems out of control. Many
of my students are children of the comfortable middle class who have received
supposedly good educations. Yet increasingly they seem ill-equipped to even
begin thinking about national problems in any systematic way.

Many are conservative all right, but less as a matter of ideology than as a way
of saving themselves from Armageddon. Their conservatism is more personal than
political. Theyseem to be retrenching at the very time in life that they ought
to be taking risks. The economic pie has shrunk so much, some students suggest,
that unless they seize upon the right vocational courses now, they'll be without
a job when they graduate.

What they describe is a world divided so completely into haves and have-nots
that to feel safe they need to be ensconced near the top. ''It's good to be
selfish,'' one young man said. ''I mean that what Reagan says is right. It's
good for people to take care of themselves.'' True enough. But some students
describe taking care of themselves as such a consuming task that it leaves room
for little else. Having heard their parents talk about remortgaging their houses
to educate them, these impressionable teen-agers seem to think it's a short drop
from two cars in the garage to a shopping bag on the street.  In a way, today's
students are better observers than we give them credit for. Born in the
mid-1960's, they grew up with public disillusionment over assassinations, the
Vietnam War, Watergate and simultaneous inflation and unemployment. They are
impressed with the complexity of the problems of pollution, starving refugees,
overpopulation, nuclear proliferation. But, unlike the students of the 1960's,
today's undergraduates feel they have no way of addressing these problems. The
baby-boomers - bolstered by their huge numbers, an expanding economy and the
idealized image of a martyred President - thought they could change the world.
Today's students fear there is no place in the world for them. So some turn to
numbing themselves not with drugs but with the creature comforts and isolation
that money can buy.  At a time when they need their wits, many students,
educated by television and watered-down textbooks, seem intellectually
handicapped. They don't know that it's possible to describe events in many ways
and to confront issues with a variety of approaches. They see events in the
commercial news mode - one disaster following another to the accompaniment of
synthesized Teletype sounds. They have no sense that solutions might involve
months or even decades of work. And, unlike the baby- boomers, these students
don't question authority, they welcome it. They dare not ask provocative
questions in class, lest they jeopardize their safe A's and, by extension,
business and medical school.  Some students seem to be purposely shutting out
information so they can make their political decisions on the basis of beliefs
prompted by emotional needs. ''I'm for Reagan because he's for defense,'' one
18- year-old student said. ''I think we ought to spend more on defense.'' Yet it
turned out she had no idea how much is being spent or how it is being spent.  It
takes confidence to seek external solutions. For all of their excesses, the
students of the 1960's brought intellectual vigor to their causes. They wrote
manifestos, conducted teach- ins, debated tactics and insisted upon action and
accountability.  A couple of weeks ago, Brown University activists asked for
suicide pills, using the threat of self-annihilation to shock their fellow
students and the nation into taking the nuclear buildup seriously. They were
saying that they can't control anything in the world except the taking of their
own lives. What better example could there be of their sense of powerlessness

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENTS EMBATTLED

BYLINE: By Drew Middleton

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 926 words


Drew Middleton is the military correspondent of The New York Times.  NEMESIS

Truman and Johnson in the Coils of War in Asia.  By Robert J. Donovan.
Illustrated. 216 pp. New York: St. Martin's/Marek. $14.95.

Robert J. Donovan tackled an awesome task in this analysis of two American
Presidents' actions and reactions to two of the most agonizing
political-military crises ever to beset the Republic. The result is a closely
reasoned, well-researched commentary on troubles that convulsed the United
States for a quarter of a century.

Mr. Donovan has presented in alternate sections descriptions of the military and
political events that cost more than 100,000 American lives and dominated
American politics. The reader is asked to move from the Yalu River to the
councils of the Democratic Party leadership, and from the jungles of South
Vietnam to the groves of academe where opposition to the fighting in those
jungles flourished. Mr. Donovan's success in making the book readable and at
times even exciting is a tribute to his skill. Inevitably longer, more detailed
comparative analyses of these situations will be published one day. But until
they appear, ''Nemesis'' should serve as a standard.

Two themes run through it. The first is that neither Truman's Administration nor
Johnson's anticipated the endless complications, domestic and foreign, that
would arise from the deployment of United States forces on the Asian mainland.
Governments, democratic or otherwise, seldom do understand the consequences of
such actions.

The second theme, which I wish Mr. Donovan had explored more fully, is the
impact of recent history on policy making. The decisions about Korea by
President Truman and his cabinet were affected strongly by what today would be
called the Munich syndrome - a bitter memory of the surrender by Great Britain
and France to Hitler's demands at the Munich meeting of 1938. Ironically, the
capitulation at Munich was partly inspired by British and French leaders'
memories of the millions of their compatriots who were killed or wounded during
World War I. But Truman saw any failure to respond to the North Koreans' attack
on South Korea in 1950 as another Munich.

That attitude continued to affect Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson in
the form of the ''domino theory'' when they considered what to do about the slow
disintegration of Vietnam after the French were defeated there in the 1950's.
They believed that the loss of South Vietnam would lead to the falling of other
''dominoes'' in Asia. And the result is that the United States now suffers in
the conduct of international affairs from the inhibiting influence of our loss
in Vietnam.



Mr. Donovan, a seasoned reporter on politics who has written a highly praised
two-volume biography of Truman, excels in recounting the criticism that fell on
Truman and Johnson during their war years. Still vivid in public memory is the
wave of criticism of Johnson, the Vietnam War and, in many cases, the entire
American political and social system that broke over the White House in the
1960's. But many will have forgotten the storm of abuse that burst on the White
House after the dismissal of Gen. Douglas MacArthur from his command in Korea,
abuse that included demands for Truman's impeachment.

Mr. Donovan pays perhaps too much attention to the political ramifications of
the two wars and, in my view, not enough to the military events and decisions
that aroused these political responses. For instance, I would have welcomed a
more thorough examination of the refusal by the White House to recognize that
North Vietnam and not the Viet Cong was the enemy in the Vietnam War, and to
consider plans for early attacks on Haiphong and Hanoi. One reason heard at the
time was that such bombing would invite intervention by China. But at the time
China was caught up in the opening of the Cultural Revolution and many experts
believe it would have been unable to intervene effectively.

Mr. Donovan's discussion of the later American air attacks on North Vietnam is
balanced and makes the point, too often dismissed at the time, that in that
predominantly agricultural economy there was really nothing much to bomb save
key communications. North Vietnam wasn't Germany.

Effective surprise by the enemies marred the American military performance in
both wars and these surprises had a great impact on American politics. The
Chinese attack on MacArthur's forces in North Korea led to a major American
military defeat - all the more grievous for public opinion in this country
because it closely followed the successful American landings at Inchon harbor in
North Korea. About 300,000 Chinese fell on the American and South Korean forces
and MacArthur, who had been talking about getting the boys home by Christmas,
faced what he called an entirely new war.


POLITICALLY, the Tet offensive in 1968 was the turning point of the Vietnam War,
as Mr. Donovan illustrates. Although, as we now know, eventually both the North
Vietnamese and the Viet Cong were defeated with heavy casualties in this
offensive, the raid on the United States Embassy in Saigon gave the impression
that the United States was losing the war in military terms.

Truman emerges from these pages as by far the more balanced and effective war
leader - one who, of course, knew something of war at first hand. Johnson, on
the contrary, seems volatile and uncertain, a consummate politician who in the
end failed to understand the impact of war on politics.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Robert Donovan

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 850 words


Nov. 4, 1984Fiction*1

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  *2

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  *3

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love. *4

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.  *5

BLOOD AND ORCHIDS, by Norman Katkov.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four Hawaiian youths
are accused of raping a Navy officer's wife.  *6

SINNERS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) Sex and scandal in Hollywood.  *7

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) A human
detective from Earth investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora. *8


MORETA: Dragonlady of Pern, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.) On a
distant planet, humans and dragons fight a spore invasion.  *9

WHEN LOVE COMMANDS, by Jennifer Wilde.  (Avon, $3.95.) An Englishwoman in the
clutches of a sadistic Russian count.  10

FIREFOX DOWN, by Craig Thomas. (Bantam, $3.95.) A sequel about the theft of a
secret Soviet warplane.  11

FIRST LOVE, WILD LOVE, by Janelle Taylor.  (Zebra, $3.75.) An innocent beauty
finds rapture in the arms of a Texas cattle baron.  12

DARKFALL, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $3.95.) Ratlike creatures escape from
hell to leave a trail of disfigured corpses in this tale of horror.  13

GRANDMASTER, by Warren Murphy and Molly Cochran. (Pinnacle, $3.95.) Two chess
prodigies in the world of espionage.  14

MISTRAL'S DAUGHTER, by Judith Krantz.  (Bantam, $4.50.) The art world of the
20's and the fashion business of the 80's.  15

CHEROKEE, by Donald Clayton Porter. (Bantam, $3.95.) The ''White Indian'' series
continues with a story of hostilities between the Senecas and the Cherokees.



















































































































 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.  *An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.


 Nonfiction

General *1

MOTHERHOOD, THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION, by Erma Bombeck. (Dell, $3.95.) Humor
by the syndicated columnist.  *2

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) Americans flee an
Iranian prison.  *3

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  *4

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy League
graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  *5

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) Men who won't grow up. *6

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  *7

INTREPID'S LAST CASE, by William Stevenson.  (Ballantine, $3.95.) How the famous
spymaster looked for a mole in British intelligence.  *8

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) A helicopter pilot's life in
Vietnam.  *9

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.  10

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.

 Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous *1

NO MORE SECRETS FOR ME, by Oralee Wachter.  (Little, Brown, $4.95.) How children
can defend themselves against sexual abuse.  *2

GARFIELD LOSES HIS FEET, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.  *3

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  *4

IN SEARCH OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson.  (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $4.95.) A
new collection of the syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.  *5

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
For 1984.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: KRISTALL NACHT


the Night of the Broken Glass - was the Nov. 9, 1938, night in Germany when the
Nazis began their systematic campaign to terrorize the Jews with the breaking of
windows in synagogues and shops throughout the country.

The Second Generation of Long Island - a group of people whose parents were
concentration camp survivors - will remember Kristall Nacht at Temple Beth El,
Cedarhurst, on Thursday at 8 P.M. This is the third year that the service has
been commemorated on Long Island and some 300 people are expected to attend.

Elizabeth Holtzman, Brooklyn's District Attorney, will address the gathering.
According to

Sarah Ducorsky, president of Second Generation, ''we will also discuss what the
Night of the Broken Glass means to us and where we go from here.''

''Education must keep everyone aware of how humanity can fall down if we aren't
careful to respect each other,'' she said.

Miss Holtzman will speak about her office's work in tracking down Nazi war
criminals for deportation.



In response to inquiries from local veterans' groups, the Town of Hempstead
recently announced that it will apply the recently approved New York State
Veterans Tax benefits to the maximum extent allowed by law.

Kenneth J. Cynar, a town spokesman, pointed out that the announcement comes in
the wake of actions by several local municipalities to delay or deny veterans
these benefits for the coming budget year.

Six Nassau villages, Great Neck, Floral Park, Old Westbury, Manorhaven, Port
Washington North and Flower Hill, voted not to offer the benefits for now,
apparently because they want to have time to study what effect they will have on
their tax base. Some criticism had been voiced that taxpayers who are not
veterans would be paying for the costs.

The new state tax benefits, approved in the 1984 spring legislative sessions,
extend property tax exemptions to veterans of the Vietnam and Korean Wars.
Previously, the exemptions were available only to veterans of World War II.
Approximately 164,000 veterans of the Korean and Vietnam Wars live in the
Nassau-Suffolk area.

According to

Eugene L. Weisbein, a town councilman from Hewlett Harbor, ''there is simply no
reason to deny these benefits to our more recent veterans.''

''We urge them to avail themselves of the appropriate information so that these
exemptions may be applied as soon as possible,'' he said.

Eligible veterans may call the Nassau County Department of Assessment at 535
2333 for information. Under the new law, a war-era veteran could be eligible for
an annual exemption of 15 percent of the assessed value of his home for 10
years. Veterans with combat duty would be allowed an additional 10 percent
exemption and additional benefits would be available for service-related
disabilities.

The exemptions apply to the town's general and part-town property taxes (paid by
people in unincorporated areas in lieu of village tax) and highways taxes.

Mr. Cynar noted that the exemption does not apply to special districts such as
parks or school districts.



Three Suffolk cable television systems have joined forces for the first time to
broaden their election night coverage for Smithtown, Brookhaven and Islip
viewers.

Viacom Cablevision, Brookhaven Cable and Group W Cable are combining crews and
equipment for the live broadcast, which will originate from the Viacom Studio in
Hauppauge.

Karl Grossman and

Don Stephan will anchor the program, which will include results of local
Congressional and state legislative races, on-the-scene reports from several
election gathering places, special features and political commentary.

The program will go on the air at 8 P.M. Tuesday on Channel 6 for Viacom and
Brookhaven viewers and Channel 10 for Group W.



Low-income single-parent families will receive a helping hand in Brookhaven Town
as part of a $25 million nationwide Federal demonstration project.

Brookhaven is one of four municipalities in New York State chosen to take part
in the project, which includes housing subsidies, job training and placement and
other assistance to help those families climb up the financial ladder.

The town is receiving about $325,000 a year in rent subsidies for 50 families,
who will receive child care, transportation and employment assistance through
both public agencies and the private sector. A 25-member task force is
coordinating that aid.

Edward Romaine, Brookhaven Commissioner of Housing and Community Development,
said participants would be selected on the basis of financial guidelines and
motivation. The test project, which is spread through 78 communities across the
country, will continue for 18 to 24 months, at which time it will be evaluated
for possible expansion.

Applicants must not own a home and must meet income guidelines - below $13,500
for a family of two to below $22,500 for a family of eight or more. Applicants
can call 654-2136 or 654-7977.qm




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLANDERS;
NOW A SCHOLAR, HE SAW HISTORY MADE

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 2, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 639 words


''TO me, world events are like a great crossword puzzle,'' said Dr. Louis A.
Fanning of Northport. ''It's one of the greatest enjoyments of my life to come
to a particular topic or an area, and - hopefully by good research and extended
contemplation - try and find out what really happened. That's what I enjoy
most.''

It should come as scant surprise, therefore, that Dr. Fanning is, by choice and
by training, a historian and an author. And because at times he has had a
ringside seat at the making of history, it seems natural that his field of
expertise is the 20th century.

At age 57, Dr. Fanning, who served during World War II in the Army as an
enlisted man and during the Korean conflict as an intelligence officer (when he
was the person who alerted the high command to the Chinese Communist request for
an armistice), is a professor of history at the State University of New York at
Farmingdale.

Dr. Fanning, who retired from the Reserves with the rank of major, has served as
an adviser to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on United States relations
with the Soviet Union. He has been a visiting lecturer to the Special Forces
troops at the United States Army Special Warfare Center at Fort Bragg, N.C. And
he is a specialist on Vietnamese history and politics for the Heritage
Foundation, a conservative research organization in Washington, D.C.

In addition to his scholarly articles, he is the author of ''Betrayal in
Vietnam,'' a 1977 book that blames Congress for loss of the war.

''We could have won that war at almost any time,'' Dr. Fanning said. ''We
elected not to do whatever was necessary.''

As a teacher, he noted, ''There is a reawakening of interest in what it is that
happened in Vietnam.''

In recent years, Dr. Fanning has been working on a new book about the origins of
Hitler's rise and the Nazi movement and of World War II. Titled ''Broken
Promises: The Lost Peace of the 20th Century,'' it is scheduled for publication
by Arlington House. ''It takes me about eight years to put out a book,'' Dr.
Fanning said. ''I'm in my fifth year of research now.''

The thesis is that the Versailles Treaty that ended World War I was so
psychologically and financially punitive as to doom efforts to establish
democracy in Germany during the Weimar Republic that preceded the Nazi era.

Last summer, Dr. Fanning said, while conducting research as a visiting scholar
at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, he came upon evidence that the
United States had bought the surrender of Bulgaria during World War I,
permitting an Allied breakthrough from the south in September 1918. General
Erich Ludendorff of Germany called this movement the straw that broke the
camel's back. The fighting ended two months later.

Dr. Fanning was fascinated by the past while growing up in various places in the
Middle West. ''My greatest enjoyment as a kid was reading about battles,'' Dr.
Fanning said. ''Battles of the Roman army; battles of the Carthaginians.''

When he graduated from Knox (Ind.) High School in 1944, he enlisted in the Army
and served for two years. He studied at three colleges before earning a
bachelor's degree in history and psychology in 1951 from the University of
Illinois. As an R.O.T.C. officer, he was called to active duty during the Korean
conflict and was the night link between the Far East Command in Japan and 11
generals in Washington.

Returning to the United States, Dr. Fanning, who is married and has two grown
children, worked as a personnel director in private industry for about 10 years
before he applied for a teaching position at Farmingdale and resuming his
studies.

''All I was doing was making money,'' he said of his work in provate industry.
''I really felt I wasn't making a contribution, so I decided to make a greater
contribution.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dr. Louis Fanning

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAMPS;
WHAT THE HOLES MEAN

BYLINE: By Richard L. Sine

SECTION: Section 2; Page 34, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 991 words


The condition of a stamp or other philatelic item, is perhaps the most important
factor affecting its desirability. But there are so many exceptions to
''philatelic rules.'' One is the belief that stamps should be perfect. This has
led to a whole area of collecting: that is ''perfins'' stamps with perforated
initials punched in them.

By definition, perfins are sets of holes punched in stamps that form patterns of
letters, numbers, designs or a combination of the three. These patterns are
distinctive and normally identify the user.

Principal use of perfins, at least at their beginning and in the eyes of British
inventor Joseph Sloper, was security. Items as small as postage stamps and
produced in such large quantities are subject to theft. Because they prepay a
service, stamps may be used by anyone. By punching holes in stamps in an
identifiable pattern, they are transformed from uniform and indistinguishable to
items uniquely recognizable. Unauthorized use of the punched stamps may be
readily seen.



Perfins were authorized for use in the United States on May 8, 1908. The current
Domestic Mail Manual of the U.S. Postal Service notes that postage stamps may be
perforated if individual holes do not exceed 1/32 of an inch in diameter and the
total design does not occupy more than a 1/2-square- inch area. From a
historical standpoint, perfins replaced company overprints of stamps and, in
turn, are being replaced by easier-to-use and uniquely numbered postage meters.

Perfin collecting normally is limited to punched patterns on postage stamps and
excludes the cancel punches used on some revenue stamps in many countries. There
are examples where the same perforator was used both to cancel revenue stamps
and to protect postage stamps from theft.

Perfins can be of private or official origin. A prime example of a perfin for
official use is one that shows the coat-of-arms of the City of London, England.
Private perfins are used by companies, private agencies, clubs or individuals.
More than 200 stamp-issuing entities permit or have permitted the use of perfins
as secutiry devices.

Of this total, Great Britain and Germany each have more then 10,000 identifiable
patterns. The United States is among a group of nations which have more than
5,000 known patterns. Most entities, however, have fewer than 1,000 patterns and
many fewer than 100.

Some perfin users have more than one pattern. Multiple patterns usually are used
to distinguish a branch office of a company. Some users have patterns that
differ in size while maintaining their basic shape. Perfins are usually found in
old collections or lots of old stamps. They normally are found off cover,
although often the only way to ascertain the identity of the perfin user is to
find a perfin on cover with a return address.



As with all parts of stamp collecting, some perfin varieties may be purchased
inexpensively while others command a much higher price. Normally the cost of a
perfin is usually on the low end of the scale.

Perfins may be collected in a variety of ways. There are perfins of railroads,
insurance companies, colleges and universities and shoe companies, to name a
few. This form of collecting may be separate or part of a topical stamp
collection. Others collect by type of design such as single-letter patterns,
numerals, words or specific types of designs. There is no limit.

Just as there is variety in how to collect perfins, mounting the collection may
take different approaches. In addition to the normal method of mounting stamps
on an album page, the perfin collector may choose to mount the stamp face down
to accentuate the perfin design. The Perfin Club, R.R. 1, Box 5645, Dryden, Me.
04225, is a national organization specializing in this field.

Vietnam Veterans

The second anniversary of the dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington, D.C. on Nov. 10, also marks the release date of a 20- cent
commemorative stamp honoring the memorial. The V-shaped structure was designed
by former Yale architectural student, Maya Ying Lin, and is composed of two
black granite walls, each nearly 250 feet long. The walls are cut into a grassy
slope between the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial.



The walls are inscribed with the names of 57,939 American missing and dead. They
are listed in chronological order beginning with the first casualty in the
summer of 1959 and ending with the last in the spring of 1975. Designer of the
stamp was Paul Calle of Stamford, Conn., who also designed the 1983 Pearl Buck
and Voluntarism stamps. The Vietnam Veterans Memorial stamp was prepared under
the direction of Howard Paine, a design coordnator for the Citizens' Stamp
Advisory Committee.

On the selvage of each pane of 40 stamps appears a single digit plate number,
''Copyright, U.S. Postal Service 1984,'' ''Use Correct ZIP Code,'' and Mr. ZIP
in a running position. Normal procedures for ordering first day cancellations
are in effect, with orders to be postmarked no later than Dec. 10.

Customers affixing stamps. All envelopes must be addressed on the right side at
least 5/ 8 of an inch from the bottom and peelable return address labels are
recommended. Stamps must be affixed in the upper right corner, approximately 1/4
inch from the top and right edge. A filler of postal card thickness should be
inserted in each envelope. Requests should be addressed to Customer-Affixed
Envelopes, Vietnam Veterans Memorial Stamp, Postmaster, Washington, D.C.
20066-9991.

Postal Service affixing stamps. Procedures are the same as above, except for
affixing stamps to the envelopes and the address to send orders. Cost for the
stamps is 20 cents each and personal checks will be accepted for orders up to
the limit of 50 envelopes. Cash and postage stamps are not acceptable as
payment. Orders should be sent to Vietnam Veterans Memorial Stamp, Postmaster,
Washington, D.C. 20066-9992.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 4, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHEN DAD WAS BAD

BYLINE: By Russell Banks

SECTION: Section 7; Page 37, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 826 words


Russell Banks is the author of the forthcoming novel, ''Continental Drift.'' THE
LEGENDS OF JESSE DARK

By Michael Doane.  356 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $16.95.

In the first of the four ''legends'' that make up Michael

Doane's first novel, we're

asked to piece together the painful story of a son's surviving the psychotic
wrath of his drunken, violent father. It's a brutal story almost too personal
and despairing to tell straight out, and consequently Mr. Doane tells it aslant,
by digression and flashback, letting us gather in the story and its horror bit
by bit, until at last we can decipher the particulars of the legend and see it
for the universal story it really is, the Drunken Father Story, told since
before Noah.

In Mr. Doane's version, it happens in South Dakota at the edge of the Badlands
in the late 1960's and early 1970's. It happens among impoverished whites and
Indians grinding their lives of quiet desperation exceedingly small against one
another, beating, maiming, sometimes even killing one another in black rages,
weeping for forgiveness the next morning, and then by nightfall, in that awful
lonesomeness of the western plains, starting in again.

Mr. Doane's portrayal of these lives and their shattering effect on his
protagonist's childhood and adolescence is the best part of the novel. He
locates his story at the center of one family: the father, Bill Dark; Bill's
wife, Lady, whose voice has been literally crushed in her throat by the man's
incessant beatings; the 19-year-old daughter, Rose, who for years has been
sexually abused by the father, and the narrator of the story, Jesse. When Jesse,
17 years old, discovers what his father has been doing to Rose, he flees with
her to an abandoned farmhouse outside of town, where they set up housekeeping in
a sad, pathetic imitation of Bonnie and Clyde, running not from the law but from
their own parent.

This legend, which occupies the first quarter of the book, is about Rose's
descent into catatonia, about Jesse's attempts to save his mother, Lady, and
about his father's eventual discovery of his children's hideout. It's a child's
nightmare, to flee and hide from an enraged, drunken father, to hear him come
closer and closer to your hiding place; and it's this terrifying, primitive form
of suspense that gives the legend its awesome power, for we identify with the
children, with Jesse and Rose as with Hansel and Gretel, and the child's terror
of the mad giant is ours.

Unfortunately, a bizarre and unlikely accident is Mr. Doane's ending to this
legend, but it is so contrived a resolution to its deeper, universal conflicts
that we feel cheated of our legitimate grief, and Jesse's and Rose's sufferings
come up meaningless.

In Mr. Doane's second legend, we follow Jesse into the larger world of
university life in the early 1970's: laid-back rock bands, demonstrations
against the Vietnam War, casual and fairly constant sex, funky bars and
farmhouses where long- haired middle-class kids sit around stoned and play
humorless music. It's a common story, not a universal one, and as a result we
feel too much is being made of too little. We're given page after page of
frantic searches for drug connections, long, rambling descriptions of rock music
played, sung and composed by a musician who we're supposed to believe is
superior to all this, a Gregg Allman clone victimized by his fame. Meanwhile,
Jesse Dark moves through this dreary scene in the cool role of existential drug
dealer. This segment of the novel is peopled largely by stereotypes, and Jesse
is romanticized to such a degree that it's hard to believe he's the same boy we
met in the first legend.

This story, too, is brought to a contrived and melodramatic end, and Jesse soon
turns up, in the third legend, down and out in a flophouse in St. Paul,
assistant manager of a porn shop, consorting with the drunks, panhandlers,
hallucinating bag ladies and street people who huddle in the cold corners of
American cities.


A* FOURTH legend ends the novel, but not soon enough, unfortunately.  This
legend is about Jesse's attempt to kidnap the baby boy born in the mental
hospital to Jesse's catatonic sister. Rose. Her pregnancy is an unsolved mystery
(unless it's a miracle), and the baby is about to be given up for adoption when
Jesse appears at the hospital to say goodbye to Rose before heading east to join
his college girlfriend, Harper.

There are many obvious problems with this novel - stereotypes instead of
characters, Gothic and creaky mechanical turns in plot, overwrought and
frequently ungrammatical and cliched prose, along with a self-indulgent
sentimentality - but even so, one is almost willing to overlook such egregious
faults because of the power and honesty of the first 100 pages. The man who
wrote those pages is a gifted, promising writer; one could not, however, say
that about the man who wrote the rest of the book.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 5, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

F.B.I. ARRESTS 4 FUGITIVES IN OHIO IN 1981 SLAYING OF JERSEY TROOPER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1247 words


Federal agents in Ohio yesterday arrested four long-sought fugitives in the
slaying of a New Jersey state trooper nearly three years ago. A fifth person
accused of harboring them also was seized.

In a statement issued in Washington late in the afternoon, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation said three suspects were seized in a home in Cleveland early
yesterday, while two others were taken into custody in a van near Deerfield,
Ohio, 40 miles southeast of Cleveland.

The suspects included Raymond Luc Levasseur, a reputed member of a New
England-based revolutionary group who has been on the F.B.I.'s 10 most- wanted
list since 1977, and Richard Charles Williams, one of two men indicted for the
murder of Trooper Philip Lamonaco on a highway in New Jersey in 1981. Mr.
Levasseur's wife, Patricia Gros, and Jaan Karl Laaman, both of whom had been
sought for questioning in the trooper's slaying, also were taken into custody.



No Trace of One Suspect


But the agents found no trace of Thomas William Manning, the second man who had
been indicted in the slaying. His fingerprints had been found on the killers'
getaway car, which was found abandoned a few miles from the scene of the
shooting.

''We feel that Manning and his wife, Carol, have been in the Cleveland area, but
obviously they may have gotten out of there,'' said John Dunn, an F.B.I.
spokesman in Cleveland. He said they were believed to be traveling with their
three children.

The murder of Trooper Lamonaco, a highly decorated, 32-year-old officer, had
touched off one of the most intensive nationwide manhunts in years by the F.B.I.
and other law enforcement agencies.

The case had drawn wide attention, partly because of the brutality of the crime
and partly because Mr. and Mrs. Manning and Mr. Levasseur were already wanted in
connection with a series of bombings and a bank robbery in New England that had
been ascribed to a terrorist revolutionary group called the Sam
Melville-Jonathan Jackson Unit.

Trooper Lamonaco, the father of three children, was shot to death on an isolated
stretch of Interstate 80 near the Pennsylvania border on Dec. 21, 1981,
apparently after he stopped a car for a routine check. Witnesses said there were
two or possibly three men in the car, which sped away after Trooper Lamonaco was
shot eight times.

The F.B.I. did not say how the suspects had been found, and it was unclear
whether the arrests had stemmed from a tip or were the fruits of a painstaking
investigation.

Agents said Mr. Levasseur, 38, and Miss Gros, 30, were seized after their van
was halted in Deerfield. According to the agents, Mr. Levasseur kicked an
officer but otherwise surrendered without a struggle. A 9-millimeter pistol was
found in the van, and the couple's three children, who were in the van, were
turned over to juvenile authorities, the agents said.

Later, the other suspects - Mr. Williams, 38, of Beverly, Mass., Mr. Laaman, 36,
and Barbra J. Curzi - surrendered at a home on Cleveland's southwest side after
a force of 40 Federal agents and local officers surrounded the house, telephoned
in and ordered them to come out.

Extradition Proceedings


Three children of Mr. Laaman and Miss Curzi emerged first, then the three
adults. The children were turned over to juvenile authorities and the adults
were taken to the Cuyhoga County Jail to await arraignment and extradition
proceedings today before a Federal magistrate.

Miss Curzi and Miss Gros were charged with harboring fugitives. Mr. Levasseur,
who had been on the F.B.I.'s most wanted list since 1977, was wanted on
bank-robbery and unlawful-flight charges. Mr. Levasseur, Miss Gros and Mr.
Laaman were listed as fugitives wanted for questioning in the Lamonaco case.

Mr. Williams and Mr. Manning were indicted in November 1983 in the trooper's
slaying, though both, along with Miss Gros and Mr. Laaman, had been sought since
shortly after the trooper's shooting.

Joseph Griffin, the agent in charge of the F.B.I.'s Cleveland office, said the
fugitives appeared to have been living in that area for the last two years.
There was no indication that they had been involved with radical groups or had
committed any crimes during their time in the Cleveland area. he said.

It was unclear where the fugitives had been in the first year after Trooper
Lamonaco's slaying.

A Rented Farmhouse


Within days of the slaying, authorities found a rented farmhouse where the
Mannings had then been living near Marshalls Creek, Pa., 10 miles from the
shooting. They also found the home where the Levasseurs had been living, in
Germantown, Pa., 30 miles away.

Mr. Manning and Mr. Levasseur were combat veterans of the Vietnam War whose
politics had become increasingly radical after they returned from the war and
joined a New England prison reform group, the authorities said.

The Sam Melville-Jonathan Jackson Unit was formed in the mid-1970's as a
self-styled band of revolutionaries, according to the authorities. It took its
name from Mr. Melville, a radical killed in a 1971 uprising at the Attica state
prison in New York, and Mr. Jackson, who was killed in a California shootout
while trying to kidnap a judge.

In May 1976, the group claimed responsibility for bombing the offices of the
Central Maine Power Company in Augusta. Later in 1976 and in 1977, the group
claimed it was responsible for a series of bombings in the Boston area. No one
was killed in the bombings, but some people were injured.

The arrests in Ohio constituted a major breakthrough in what Col. Clinton L.
Pagano, the Superintendent of the New Jersey state police, has called the most
intense investigation by his department since the kidnapping of Charles A.
Lindbergh's infant son from his New Jersey home in 1932.

Colonel Pagano, who flew to Ohio early yesterday to join Federal and other
investigators after the suspects were seized, has followed every significant
development in the case and has vowed never to relax the investigation until all
suspects are in custody.

One reason that the Superintendent has attached such importance to the inquiry
is that it is the only unresolved case involving the killing of a state trooper
in New Jersey.

Since Trooper Lamonaco was slain, the New Jersey state police have spent well
over $1 million on the case and have had 15 troopers, and at times as many as
250, working on it, pursuing leads in many parts of the nation and across
Canada.

Full-Time Command Post


For this case alone, the state police have maintained a full-time command post
in the Town Hall of Knowlton Township, not far from the scene of the murder, and
have assigned detectives to a Boston-based, 16-member task force of F.B.I.
agents and investigators from six New England states that has worked on the case
exclusively.

In the hunt, the New Jersey state police have sought public help by mailing more
than a million fliers, photographs, descriptive circulars and other materials to
newspapers, schools, gasoline stations, doctors' offices, car dealers, weapons
sellers, truckers' and outdoors magazines and other institutions throughout
North America.

Thousands of tips from all 50 states and nearly all of Canada's provinces have
been received by the command post in Knowlton Township from people who thought
they had seen the suspects from time to time. The pursuit of these leads has led
to the arrest of at least 50 fugitives wanted in unrelated cases.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 5, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MAKING MARK ON POLITICS, 'BABY BOOMERS' APPEAR TO RALLY AROUND REAGAN

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section B; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1376 words

DATELINE: LOWER MERION, Pa., Oct. 31


Pollsters and political scientists have been watching Dick Merrick and his
generation for years.

At the age of 37, he is a member of the generation, born in the 12 years after
World War II. When that ''baby boom'' generation came of age and settled down,
the analysts predicted, it would have a profound effect on American political
life.

This year it appears that many in this generation plan, like Mr. Merrick, to
vote for President Reagan. According to the last four New York Times/ CBS News
Polls, 54 percent of the voters aged 27 to 38 favor Mr. Reagan, while 37 percent
back Walter F. Mondale. Only the smaller segment of the electorate aged 18 to 26
gives Mr. Reagan a bigger share of their support.

Economic Self-Interest

The polls indicate that Mr. Reagan's appeal is primarily economic in nature. In
one recent Times/CBS News Poll, two-thirds of those 27 to 38 years old said the
economy was the ''most important'' issue influencing their vote, a proportion
well above other age groups.

This trend is illustrated by Mr. Merrick, who sells franchises for a chain of
automobile repair shops and owns a horse. In recent months he has married,
bought a house and decided to vote for the first time.

''I don't want a tax increase,'' he said over lunch at Charley's Place, a
restaurant that caters to young professionals and business people in this
Philadelphia suburb. ''There probably will be one anyway, but we have a better
chance of avoiding one with Reagan than with Mondale. If the published figures
are right, Mondale's tax proposal could cost me $300 a month. I could get
another horse for that.''

The Future as an Issue

A fellow worker, Bill Polko, 35 years old, head of the marketing division,
agreed. ''I'm very comfortable at this point in my life,'' he said, ''and I can
see an upward mobility. In my mind, Reagan's a winner.''

All year, strategists in both parties have argued that the election might turn
on views of the future, and that the winner would have to convince voters that
he offered enhanced hope and opportunity in a changing world.

Today there is widespread agreement that Mr. Reagan has swayed many Americans on
that issue and has made a particularly striking impact with people like Mr.
Merrick and Mr. Polko, who are just now establishing households and careers,
buying houses and pondering long-term prospects.

Hart's Signal Ignored

''Mondale's tax plan has been dismally received by this group,'' said Lee
Atwater, a senior adviser to the Reagan campaign. ''It's the single biggest
mistake an American politician has made this year.'' He said the strong bid by
Senator Gary Hart of Colorado for the Democratic Presidential nomination marked
''the first rumbling of what the baby boomers could do in politics.''

Mr. Hart says Mr. Mondale and many other Democrats do not understand his appeal
to that generation. ''One argument I tried to make was that the Democrats had to
become more than the party of redistribution,'' Mr. Hart said. ''They also had
to become the party of growth and opportunity. But I don't think they've done
that yet. More traditional Democrats don't want to understand that or face up to
that. It sounded too Republican, somehow.''

Christopher J. Matthews, an aide to the House Democraic leadership, said: ''We
haven't done a good selling job with a lot of young people. The Republicans have
portrayed us as the party of the poor, rather than the party of the people
working their way up.''

The tax issue is critical to many born in the baby boom, like Mary Beator, a
36-year-old homemaker in Merrimack, N.H., who was a Democrat while in college.
''I'm tired of being the middle class that pays for all of those giveaways,''
she said

''I guess I have more to lose now,'' Mrs. Beator said. ''I've gotten attached to
my creature comforts. I've started having a vested interest in the status quo,
because I am the status quo.''

Bill Seiter, a 26-year-old computer designer in Dayton, asserted: ''Reagan's
style of running the country encourages people to work hard. If you get more
money, it won't be taken away in taxes.''

Reagan and Independence

Mr. Reagan's economic policies also appeal to a streak of independence that
inspires aggressive opposition among this age group to big government and big
unions. ''No one wants to be told how to run their business, or how to run their
lives,'' said Ron Gaiser, a real estate developer in Birmingham.

As Mr. Gaiser indicated, however, that streak of independence among the baby
boomers can also work against Mr. Reagan because they resent governmental
intrusion into private matters. Nowhere is this more vividly demonstrated than
by the subject of abortion. In a recent Times/CBS News Poll, people in this age
group disagreed by a margin of 76 percent to 19 percent with Mr. Reagan's
proposal to outlaw abortion through a constitutional amendment.

''No man has a right to tell any woman that she can, or cannot, bear a child,''
said Linda Coalson, a 36-year- old homemaker in Dayton. ''That's government
crossing over the lines of personal decisions.''

The problem for the Democrats is that many voters who disagree with Mr. Reagan
on personal matters like abortion will still vote for him. Mrs. Coalson, whose
husband is a physician, said the right to abortion was not ''a matter of
survival'' with her, and economic prosperity had a higher priority.

To Some, G.O.P. Is the Foe

The Democrats run well among baby boomers who still see the Republican Party as
the champion of the rich elite, not the mobile middle class. ''Reagan doesn't
seem like he's for you unless you've got a lot of money,'' commented Wilbur
Terrell, an automobile worker in Dayton.

Others have accepted Mr. Mondale's argument that the current prosperity will not
last and that large budget deficits will create a bleaker economic future than
Mr. Reagan portrays. ''Down the road we could be in trouble if that problem is
not addressed,'' said Jim Rousseau, a 35-year-old executive of a leasing company
here.

Mr. Reagan's vision of the future seems more appealing to men of the baby boom
generation, who support Mr. Reagan by a margin of 32 points in the four recent
Times/CBS News Polls. Among women polled, the gap shrinks to 13 points, and one
reason is a widespread feeling that the Reagan Administration is not committed
to equality.

Elaine Freedman, 30 years old, who sells advertising space for a newspaper here,
said, ''The whole feeling, with the Republicans in power, is that it's O.K. not
to promote women, to treat us like little girls.''

Peggy Dobbins, a sociology instructor in Birmingham, Ala., said women were more
sensitive to the Administration's budget cuts. ''Chances are,'' she said, ''if
you're a woman, you're more intimately involved with human, caring concerns.''

War Threat Is an Issue

Moreover, when some women think about the future, they seem more likely to worry
about nuclear war than about economic expansion. ''I feel the arms race is
heating up,'' said Myreda Johnson, 33, a Dayton automobile worker. ''I don't
feel as secure under Reagan. Money wouldn't do me any good if you have no future
to spend it in.''

Ellen Toplin, 31, who runs a public relations business here, says many of her
contemporaries are too ''egocentric,'' and she mourns the loss of commitment to
larger issues that she felt in the 1970's. ''I'm trying to recapture a sense of
working togther to change the world, instead of taking money to the bank,'' she
said.

Despite Mr. Reagan's strong showing in the polls this year, experts in both
parties say the baby boom has not yet found its permanent political identity.
Dotty Lynch, a poll taker who worked for Senator Hart, said both parties had
''disappointed'' the baby boomers: the Democrats with Vietnam, the Republicans
with Watergate.

''They seem to be deliberately independent and nonideological,'' she said.
''Neither party can predict their voting behavior.''

Mr. Atwater, the Republican strategist, called the current poll readings ''a
good sign for us.'' But then he added: ''We can't take this group for granted.
It will be 1988 before the baby boom comes into its full force in the
electorate.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 5, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE USE OF VIDEO CLIPS IN WESTMORELAND TRIAL

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1299 words


When the jury in Gen. William C. Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against
CBS first heard the voice of George Crile in Federal District Court in
Manhattan, it wasn't from the witness stand, but from videotape played by the
general's attorney.

They saw Mr. Crile - a producer who is one of several defendants in the case -
as he interviewed subjects for the disputed CBS documentary ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' And they saw one of his subjects rebuke him
sharply: ''You're trying to make something harder than it is here,'' said Cmdr.
James Meacham, a former intelligence officer.

Another, Col. Gains Hawkins, another former intelligence officer, said, ''Well,
George, I wouldn't put it that way.''

''Help me,'' Mr. Crile implored both Commander Meacham and Colonel Hawkins when
he needed something told in detail.

But none of these remarks, none of these segments of film, appeared on the air
when the CBS Reports documentary was broadcast in January 1982.



Iluminating a Subject

The process revealed in these videotapes - that of subjectively selecting the
most pertinent statements, facts or film clips from a mass of raw material in
the creation of a program or story - is not confined to television journalism.
It is practiced by the press as well. And the fact that selection or compression
takes place is by no means an indication of bias. It is necessary because
reporters, including television journalists, typically fling their nets widely
and then must pick and choose representative specimens of what they have found.
The function of the journalist is not to provide an unevaluated transcript of
the process of information gathering but to illuminate a given subject with
precision and fairness.

Still, compression or selection may result in distortion, and if it is done with
reckless disregard for whether it is true or false, it may libel a public figure
- which is what the CBS-Westmoreland trial is all about.

Film clips not used in the final version of ''The Uncounted Enemy'' - known as
''outtakes'' - are part of the arsenal of evidence being brought to bear by
General Westmoreland's attorneys in the trial that continues today. They are
seeking to make the case that this material was edited with a reckless disregard
for what CBS knew to be the truth.

The use of outtakes in the Westmoreland trial, though not unprecedented, is a
focus of concern among journalists and legal scholars sensitive to trends in
litigation that could alter the limits of the First Amendment guarantee of a
free press.



'See What Comes Out'

''Whenever there is a libel case,'' said Benno C. Schmidt Jr., the dean of
Columbia Law School, ''a plaintiff will find it to his or her advantage to turn
the editorial process over and shake it and see what comes out.''

Among television journalists, outtakes of the sort presented by General
Westmoreland's attorneys are considered akin to notes compiled by print
journalists as they gather information to be shaped into stories - undigested
material not intended for public scrutiny.

Now, in court, the process of television news-gathering is being exposed in a
way rarely observed by people outside the profession. And the jurors are
reminded that although a documentary may aspire to the truth, the means by which
it is constructed - including the banging of a clapboard at the start of each
new filmed ''take'' - are reminiscent of the making of a movie.

Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's attorney, has said repeatedly that
challenging the assumption that television documentaries are indisputable fact
will be part of his presentation, and he is using outtakes to establish that
point.

''It is a lethally effective tool in the hands of a plaintiff's lawyer,'' said
one CBS producer who asked not to be identified for professional reasons.

Before the trial ends, the jury will become aware that in television
documentaries, the person who bears the title of producer often functions as a
reporter. And the person who appears on screen as the reporter may not actually
have been present when some questions were posed to the individual who is
interviewed.

And the jurors will undoubtedly recognize the process by which films of long
interviews - which may reflect both the imperfection of the interviewees'
memories and unpeeled layers of fact through which a reporter attempts to cut -
are excerpted and fitted together to make a coherent documentary.

''I'd hate to see every interview by me paraded in front of a jury,'' said David
Tabicoff, an ABC producer, who was present when outtakes were presented at the
Westmoreland trial. ''People are confused about television interviews and ho
they are put together. They don't understand that we shoot 40 minutes and end up
using 20 seconds.''

Most reporters and news executives feel that unedited interviews are, as
Lawrence K. Grossman, the president of NBC News, said, ''for my money,
comparable to reporters' notebooks.''



'Privileged and Confidential'

''Our policy,'' said George Watson, a vice president of ABC News, ''is to regard
outtakes as we would regard reporters' notebooks: privileged and confidential.''

But ever since the 1979 United States Supreme Court decision in Herbert v. Lando
- a libel case in which a former Army officer, Lieut. Col. Anthony Herbert, sued
CBS over a ''60 Minutes'' broadcast - access to raw film as evidence has been
possible in libel suits. Associate Justice Byron R. White wrote for the majority
in that case that materials that establish the ''state of mind'' of a defendant
were necessary in a libel suit, and that to erect an ''impenetrable barrier'' to
the material would impede a determination of libel in a case involving a public
figure.

Since, to win a libel suit, a public figure such as General Westmoreland must
prove not only that the published material was false but that it was published
with knowledge that it was false, or in reckless disregard of whether it was
true or false, the state of mind of the defendant becomes an essential element
in the determination.

But some television reporters and producers at the Westmoreland trial wondered
aloud about the fairness of the procedure.



'Awesome Impact' in Court

''Outtakes are filled with this spooky ability to resurrect sound and image,''
said a producer who asked not to be identified. ''Nobody ever likes how they're
quoted by any reporter. The question is: If you can take 56 minutes that were
not used in an hour interview and show it to a jury, is it relevant? They are
only one of the many notebooks a broadcast reporter has. And they are an awkward
one, because they do not necessarily indicate what a person thinks or believed,
but they are still used to indicate that they are the sum total of a situation.
It has an awesome impact in the courtroom, even though it may have nothing to do
with anything.''

None of the networks believes it has much legal recourse when raw news material
is subpoenaed for a libel suit in which it is the defendant. ''By and large we
would resist turning over reporters' notes and outtakes,'' said Mr. Grossman.
''On the other hand, we are a law-abiding group.''

''I think there is no alternative to libel defendants,'' said George Vradenburg
3d, the deputy chief counsel of CBS, who is in charge of the CBS legal
department.

''There is a degree of scrutiny over these shows,'' he said, ''and a news
organization ought to be sufficiently confident that they ought to be able to
stand that scrutiny. For a few years, there is going to be an uncomfortable
period with this kind of thing. But broadcasters and print journalists are
perceived to be institutions of importance and power. And people are going to
ask us how we go about our work.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A WALL HONORING NOT ONLY VIETNAM VETERANS

BYLINE: By James Reston Jr.  ;
James Reston Jr. is author of the forthcoming book ''Sherman's March and
Vietnam.''

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 717 words

DATELINE: HUME, Va.


The Vietnam Veterans Memorial that New York City is planning for lower Manhattan
is an admirable gesture. But why just for veterans? Why not a memorial for the
entire Vietnam generation?

The design - a plain wall of glass brick etched, inside, with veterans' words
written from Vietnam and letters sent to them from home - is too narrow a view
of that war. Ultimately, such a monument is doomed to be a forgotten place. The
test of a good monument is whether it means something in a hundred years.

Washington, after all, has given Vietnam veterans a shrine. Its inspiration lies
in its ambiguity, for it encourages one to ponder the enormous cost of human
life without addressing the issue of whether the cost was justified. Veterans,
regardless of their support or loathing of their war, have rightly embraced the
memorial as their own. It is difficult to imagine that a second memorial will
upstage the first.

New York should go beyond Washington's achievement and put its mind to a
broader, different statement. It is often overlooked that between 1964 and 1973,
only 2.5 million men out of an eligible 26 million ever fought in Vietnam. To
make New York's monument, the city's only tangible public memorialization of the

war, a tribute to a fraction of the generation perpetuates old wounds rather
than advancing reconciliation. Throughout those years, elements of the
generation were pitted one against another. Veterans were set against resisters
in the streets. Prisoners of war were set against self-exiles in Canada. Even
conscientious objectors in jail were set against conscientious objectors who
avoided jail, just as starched officers on the battlefield were set against the
pot-smoking ''grunts.'' Why must that same rancorous division, deliberately
promoted by the nation's political leadership, now be cut into glass for all
time?A great moral chart was devised during the Vietnam years, with hot
arguments about what a young American should do when faced with an undeclared
war in a primitive, faraway place where American security was scarcely involved.
Perhaps the veterans were the ultimate losers in that impossible situation and
so deserve special tribute now. But the impossible choice scarred all 26 million
eligible men in many complicated ways, whether they will all admit it or not.
Those who resisted the war, those who by hook or crook avoided the
unpleasantness, and quite a few women as well, were deeply alienated by the
Vietnam experience.

The Vietnam generation, we must hope, will always be different. The sacrifice of
the soldiers was not the only sacrifice. The victims were not only the dead and
the wounded.

In thinking about a Vietnam memorial, we may draw a parallel with Civil War
statues, for they raise the question of whether they promoted reconciliation or
romanticized the nation's division. Most of those statues honor the respective
causes as just and noble, but they have little meaning today, except to arouse a
longing for antebellum chivalry in a few esoteric Southern circles.  The Vietnam
War was also internecine, and what is needed is not a public park that says, by
implication, that the soldier's sacrifice was more poignant or pointless, more
romantic or tragic, more noble or more brutalizing than the lot of his brother.
In that wall then, alongside the best of the veterans' poems and letters, why
should not the sentiments of the resister and the exile and the perpetual
graduate student be represented, as well as a few key documents and a few relics
that defined the dilemma of the whole generation? Why not honor the moral as
well as the physical courage of the generation? Interspersed among the heartfelt
letters of all elements of the generation might be such relics as the Tonkin
Gulf Resolution, a sharpened bamboo stake, a Westmoreland troop request, a Zippo
lighter, a stone from the Hue Citadel, a lottery number, a remnant of a
fuselage, a sign from the ''Hanoi Hilton'' (a P.O.W. camp), a Medal of Honor
citation, a shroud from a Buddhist monk's robe, a marijuana pipe, a national
service ribbon, a leaflet from the protest of 500,000, Jimmy Carter's pardon
declaration.  If there is to be a panorama for meditation on the nature of
Vietnam, let it encompass the whole national experience. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Laos Says It Has Closed Its Re-education Camps

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 117 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 5


An American professor said here today that he had been told in Laos that
''re-education camps'' set up after 1975 had been dismantled.

MacAlister Brown, a visiting professor at Chulalongkorn University here, said he
got the information from a Deputy Foreign Minister, Khampai Boupha, on a visit
to Laos last month.

A human rights report issued in 1983 by the State Department said that there
were at least 20 camps in Laos in 1980, with a total of 15,000 inmates.

Professor Brown said the camp closings had been confirmed by American aid
officials in Laos. But he said that many people, though released from camps,
might still be restricted to certain areas under a system of internal exile.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 6, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JURT HEARS DEPOSITION FROM EX-AIDE IN CBS TRIAL

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words


A. FARBER

The jury in the libel suit brought against CBS by Gen. William C. Westmoreland
heard testimony for the first time yesterday that a military intelligence
analyst in South Vietnam believed that North Vietnamese infiltration in 1967 was
much higher than was made known.

In a pretrial deposition that was introduced by lawyers for General Westmoreland
- but that seemed initially to buttress CBS's position - former Lieut. Michael
B. Hankins said he had ''screamed bloody murder'' that monthly infiltration into
South Vietnam was between 20,000 and 30,000 in the fall of 1967. That would be
four to five times the rate cited in official reports.

Lieutenant Hankins said he told ''everybody'' that the figures in the official
reports were too low and ''misleading'' because they depended on confirmatory
evidence of the infiltration. But he also said his higher figures were based on
an unvalidated method of projecting infiltration and he did not know whether
there was ever any ''hard source'' data to support them.

Lieutenant Hankins, now a civilian employee of the Army at Fort Lewis, Wash.,
declined to travel to the trial, now in its fifth week in Federal District Court
here, according to lawyers for CBS. So portions of his deposition, taken under
subpoena in Washington state, were read into the record yesterday.

Size of Enemy Forces an Issue


The lieutenant's experience in Vietnam seemed especially important to the trial
because it appeared to form a basis on which CBS contended in a 1982 documentary
that infiltration was running about 25,000 a month in the fall of 1967 -
information that CBS said was ''systematically blocked'' by General
Westmoreland's command.

The network made the assertion in a CBS Reports documentary - ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' The broadcast charged that military intelligence
officers at the ''highests levels'' had engaged in a conspiracy to minimize
enemy strength in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968. General
Westmoreland claims that the program defamed him by saying that he lied to
President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size of enemy forces.

In his deposition, Lieutenant Hankins said he refused entreaties by other former
officers to cooperate with CBS during the preparation of its documentary. But he
said he had spoken on several occasions with Samuel A. Adams, a former analyst
for the Central Intelligence Agency who served as a consultant to the network
for the program.

After parts of the deposition were read, Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's
lawyer, showed the jury the segment of the broadcast that related to North
Vietnamese infiltration.

Sent to Vietnam in 1967


In an interim summation - an unusual feature of this trial - Mr. Burt told the
jury that nothing about the rate of infiltration had been kept secret from those
officers who were ''cleared to know'' the information.

''Ask yourself,'' Mr. Burt said, ''why a commander would conceal a doubling of
the troops he faced.''

David Boies, CBS's lawyer, countered by saying that the deposition and
broadcast, together with other materials he cited, supported the charge leveled
on the program.

The story told by Lieutenant Hankins in his deposition is intertwined with a
number of the events that have been the subject of testimony by previous
witnesses - particularly by Lieut. Col. Everette S. Parkins.

Colonel Parkins was Lieutenant Hankins's immediate superior in a military
intelligence unit in Vietnam in 1967. At the trial last week, the colonel denied
a statement on the CBS documentary that he had been ''fired'' by his own
superior, Col. Charles A. Morris, because he wanted to report a high rate of
North Vietnamese infiltration.

Lieutenant Hankins said that, despite his efforts to evade the draft and remain
a college student, he was sent to Vietnam in 1967 and given the job of
estimating North Vietnamese infiltration in a unit that was required to have
''collateral sources'' of information before it could list new enemy units.

With that ''constraint,'' he said, he issued a monthly report in the fall of
1967 that estimated infiltration at 5,000 to 6,000. Meanwhile, he said, he was
''playing around'' with another method of estimation that had been shown him by
Colonel Parkins.

This method, he said, factored in sensitive communications data on enemy
movements in and around South Vietnam - as well as past patterns of
infiltration, weather and other seasonal conditions - and extrapolated or
projected infiltration rates. And those rates, he said, turned out to be
substantially higher than what he was regularly reporting.

Lieutenant Hankins said he became convinced that his normal method for
estimating infiltration was unrealistic and ''counterproductive.'' He said he
told that at the time to Colonel Parkins, to Colonel Morris, who was director of
intelligence production, and to Lieut. Col. Daniel O. Graham, who was in charge
of ''current estimates'' on enemy strength. All three colonels testified
recently that, as far as they knew, infiltration never approximated 20,000
during the fall of 1967.

Lieutenant Hankins said in his deposition that both Colonel Morris and Colonel
Graham - who he acknowledged may have had access to data he did not - had
reservations about his new methodology. At one point in the deposition,
Lieutenant Hankins said he had no reason to think the two colonels were acting
in ''bad faith.''

The colonels, he said, ''just felt, from their analysis of the stuff, that the
enemy was not infiltrating at that level, and to some extent didn't have the
capability to infiltrate personnel at that level for any extended period of
time.''

In a portion of his deposition not read to the jury, Lieutenant Hankins said he
believed that the dismissal of Colonel Parkins - who, he said, supported his
conclusions - was related to an effort by the colonel to have his figures
accepted.

Testimony by another military intelligence officer, Col. John R. Stewart, began
yesterday afternoon and will continue today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Thailand Sends Troops To Counter Vietnamese

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 108 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 6


The Thai Army sent reinforcements today to push out Vietnamese soldiers who
overran a border post inside Thailand, army officers said.

Two Thai soldiers have been killed, 25 have been wounded and 5 are missing since
fighting began Monday for control of Hill 424 on the Cambodian border at
Traveng, 180 miles northeast of Bangkok, the officers said.

They said about 100 soldiers from Vietnam's 73d Regiment punched about a mile
into Thai territory but, according to the Thai radio, they were later pushed
back into Cambodia by Thai forces. A Thai military source said the Vietnamese
crossed the border in pursuit of Khmer Rouge guerrillas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SUMMARIES OF MAJOR SENATE RACES

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1302 words


Illinois

PercySimon

Senator Charles H. Percy, the 65- year-old Republican, is facing Representative
Paul Simon, 55, a liberal downstate Democrat. This campaign has been a different
sort of test for Mr. Percy, a ''progressive'' who in three previous races has
been challenged by conservatives from Chicago. This year, Mr. Percy has worked
hard to win the support of the Republican right wing, tying himself closely to
the economic policies of the Reagan Administration. Mr. Simon has mounted an
appeal to blacks, liberal Democrats and moderate Republicans who have
traditionally supported Mr. Percy.  Iowa

JepsenHarkin

Senator Roger W. Jepsen, a 55- year-old Republican, is defending his seat
against Representative Tom Harkin. Mr. Jepsen, faced with negative publicity
about invoking a constitutional privilege to escape a traffic ticket and
applying for membership in a ''health spa'' that was closed on prostitution
charges, has depicted himself as a Senate leader and has relied upon visits by
big-name Republicans. Mr. Harkin, 44, a Democrat with five terms in the House,
has tried to hold the urban Democratic vote and his conservative base in western
Iowa while attracting moderate Republicans and farmers.  Massachusetts



Kerry

Shamie


Lieut. Gov. John F. Kerry, a 40- year-old Democrat, and Raymond Shamie, a
businessman, are battling for the seat vacated by Senator Paul E. Tsongas. In
the Republican primary Mr. Shamie, a 63-year-old conservative, upset Elliot L.
Richardson, the former United States Attorney General. In the general election
campaign he has pursued the working- class and middle-class vote, stressing his
opposition to abortion and higher taxes. Mr. Kerry, who organized Vietnam
Veterans Against the War, has criticized his opponent's support of
Administration policies on arms control and Central America.  Michigan



Levin

Lousma


Senator Carl Levin, a 50-year-old Democrat of Detroit, is running for his second
term against Jack Lousma, a former astronaut. Mr. Levin has opposed the Reagan
Administration's economic and social policies but said he would favor a tax
increase only as a last resort. He has stressed his work to extend unemployment
benefits, limit auto imports and reduce prices for military spare parts. Mr.
Lousma, 48, has opposed any tax increase. He has favored constitutional
amendments to restrict abortion and allow prayer in public schools. Both
candidates are fighting for Michigan's huge blue-collar vote.  Minnesota



Boschwitz

Growe


Senator Rudy Boschwitz, a Republican, has largely ignored his opponent,
Secretary of State Joan Anderson Growe. Mr. Boschwitz, who is 53 years old, has
supported the Reagan Administration's military buildup, though he has stressed
the need for parity with rather than superiority over the Soviet Union, and he
has proposed limiting increases in Government spending to 5 percent annually
over the next five years. Mrs. Growe, who is 49, has charged that Mr. Boschwitz
is too close to special interest groups, and she has allied herself with
Minnesota's strong nuclear freeze movement.  Mississippi



Cochran

Winter


Senator Thad Cochran, a 46-year- old Republican, is defending his seat against
William Winter, a 61-year-old Democrat who has spent three decades in
Mississippi politics and was one of the most popular Governors of recent years.
Mr. Cochran, who has cultivated a moderate image, has emphasized his
Congressional seniority and his chairmanship of the Agriculture Appropriations
subcommittee. Mr. Winter has labeled the incumbent a ''backbencher'' who has not
helped the state, and he has stressed his own record as Governor of hammering
out a new education program and balancing the budget.


New Hampshire

HumphreyD'Amours (00 percent of precincts reporting)

The Republican Senator, Gordon J. Humphrey, and the challenger, Representative
Norman E. D'Amours, a 46-year-old Democrat, have been battling for the middle of
the political road in New Hampshire. Mr. Humphrey, who has conceded that some of
his positions have shifted away from militant conservatism, has denounced his
opponent as ''a foot soldier in Tip O'Neill's liberal army.'' In response, Mr.
D'Amours, who has described himself as a middle-of-the road Democrat, termed the
44-year- old Mr. Humphrey ''one of the John Birch Society's leading voices in
the Senate.'' North Carolina

HelmsHunt (00 percent of precincts reporting)

In the most expensive and widely publicized Senate campaign of the year, Jesse
Helms, the 62-year-old Republican Senator, is being challenged by Gov. James B.
Hunt Jr., a Democrat who has served two terms. They have competed for ways to
demonstrate their commitment to tobacco, the state's biggest cash crop, and
traded charges over such matters as Mr. Helms's position on Central America and
Mr. Hunt's use of state airplanes. Most experts believe the campaign has made
little difference to North Carolinians who have known from the beginning for
whom they would vote.  Oregon

HatfieldHendriksen (00 percent of precincts reporting)

Senator Mark O. Hatfield, a 62- year-old Republican who has never lost an
election in 32 years in Oregon politics, is defending his seat against a
challenge by state Senator Margie Hendriksen, a 41-year-old Democrat. She has
attempted to capitalize on news reports describing Mr. Hatfield's support of an
African oil pipeline proposed by a Greek financier who also paid a $55,000 real
estate commission to the Senator's wife. The Hatfields, denying any wrongdoing
in the matter, have donated $55,000 to charity, and an investigation by the
Senate Ethics Committee has been dropped.  Tennessee

GoreAshe (00 percent of precincts reporting)

Representative Albert Gore Jr., a 36-year-old Democrat, and Victor Ashe, a
39-year-old Republican and a former state senator, are competing for the seat of
Howard H. Baker Jr., who is retiring. Mr. Gore has taken advantage of a
household name, the legacy of his father, the former Senator, to create the
image of incumbency. He has attempted to cultivate support beyond the Democratic
Party by backing the Reagan Administration on such things as the MX missile. Mr.
Ashe, however, has worked hard to tie himself to President Reagan and has
criticized Mr. Gore for opposing some Reagan programs.  Texas

DoggettGramm (00 percent of precincts reporting)

A Democratic State Senator, Lloyd Doggett, 38, and a Republican member of the
United States House, Phil Gramm, 42, are fighting for the seat vacated by John
Tower, a Republican. Mr. Gramm has criticized Mr. Doggett's opposition to
raising the drinking age and allowing prayer in public schools and has charged
that the Democrat accepted a campaign contribution from a homosexual group that
raised at least part of the money at a male striptease show. Mr. Doggett has
termed the Republican a right-wing extremist who wants to cut Social Security
benefits and eliminate Federal aid to education.  West Virginia

RockefellerRaese (00 percent of precincts reporting)

Ineligible for a third term, Gov. John D. Rockefeller 4th, a 47-year-old
Democrat, is seeking the seat of Jennings Randolph, a Democrat who is retiring
at 82. His opponent is John R. Raese, 34, a Republican businessman. Mr.
Rockefeller, a member of one of America's wealthiest families, has spent
millions on a campaign in which he has termed Mr. Raese immature and
inexperienced. Calling the Governor the dilettante, Mr. Raese has said his
involvement in his family's businesses - coal companies, a newspaper and radio
stations - has allowed him to develop a better understanding of West Virginia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of senate winners

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE 1984 ELECTION: EACH STATE HAS ITS OWN BATTLES;
DEMOCRAT VICTOR IN MASSACHUSETTS

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 560 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, Nov. 6


Despite a nationwide landslide for President Reagan, Lieut. Gov. John F. Kerry,
a liberal Democrat, defeated Raymond Shamie, a conservative Republican
businessman, today for the Senate seat vacated by Paul E. Tsongas.

At the same time, Democrats won the 10 House seats they held in the last
Congress, holding the Republicans to one seat.

''I believe this race gave Massachusetts a real choice,'' Mr. Kerry said. That
choice, he said, was that the people of Massachusetts ''emphatically reject the
politics of selfishness and the notion that women must be treated as
second-class citizens.''

Conceding defeat in a speech to his supporters, Mr. Shamie, a selfmade
millionaire, said that ''we can celebrate tonight the larger victory'' achieved
by President Reagan, ''which makes up for our disappointment.''

''Only in America,'' Mr. Shamie said, and the crowd shouted ''U.S.A.''

Voter turnout was unusually heavy in Massachusetts, about 85 percent of the
state's registered voters, a record, according to Michael Connally, the
Secretary of State.

Mr. Kerry will succeed another liberal Democrat.  Senator Tsongas announced his
retirement earlier this year for health reasons.

With 67 percent of the precincts reporting, the vote was:

Kerry862,304 (56%)Shamie666,549 (44%)

A Bitter Contest

The Senate fight was the most bitterly contested race in Massachusetts, which
traditionally favors Democrats. Registered Democrats outnumber Republicans here
by 4 to 1, and Massachusetts was the only state won by George McGovern, the
Democratic Presidential nominee, in 1972.

But conservatives like Mr. Reagan have made deep inroads in recent years among
urban working-class and Roman Catholic voters, the traditional backbone of the
Democratic Party here. Mr. Shamie sought to capitalize on the popularity of Mr.
Reagan's policies and personality by echoing his calls for lower taxes, a strong
military and a ban on abortion.

Mr. Shamie, 63 years old, president of a high-technology concern he founded,
spent nearly $1 million of his own money on the campaign, much of it for
television advertisements. They portrayed him as a smiling, benign figure much
like the President.

Trading of Accusations


Mr. Shamie repeatedly accused Mr. Kerry, a decorated veteran of the Vietnam War,
of lying and charged that he would raise taxes if elected. Mr. Kerry contended
that his opponent offered overly simple solutions and cited Mr. Shamie's
flirtation with the John Birch Society in the mid-1970's. Mr. Shamie responded
by saying the Birch group, a right-wing organization, was part of ''mainstream
America.''

Mr. Kerry, a tall, slender 40-year-old man with rugged good looks, sought to
cast himself in the mold of Democrats like Senator Gary Hart by saying he would
mix liberal compassion with tight budget controls.

A graduate of St. Paul's School and Yale University, Mr. Kerry has a paradoxical
heritage, for Massachusetts, of having a father of Irish descent and a mother
who is a Forbes, one of the richest Boston families.

Mr. Shamie, who never finished college, lost badly in 1982 to Senator Edward M.
Kennedy in his only other attempt to win political office, and politicians here
felt he would have run well behind Mr. Kerry but for Mr. Reagan's enormous
appeal and the amount of his own money Mr. Shamie spent.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of voters

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

INFILTRATION ASSESSMENTS DEFENDED AT CBS TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1010 words


A military intelligence officer testified yesterday that, contrary to statements
made by CBS in a 1982 documentary, North Vietnamese infiltration into South
Vietnam in 1967 was not understated by Gen. William C. Westmoreland's command.

Appearing as the 12th witness for General Westmoreland in his $120 million libel
suit against the network, Col. John F. Stewart said that official infiltration
figures in the months before the Tet offensive of January 1968 ''were about
right'' and that the offensive had been expected for half a year.

''If we had grossly underestimated infiltration we would have seen a much larger
attack,'' Colonel Stewart said. ''But, in fact, we saw differently.'' The
colonel stated that, within a month of the Tet offensive, about 85 percent of
the estimated 100,000 North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops who took part in it
were killed or disabled.

Colonel Stewart - the only military witness so far in the trial who is still on
active duty - told the jury that military intelligence was ''not an exact
science'' and that infiltration and other estimates of enemy strength should not
be taken as irrefutable.

'Numbers Are Not Gospel'


''You know,'' he said, ''there was a love of numbers in Washington in the
1960's. But these numbers are not gospel.''

Colonel Stewart, who was chief of military intelligence on Grenada during the
United States invasion in 1983 and is now head of a 1,600-member intelligence
unit at Fort Bragg, N.C., also testified that:


- As a captain in South Vietnam, he regularly briefed General Westmoreland in
the fall of 1967 and the general never asked him to skew his analysis of enemy
activities.


- General Westmoreland's decision to delete the Vietcong's self-defense and
secret self-defense forces from the official listing of enemy strength known as
the order of battle in mid-1967 was made after much ''give and take'' and after
the command was told American troops had ''little contact'' with such forces.


- He was aware that some intelligence officers believed that North Vietnamese
infiltration into South Vietnam was substantially higher than was being
officially reported but he disagreed with their conclusions and their
methodology.

In the CBS documentary that was the basis for General Westmoreland's libel suit
- ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - the network said that reports
of high enemy infiltration in the fall of 1967 were ''systematically blocked''
by General Westmoreland's command.

CBS also said in the documentary that, by such ''tactics'' as excluduing the
Vietcong's self-defense forces from the order of battle, senior intelligence
officers had engaged in a ''conspiracy'' to minimimize enemy strength to make it
appear that America was winning the war.

Colonel Stewart, whose testimony will conclude today, joined the Army in 1962
and served his first of two tours in Vietnam between March 1967 and April 1968.
He was an analyst in General Westmoreland's ''current intelligence'' unit and
held the rank of captain.

Planning 'Major Operation'


Colonel Stewart testified that, in September 1967, he was ordered by his
superiors to evaluate information indicating a change in enemy strategy. He
found, he said, ''that the enemy was planning a major operation in a coordinated
fashion.

''There was a lot of talk, particularly in the diaries of North Vietnamese
soldiers, that they were going to come into populated areas, into hamlets and
other places, and liberate the people,'' Colonel Stewart said.

In late November, the colonel said, ''we concluded that the North Vietnamese
were taking an unprecedented step in sending major combat troops south'' along
the Ho Chi Minh Trail and into sanctuaries in Laos. Colonel Stewart said he had
access at the time to sensitive data on enemy movements provided by the National
Security Agency.

Under direct examination by David Dorsen, a lawyer for General Westmoreland,
Colonel Stewart said by mid-January 1968, the infiltrators in these units -
separate from North Vietnamese who regularly entered South Vietnam as
''replacements'' - totaled at least six regiments, each with 2,000 to 2,400 men.

Not all of these regiments, he said, came into South Vietnam at once. After the
Tet offensive, the colonel added, he confirmed that seven or eight regiments,
numbering at most a total of 20,000 troops, had infiltrated.

Under cross-examination by David Boies, a lawyer for CBS, the witness said that
the rate of infiltration betweenning a major November 1967 was about 5,000 to
8,000 a month - the approximate figures published at the time by General
Westmoreland's command. In December of that year, he said, the figure jumped to
about 10,000; in January 1968 it doubled.

85 Percent Casualties


Colonel Stewart said that of the 100,000 enemy troops ''committed'' to the Tet
offensive, 70,000 were killed by late February 1968, and 15,000 other casualties
were put out of action.

The witness was unable to recall on the stand how many of the 85,000 were North
Vietnamese forces and how many were Vietcong. But Mr. Boies showed Colonel
Stewart a copy of a deposition, taken only days ago, in which he indicated that
North Vietnamese forces made up 55 to 60 percent of the killed or wounded.

''That was only a guess,'' Colonel Stewart said.

''Well, you didn't call it a guess then, did you?'' Mr. Boies said.

The CBS documentary quoted some intelligence officers as saying that
infiltration throughout the fall of 1967 was at the rate of 25,000 a month.
Those figures, Colonel Stewart said yesterday, were unreliable.

Colonel Stewart said he that on the occasions when he briefed General
Westmoreland on enemy activities, he found the general ''businesslike, precise
and incisive. He raised questions in a terse manner and he expected you to have
the answers.''

Mr. Dorsen followed up:

Q. Did he ever indicate to you how he wanted you to come out with an analysis?

A. No.

Q. Did you ever see that in any intelligence officer?

A. No, I did not.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 7, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Arms Outlays And the Upturn

BYLINE: By Jonathan Fuerbringer

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 790 words


WASHINGTONA rapid increase in the military budget, which has been one of the
most controversial elements of President Reagan's term, has produced a steady
rise in Pentagon spending that could help buoy the economy next year if, as
predicted, other sectors slow down.

But several economists contend that the pace of military spending is likely to
slow and that the Reagan military buildup will not contribute as much to
economic growth in the future as it has so far.

Some economists also contend that large Federal deficits, which were in part
caused by the boom in military spending, will keep interest rates high next
year, leading to slower growth in many industries and offsetting some of the
impetus from arms outlays.

''Defense spending was one element that pushed us toward a boom,'' said Roger
Brinner of Data Resources Inc., an economic consulting firm. ''But now defense
is part of the problem that is pushing us'' toward a slower expansion.

The military buildup, which began late in the Carter Administration and was
accelerated by President Reagan, kept the 1981-82 recession from being deeper.
In the first 21 months of the unexpectedly strong expansion since the end of
1982, military spending grew 11.4 percent, matching the growth of the overall
economy.

At the same time, the worries several years ago that the rapid rise in military
spending would lead to bottlenecks and higher inflation have not been borne out.
Through the first nine months of this year, the inflation rate for the military
portion of the gross national product was 4.2 percent, according to the Commerce
Department, slightly below the 4.4 percent for the economy as a whole.

Economists find that the increase in military spending, while significant, was
not crucial to the 1982-84 recovery.

''It's a pretty big number, and it has provided a pretty good base to the
recovery,'' said Morris Cohen, a consultant from Hackensack, N.J. ''But it has
not been critical. We would have had a good recovery without it. It is a
sustaining influence.''

Alan Greenspan, an outside adviser to the Reagan Administration, said, ''It's
hard to make the case that it is a major factor in the recovery.''

For 1985, Mr. Greenspan projected that increases in military spending would
account for a little less than 10 percent of his projected overall growth for
the economy of 4 percent.

The greatest impact of the military spending surge has been in places like
Newport News, Va., where ships for the Navy are built, and in Connecticut, where
the Defense Department has spent more per capita than in any other state.

Mr. Greenspan said, ''There is no question that in certain limited areas,
defense has had an impact - in high technology, in aerospace, in shipbuilding.''

In 1983, the rise in military outlays, after adjustment for inflation, was the
second largest since 1972, but accounted for just 10 percent of growth in the
gross national product. Donald Strazheim of Wharton Econometrics calculates that
military spending in 1983 accounted for 130,000 new jobs.

One reason for the relatively small impact of military spending to date is that
the military budget was only 5.5 percent of G.N.P., after adjustment for
inflation, in the calendar year 1983. This is up, however, from a low of 4.6
percent during the middle of the Carter Administration. The military accounted
for 26 percent of the entire Federal budget for the fiscal year 1984.

Spending on procurement, where most of the increases have occurred, is an even
smaller share, 1.4 percent, of G.N.P. Procurement accounted for 26 percent of
military spending in the July-September quarter.

Robert Ortner, the chief economist in the Commerce Department, said: ''What
matters is how large a sector is and how much it swings. And defense is not
large and it does not have large up-and- down swings.''

This is different from the 1960's when, with the buildup for the Vietnam War,
military spending was a larger portion of G.N.P. and had much more impact on the
economy. In fact, economists now attribute the surge of inflation that carried
into the 1970's to the Johnson Administration's refusal to raise taxes early to
pay for the military buildup.

Now, a spending increase that Congressional budget writers regard as large shows
up in the G.N.P. only as tenths of a percentage point. Whether that is
significant or trivial is open to debate.

Mr. Strazheim argues that although small in comparison with the overall G.N.P.,
the difference is important. ''Four-tenths of a percentage point is not a
trivial sum,'' he said, referring to the difference that military spending
increases made in 1983. ''We may miss that in a forecast but after the fact
four-tenths is a great deal.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 8, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

A FEW SHIFTS IN THE FACE OF AMERICAN POLITICS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1457 words


Albert Gore Jr.  Albert Gore Jr., has won the right to take the Senate seat
being vacated by a Tennessee institution, Howard H. Baker Jr., the majority
leader. As a four-term Democratic member of the House, Mr. Gore has represented
the Sixth District, which has sent several national party leaders to Washington,
including his father, Senator Albert Gore Sr. Representative Gore, a Harvard
graduate who attended Vanderbilt School of Religion and Vanderbilt Law School,
is a Vietnam War veteran. He has worked hard in Congress on such matters as
toxic-waste cleanup, which is a major concern in customarily Republican East
Tennessee, and arms control. In the latter area, he agreed to support the MX
missile in exchange for shifts in the Reagan Administration's bargaining
position in strategic arms talks.


John Ashcroft

Attorney General John Ashcroft of Missouri, the Republican Governor-elect, has
built a political career upon being religious, conservative and family oriented.
A 42-year-old lawyer and former college teacher, Mr. Ashcroft is the son of a
minister in the Assembly of God, a fundamentalist church. He is also a tenor who
specializes in gospel singing. Mr. Ashcroft moved to Jefferson City from
Springfield in 1972, when Gov. Christopher S. Bond appointed him State Auditor.
Although Mr. Ashcroft lost a Congressional primary in 1972 and the State
Auditor's race in 1974, he has a loyal following among conservatives in the
largely rural southwest of the state. He was elected State Attorney General in
1976 and in 1980 won re-election with the strongest statewide showing by a
Republican since the Civil War.


John F. Kerry Lieut. Gov. John F. Kerry of Massachusetts, a 40-year-old
Bostonian, came to his successful race for the Senate with an extensive personal
political apparatus, strong support in local Democratic organizations and the
backing of mayors in such cities as Boston and New Bedford. A graduate of Yale
University whose unmistakable Irish face is an asset in Massachusetts politics,
he is a former county prosecutor and a decorated veteran of the Vietnam War. He
made his first public reputation in 1972, when, shortly after his return from
Southeast Asia, he ran for a Massachusetts House seat as a leader of Vietnam
Veterans Against the War. Mr. Kerry has since won a reputation as one of the
state's leading liberal politicians.


Booth Gardner Booth Gardner, an heir to the Weyerhaeuser timber fortune,
personally guaranteed loans of more than $500,000 to his $2 million Democratic
campaign for Governor. It was, he said, a case of ''putting your money where
your mouth is.'' The 45-year-old Mr. Gardner's net worth is estimated at more
than $32 million. He resigned from the State Senate, where he had served one
term, in 1973 to devote his time to his posts as president of the Laird-Norton
Company, a building materials and supply company, and as a Weyerhaeuser
director. In 1980 he became chief executive of Pierce County, the state's second
most populous. In the Democratic primary this year, he upset Jim McDermott, a
State Senator. Senator McDermott had been defeated four years earlier by Gov.
John Spellman, a Republican, whom Mr. Gardner defeated this year.


John D. Rockefeller 4th

Gov. John D. Rockefeller 4th was elected to the Senate from West Virginia after
a characteristically expensive campaign. He spent more than $9 million in the
drive, including $6.9 million of his own. Prohibited from serving a third term
in Charleston, he has shifted his political career to Washington. He came to
West Virginia in 1964 as a 27-year-old Republican and antipoverty worker with
the Vista program.. Within two years, he had become a Democrat and won a House
of Delegates seat. In 1968, the great-grandson of John D. Rockefeller was
elected Secretary of State. He ran unsuccessfully for Governor in 1972, but was
elected in 1976 and became the state's first Democrat to serve two consecutive
terms in the job. He holds a Harvard degree in Japanese and Far Eastern affairs
and languages.

James Martin After six terms in Congress, Representative James Martin has become
the second Republican to be Governor of North Carolina in this century. The
Congressman, who is 47 years old, holds a Ph.D. in chemistry from Princeton and
was an associate professor at Davidson College before he stood for election in
1972. He gave up what was considered a safe Republican seat to make the run for
Governor, though he had never campaigned statewide before. To overcome the
higher recognition of his opponent, Rufus Edmisten, the State Attorney General,
he visited all 100 of the state's counties on a series of ''Jim Martin Listens''
tours. An ardent advocate of supply-side economics, Mr. Martin argued that
President Reagan needed loyal fiscal conservatives like himself at the state
level.


Terry L. Bruce Terry L. Bruce, a 40-year-old Democrat, used strong ties to
organized labor and teachers that he developed in the Illinois Senate to win a
seat representing Illinois's 19th Congressional District. Mr. Bruce was also
helped in his campaign to unseat Representative Daniel B. Crane by his ability
to keep his constituents happy with a generally conservative social outlook. His
interests in Springfield included work on labor legislation, grain elevator
insurance and consumer and enviromental protection. He voted in the State Senate
against a balanced budget amendment to the Constitution. He at first opposed the
proposed Federal equal rights amendment, but now supports it.


James A. Traficant Jr.  James A. Traficant Jr., who defeated Lyle Williams, a
Republican who had served three terms representing Ohio's 17th Congressional
District, has attracted national attention for his unconventional style as
sheriff of Mahoning County, Ohio. He has crusaded against drugs and the alleged
control of local government by organized crime. He successfully defended himself
in court against charges that he had accepted bribes in his campaign for
sheriff. Opponents of the 42- year-old Mr. Traficant accused him of being a
demagogue with few substantive accomplishments. He has been known for his
attacks on banks, big business and the Internal Revenue Service, and he has
promised to introduce legislation that would create a commission to monitor
I.R.S. investigations.


A. Mitchell McConnell

The secret to A. Mitchell McConnell's success in upsetting Walter D. Huddleston,
the Democrat who was seeking a third term as Senator from Kentucky, seems to
have been a bitterly critical campaign. Mr. McConnell, a 42-year-old Republican
who was serving his second term as Jefferson County judge, staged weekly forums
that called ''Dope on Dee'' to attack Mr. Huddleston's voting and attendance
records. Some of his television ads showed a pack of bloodhounds chasing the
incumbent up a tree. A slim, pale native of Tuscumbia, Ala., he earned a law
degree at the University of Kentucky in 1967 and joined the staff of Senator
Marlow Cook. After brief service in the Justice Department, Mr. McConnell
practiced law in Kentucky before winning the county judgeship.


Madeleine M. Kunin

Madeleine M. Kunin, a former Lieutenant Governor, will be the first woman to
govern Vermont and only the third Democrat to hold the office in 130 years. She
will be the fourth woman in the nation to be elected Governor in her own right,
after Dixie Lee Ray of Washington, Ella Grasso of Connecticut and Martha Layne
Collins of Kentucky. Mrs. Kunin, 51 years old, ran unsuccessfully for Governor
in 1982, winning 44 percent of the vote. That race brought her the stature to
lead the list of potential candidates when Gov. Richard A. Snelling announced he
would retire. More aggressive as a campaigner in 1984, she forcefully promoted
her experience as Lieutenant Governor and as head of the Appropriations
Committee in the State House. She proposed a toxic waste cleanup fund, as well
as stronger rules for reviewing the impact of ski area development.


Helen B. Bentley

In her third try, Helen B. Bentley, a Republican, succeeded in unseating
Representative Clarence D. Long, who had served 11 terms representing Maryland's
Second Congressional District. She continued to display the acerbic character
that made her controversial as chairman of the Federal Maritime Commission and
led her to describe herself as the Fighting Lady in past campaigns. She eagerly
identified herself with Reagan Administration policies, passing out bumper
stickers pairing her name with the President's. She said she would be better
able to bring jobs to the district than would her Democratic opponent. She won
with the help of national Republicans, who had made Mr. Long's defeat a top
priority.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final EditionNovember
10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A personality sketch on Thursday of Madeleine M. Kunin, the Governor- elect of
Vermont, described the historical precedents incorrectly. She is the fourth
woman elected to such a post in her own right. Three other women have succeeded
their husbands as governors.A personality sketch on Thursday of Terry L. Bruce,
who was elected to the House of Representatives from Illinois's 19th
Congressional District, misstated his State Senate voting record. He voted in
committee against a call for a constitutional convention to consider a
balanced-budget amendment to the United States Constitution, but not against the
proposed amendment itself.

GRAPHIC: photo of Albert Gore Jr.; photo of John Ashcroft; photo of John Kerry;
photo of Booth Gardner; photo of John Rockefeller 4th; photo of James Martin;
photo of Terry Bruce; photo of James Traficant Jr.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 8, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS JURY HEARS DOUBT ON ABILITY OF VIETCONG'S SELF-DEFENSE FORCES

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 987 words


A witness at the Westmoreland-CBS libel trial said yesterday that the Vietcong's
self-defense forces were ''little more than a motley crew'' and recalled for the
jury a patrol he had joined in the rice paddies of South Vietnam's Mekong River
delta in October 1967.

The account by Col. John F. Stewart, an intelligence officer who served in
Vietnam in 1967 and 1968, provided a vivid contrast to much of the heavily
statistical testimony at the trial. Throughout five weeks, the proceedings in
Federal District Court in Manhattan have focused on figures relating to enemy
strength and the scope of North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam in
the months prior to the Tet offensive in January 1968.

In the 1982 CBS Reports documentary that prompted Gen. William C. Westmoreland
to sue the network for $120 million, CBS contended that the general's decision
in 1967 to drop the Vietcong's self-defense forces from the official listing of
enemy military strength was a ''tactic'' to help obscure the reality of a mighty
foe.

George Allen, a Central Intelligence Agency official, maintained on the
broadcast that the self-defense forces were a ''fundamental'' threat to American
troops, and the importance of these so-called ''home guard'' units has thus
emerged as a key issue in the trial.

Contradictory Testimony


Under cross-examination yesterday by David Boies, a lawyer for CBS, Colonel
Stewart described the self-defense forces as an ''insignificant'' collection of
boys, old men and, sometimes, women, who normally ran from American troops.
Contradicting some witnesses who preceded him, Colonel Stewart denied the
self-defense forces regularly laid mines and booby traps.

When Mr. Boies asked the witness whether he had ever seen these forces in
combat, Colonel Stewart told of accompanying a unit of American troops on a
''riverine'' patrol in October 1967.

''It was late afternoon and the sun was going down,'' he said, ''and the patrol
left the boats to conduct a clearing operation in a series of little huts or
hamlets in a rice paddy.''

In the distance, Colonel Stewart said, were ''some people in conical hats'' and,
at one point, a bullet whizzed over the heads of the patrol. The unit moved into
the hamlet and questioned the residents, and Colonel Stewart said the officer in
charge of the patrol told him the shot had probably been fired by a member of
the self-defense forces because the area was ''VC controlled.'' Only one weapon,
Colonel Stewart said, was found - and it was on the ground.

Judge Interrupts Lawyer


Mr. Boies asked the witness who else in Vietnam had discussed with him the
capabilities of the self-defense forces. When the colonel responded with one of
the prolonged answers that characterized his testimony, the lawyer broke in.

''Your Honor,'' he said to Judge Pierre N. Leval, ''What I'm trying to do . . .
''

''I don't want to hear what you're trying to do,'' the judge shot back. ''When
you ask a question, you have to sit through the answer.''

Colonel Stewart, who was not interviewed on the CBS program, completed his
testimony yesterday and was followed to the stand by George Carver, who was
chief of Vietnamese affairs for the Central Intelligence Agency during the late
1960's. Mr. Carver's testimony will continue today.

Mr. Boies and Colonel Stewart, who is still on active duty in the Army, sparred
yesterday with the same frequency as they had on Monday.

When Mr. Boies asked the witness whether he knew the percentage of self- defense
forces who were armed, the colonel said he did not.

Q. Do you have an approximation?

A. I don't recall. You'll get me to say an approximate percentage, Mr. Boies,
and then hoist me on my own petard. The answer is I don't recall.

Mr. Boies tried to demonstrate that, by Colonel Stewart's figures and others
compiled after the colonel left Vietnam in April 1968, the number of enemy
troops in the Tet offensive that began on Jan. 30, 1968 had to be substantially
larger than reported by General Westmoreland's command.

Spar on Figures


The CBS documentary that is the subject of the suit - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A
Vietnam Deception'' - contained statements that the full scope of North
Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam before the Tet attack, like the size
of the enemy generally, had been concealed by General Westmoreland's command.

Colonel Stewart said that at the start of the offensive, North Vietnamese and
Vietcong regular forces in South Vietnam numbered about 130,000, with 100,000 of
them committed to the Tet attack. By Feb. 10, he said, 85,000 had been killed or
removed from battle by wounds. That left 45,000 regular troops.

But Mr. Boies noted that, according to figures supplied to President Johnson
months later, another 40,000 enemy troops were killed between Feb. 11 and April
6, and another 56,000 wounded - making a combined total of casualties much
greater than the number Colonel Stewart said were in South Vietnam.

If Colonel Stewart was right, Mr. Boies told the jury in an interim summation,
it raised the question of ''who in the hell were we fighting? And the answer is
two-fold: there were a lot more enemy out there than the official reports of
MACV'' - General Westmoreland's command - indicated and ''there was a lot more
infiltration than the official reports indicated.''

Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, countered by saying that the later
casualties involved North Vietnamese troops who entered South Vietnam after the
initial waves of the offensive.

Colonel Stewart said many of the casualty figures were ''either exaggerated or
wrong or both.'' The colonel told Mr. Boies that he ought to get away from his
concentration on numbers and focus on ''what really mattered - how well the
American and South Vietnamese armies fought.''

''That,'' he said, ''I can tell you about.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 8, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

OUR TOWNS

BYLINE: By MICHAEL NORMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: BERGENFIELD, N.J., Nov. 7


Veterans' Day came a week early here. The official celebration will still take
place on Sunday, but last weekend veterans from World War II and Korea did
something for the veterans of Vietnam. Those who were gathered in a cold wind on
the green in front of Borough Hall are not likely to forget it soon.

Bergenfield is a small, mostly blue- collar town - 25,800 people in 3.8 square
miles - with a busy main street and narrow side streets with modest homes.

It has an unusual number of veterans, roughly 10 percent of the population, and,
for its size, a large number of active veterans' organizations: the American
Legion, the Veterans of Foreign Wars, the Disabled American Veterans, the Jewish
War Veterans and the Italian-American Veterans of the United States.

In short, the flag flies often here. ''Bergenfield is a great patriotic town,''
said Joe Corrado, a member of the American Legion. ''We run the best Memorial
Day parade in the county.''



The town also has a monument in front of Borough Hall that lists the names of
those who were killed in World Wars I and II. Two years ago, Joe Corrado, 70
years old, and a few others decided it would be a good idea to remember the boys
from Vietnam.

An alliance of veterans' organizations began a fund drive to erect a statue as a
memorial to recognize the sacrifices of Vietnam veterans, to make a statement,
they said, that would dispel ''the lousy image created of the Viet vet as a
pot-smoking, psychotic crybaby with latent killer instincts.''

Their desire to link themselves with the newest generation of veterans had a
strain of irony. In the late 1960's and early 1970's when the heroes of Con
Thien, Khe Sanh and a hundred other engagements turned in their uniforms, many
of the men who fought in the Battle of the Bulge or on Guadalcanal or at Chosin
Reservoir wanted little to do with them. Vietnam veterans sometimes grew their
hair long and wore beards. They talked about their nightmares. Many protested
their own war.

Why was the old guard interested now? Were they trying to rewrite history by
painting an unpopular war red, white and blue?

''I don't care who they were,'' said Ray Lissemore, 65 years old, a V.F.W.
member who fought in World War II with the Army engineers. ''A bullet is a
bullet, undeclared war or no. We are them and they are us. They're just young
guys - like we were.''

He is talking about brotherhood here, the kind that spans wars and generations.
''It's a complex thing,'' he said, ''an intangible thing. They call you a flag
waver but that's not true. You have to see the bodies stacked up to
understand.''

On Sunday, Ron Raffaele arrived at Borough Hall around 10 A.M. The statue was
covered with a blue nylon tarpaulin.

An Army veteran of Vietnam, Mr. Raffaele is a member of the Vietnam Veterans for
America, a small organization often confused with the larger Vietnam Veterans of
America.

Mr. Raffaele, who is 43 and is Bergenfield's postmaster, said his organization
was dedicated to the return of those declared missing in action. But it was
brotherhood, not a political issue, that drew him to the group and the alliance
of veterans organizations that worked to establish the statue.

''I used to have a tough time dealing with the war,'' he said. ''I went to see a
counselor. Then I joined the Vietnam veterans group. I felt a bond. I went to
one of their vigils and broke down. I still get chills thinking about it.''



At noon, the veterans gathered at St. John's Roman Catholic Church for a
memorial mass. The choir sang ''God Bless America.'' The pastor, Msgr. Joseph J.
Donovan, spoke about ''peace and justice'' and alluded to the American way. And
a few of the Vietnam veterans worried for a moment that the service and the
congregation might ''get carried away,'' as Mr. Raffaele put it, might turn
patriotic on them, but the priest settled down to a simple thank-you - ''you are
not forgotten and we will never forget'' - which was all that many of them said
they really wanted.

Around 2 P.M. at Borough Hall, the West Point band began playing marches and
then the speeches started. Representative Marge Roukema said, ''The issue can be
summed up in patriotism.'' Ron Raffaele and a few of the other Vietnam veterans
began to look worried again, but soon it was time to unveil the statue.

The relatives and friends of 10 men from Bergenfield who were killed in Vietnam
pulled the tarpaulin off to reveal a 5-foot, 8-inch granite statue of a soldier
in combat dress standing on a 4-foot pedestal. The inscription read simply: ''In
honor of those who served in Vietnam, 1958-1975.''

A crowd of 500 people fell silent. The Vietnam Veterans for America fired a
21-gun salute.

As the crowd dispersed, Richard Schloerb, a former Marine from Vietnam, took one
last look. ''Everyone,'' he said, ''appreciates the attention. But I just don't
know, I just don't know anymore. You know what I mean?''

Perhaps it is too much appreciation come too late or the snap of too many flags
by those who, in Ray Lissemore's words, have not seen the bodies stacked up.

Or maybe Richard Schloerb cannot express himself because he remembers too many
names, names like those listed by the Bergenfield Veterans' Alliance, the boys
from town who were killed in Vietnam:

Ross Applegate, Francis J. Campeau, Wayne L. Golon, John Lafferty, Walter Lubbe
Jr., Lawrence W. Mahurter, Mitchell Messing, John Pall, Charles H. Richardson,
Emilio Rivera.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of statue

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 8, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Tom Hayden Appears to Win 2d California Assembly Term

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 140 words

DATELINE: SANTA MONICA, Calif., Nov. 7


Assemblyman Tom Hayden appeared today to be on his way to victory, but a
write-in campaign was delaying the vote count in his bid for a second term in
the California Legislature.

Mr. Hayden, a Democrat, had 62,232 votes, or 53 percent, while David Shell, a
Republican lawyer who campaigned against this city's strict rent control
ordinance, had 50,911 votes, or 43 percent.

''I am confident of winning,'' said Mr. Hayden, who became prominent while
opposing the Vietnam War. His wife is the actress Jane Fonda.

Many paper ballots remained to be counted, but Mr. Hayden is allied with the
write-in candidate for a seat on the Santa Monica City Council and was expected
to win the bulk of those ballots.

Mr. Shell's campaign brochures had lauded his ''distinguished'' Air Force
career, in contrast to Mr. Hayden's antiwar protests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WAR'S CHILDREN RELIVE PAIN IN TOUR FOR PEACE

BYLINE: By WILLIAM R. GREER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 982 words


Twenty-six young people from abroad whose families have been wrenched apart by
war arrived in New York City this week to begin telling America's children of
life growing up in the shadow of destruction.

Their hope, they say, is that by telling their stories to Americans they will
meet in visits to 36 cities over the next 12 days, they may diminish the threat
of war.

''It seems almost unbelievable that I could forgive and forget about what
happened to my people,'' said Arn Chorn, an 18-year-old refugee from Cambodia,
who now lives in New Hampshire with foster parents. He is an advisor to the
young people on the tour, who are 14 to 17 years old. ''Children have an ability
to forgive and forget.''

''We are less sure that we are absolutely right,'' he said. ''Adults who are
sure they are absolutely right, they make war over their absolute rightness.''

''Now, look at us, look at us,'' he added. ''We represent the places in the
world where men are killing each other and yet we are living together.''

The visit to America, called the Children of War Tour, was organized by the
Religious Task Force, an interfaith religious group. The task force, which was
created in 1978, is made up of representatives from 60 religious denominations.

Tomorrow, the young people will split into six groups and fly to different
regions of the country - beginning in Boston, Kansas City, Miami, Denver,
Houston and Los Angeles - to tell their stories in schools, churches, synagogues
and meeting halls.

Yesterday, joined by 11 American youngsters from churches and peace groups
around the nation, the foreign youths traveled across Manhattan in an orange
school bus. They met at the United Nations with an Undersecretary General,
Robert Mueller, and later, at the General Theological Seminary, they talked with
Bishop Desmond Tutu of South Africa, a foe of apartheid who won the Nobel Peace
Prize this year. The young people also rode the Staten Island Ferry.

In between stops, they seemed like any other busload of high school children,
hanging out the windows, whistling, shouting things like ''Hi, Mr. Taxi Driver''
and ''Look here, cutie.''

Story of Kidnapping

But when the bus made its stops, and the youngsters gathered in front of Mr.
Mueller and Bishop Tutu and talked about what had brought them to the United
States, they were unlike most youngster born in America.

Marvyn Perez, a 16-year-old refugee from Guatemala, said that when he was 14
years old he and his friends wrote a letter to ''officials'' in Guatemala City
asking for a better education, more schools and better teachers.

A few days later, he said, he was kidnapped while waiting for a bus outside the
National Stadium in Guatemala City. He recalled 15 days of beatings, of kicks,
of cigarettes searing his skin and of electric shocks, that followed.

''They say, 'Tell me the names of the other students,' '' he said, ''but I
didn't want to because they kill them.''

A Friend Killed

''One day they take me into bathroom and ask me, 'What you want to do when you
grow up,' '' he said. ''I said I want to be a doctor. They bring my friend into
the bathroom and shot him in the head and they say, 'You want to be a doctor?
Take care of him.' He died.''

Marvyn eventually was freed by his kidnappers. He and his family fled the
country, he said, crossing into Mexico and, eventually, reaching Los Angeles.
There he is a high school student.

''Americans don't know what's happening in my country,'' he said. ''They think
it's in peace now, but it isn't.''

Another visitor, Seng Ty, who is 16, said he fled Cambodia alone four years ago
after his parents died of starvation, his brother was executed and the Khmer
Rouge separated him from his sister.

Riding on the bus through Manhattan, Seng, who now lives in Massachusetts,
laughed with the other children at their pranks. But he never stopped nervously
working his hands.

Eating Snakes and Insects

He left Cambodia, he said, because ''I don't have anybody to take care of me.''

''I want to go to school, but I couldn't because I had to go out to get food,''
he said. ''People have to find food like snakes and insects and leaves to eat.
Some people die by eating poison stuff.''

''During the night, I was not allowed to talk with my parents,'' he added.
''Some nights they call the name and they take them to the forest and kill.''

Seng said he was apprehensive about telling people in the Midwest - in Des
Moines and Milwaukee and Minneapolis - about life in Cambodia and the Vietnamese
invasion. But, he said, he would get ''warmed up.''

''I want to tell my experience during wartime,'' he said. ''I want to tell them
my life in the future and my life in the past. I want them to think about the
wars going on in my country. I want to make peace in my country. I want to make
a better world. I'm very tired to be fighting.''

Task Force Advisors

The Rev. Paul Mayer, the national director of the task force, said its advisory
committee includes Bishop Paul Moore Jr. of the Episcopal Diocese of New York,
Rabbi Balfour Brickner of the Stephen Wise Free Synagogue in Manhattan and
Coretta Scott King, widow of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.

The children - who are from 14 countries, including Lebanon, El Salvador,
Nicaragua, Israel, South Africa, Northern Ireland, Uganda and Vietnam - have
been staying since Tuesday at a monastery in Newton, N.J.

In his talk with the students, Bishop Tutu urged those who will return to their
countries soon not to forget that they can continue to work for peace.

''When you walk down the street in your country,'' he said, ''and they say who
is that, you tell them, 'I am a sign of hope.' ''

And sitting in his chair, he demonstrated, puffing out his chest and swinging
his arms as if he were that sign of hope walking proudly down the street.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Bishop Desmond Tutu and Rev. Paul Mayer (page B6); photo of Gilberto
Aguirre; photo of Lieneke Boesak; photo of Arn Chorn

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ INDICATES SOVIET HAS DENIED SHIPPING FIGHTERS



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1113 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


The Soviet Union has told the United States that it has not shipped any advanced
fighter planes to Nicaragua, Secretary of State George P. Shultz indicated
today.

At the same time, Mr. Shultz, in an interview devoted largely to the Reagan
Administration's plans for dealing with the Soviet Union in the second Reagan
term, said he planned to be directly involved with Foreign Minister Andrei A.
Gromyko in managing Soviet-American relations. He said he opposed the idea of
naming a special ''czar'' to negotiate future arms-control accords. Such an idea
has been discussed by some White House officials.



'Too Old for Teaching'


From Mr. Shultz's remarks about what was planned, it was evident he intends to
remain in the Administration and not leave unless asked to do so by President
Reagan, something that White House aides said was unlikely.

When asked if he might follow the example of Education Secretary T. H. Bell, who
resigned today to go back to teaching, Mr. Shultz, himself a former college
professor and dean, replied jokingly:

''I'm too old for teaching. It takes a lot of patience to grade these blue
books. You work so hard all term long, and then you read those blue books and
you say: 'Oh my God! It didn't seem as if I got anything across.' ''



Concern Over MIG's


On Tuesday, the United States, concerned that a Soviet ship putting into the
Nicaraguan port of Corinto might be carrying Soviet MIG jet fighters, told the
Soviet Union through diplomatic channels that such a move would be unacceptable
and have grave implications for relations. On Wednesday, Foreign Minister Miguel
d'Escoto Brockmann of Nicaragua denied that any Soviet planes were en route to
Nicaragua.

In Managua, a senior Nicaraguan official said today that the Soviet ship that
docked at Corinto was carrying one or two helicopters for the Nicaraguan Army.
(Page A10.)

Today, Mr. Shultz, in the interview, repeated the gravity with which the United
States would treat the appearance of MIG's in Nicaragua. But he then noted that
the Nicaraguan Foreign Minister ''said categorically that there weren't any
MIG's on that ship, and that same word has been expressed to us in other ways
and other quarters.''

When asked if the Soviet Union was one of the ''other quarters,'' Mr. Shultz
nodded as if to say yes, but said, ''I'm not going to go beyond what I said.''



Soviet Said to Reply


Other officials later confirmed that Mr. Shultz had indeed answered
affirmatively. They said the Soviet Union, through diplomatic channels, had
denied that any MIG's were on the way to Nicaragua.

Mr. Shultz said the issue of the MIG's only ''superficially'' concerned
Nicaragua. He said that ''strategically and politically'' it involved the Soviet
Union.

Although Mr. Shultz said he knew of no plans for the Administration to invade
Nicaragua, he stressed that if MIG's were sent to Nicaragua, this would create
''an unacceptable situation.'' He said that ''what the situation will be like
two or three days or two or three weeks from now, I can't forecast.'' Clearly,
the Soviet and Nicaraguan denials had not yet convinced the Administration that
the problem was resolved.

Asked how the Administration could hope to carry out productive negotiations
with the Soviet Union on arms control when such problems continually arise as
the possible shipment of MIG's to Nicaragua and the innuendo that the United
States was somehow involved in the assassination of Indira Gandhi of India, Mr.
Shultz said it was important ''to meet the problems head on where they are, in
their own terms.''



Doctrine of 'Linkage'


Last month, Mr. Shultz spoke out on the doctrine of ''linkage'' - punishing the
Russians in one area for their actions in another.

He praised President Nixon for going ahead with the mining of North Vietnam's
principal harbor, Haiphong, in May 1972 even though he was planning to go to
Moscow in the next month.

''I remember a lot of people saying, 'You shouldn't do that because you're going
to mess up your whole chance for a better relationship with the Soviet Union,'
'' Mr. Shultz said.

''And as I recall, his reasoning was just the opposite,'' he said. ''I think he
was proven right. At any event, in terms of these various problems that we have,
and there are plenty of them, they have to be tackled.''

On the managing of Soviet-American relations, Mr. Shultz was asked if he would
play the central role, or whether there would be a ''czar'' created to run
arms-control matters.



'Managed as a Unit'


''The U.S.-Soviet relationship has to be managed as a unit,'' he replied. ''You
can't carve off part and float it away somewhere and have it take place
independent of all other things going on. There has to be a central management
of it, and the Soviet Union probably feels much the same way.''

Although many officials will by necessity be involved in dealing with the Soviet
Union, he said, ''there has to be some overall place where it is managed below
the President.''

He said Mr. Reagan would have to become actively involved because ''inevitably
on these major things, you can go so far on even a very high level technical
basis, and then there are political decisions that have to be made.''

He said ''I'd expect'' that he and Mr. Gromyko would be involved in the central
management of relations.



Meeting With Gromyko


When asked if he thought there should be a meeting with Mr. Gromyko ''sooner
rather than later,'' he replied: ''Sure. It should be. That's the burden of the
comments the President made at the press conference'' on Wednesday in Los
Angeles. He said no specific time had been set for such a session with Mr.
Gromyko to follow up on Mr. Gromyko's trip to Washington in September.

But other officials said they believed it likely a meeting would be set for next
January, perhaps in Moscow.

Mr. Shultz said he and Mr. Gromyko had agreed ''that if there is a good reason
to have a meeting, it is not a problem to arrange.''

Some State Department officials have privately said that unless Mr. Reagan asks
for the resignation of Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, or makes it clear
to the Pentagon chief that he wants an arms-control accords with the Russians,
the differences between the State and Defense Departments that have persisted
throughout the first term will block any progress in negotiations.



Says Problems Can Be Solved


But Mr. Shultz, without denying the differences, said that these problems could
be surmounted and had been in the past.

He said that ''it always turned out in the end that the President decided things
and matters moved on.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bakuriana (page A12); photo of George P. Shultz

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

VIETNAM WAR VETERANS ASSEMBLE FOR CEREMONY

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 720 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 8


Thousands of Vietnam-era veterans began assembling here today for a weekend of
remembering the war in Southeast Asia.

More than 150,000 are expected to arrive for Veterans' Day observances in memory
of the comradeship and valor of the 9.8 million men and women who served in the
United States armed forces from 1964 to 1975 - particularly the 58,022 combat
dead in Vietnam.

One Reagan Administration source said late today that President Reagan was
expected to cut short an election- victory vacation at his ranch in the Santa
Ynez mountains outside Santa Barbara, Calif., to make a ''healing appearance''
Sunday afternoon at what is certain to be the weekend's emotional high point.

That will be the dedication at 2 P.M. Sunday, Veterans' Day, of the new bronze
statue of three G.I.'s that accents the capital's Vietnam Memorial wall on
Constitution Avenue at 21st Street N.W.

'Searching for Their Own Names'

According to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, 13 names were recently added by
cutting them into the glistening stone of the striking black marble wall bearing
the names of all Americans killed in Vietnam.

The glistening black marble wall, bearing the names of all Americans killed or
missing in action in Vietnam, often seems to overpower beholders who see
themselves reflected darkly among the names of the dead.

Frederick R. Hart, the Washington sculptor whose brown and khaki-toned statue is
to be given a preliminary unveiling at 11 A.M. Friday, has said that he designed
the three military figures so that they would seem to be ''searching for their
own names.''

On Sunday, at the dedication ceremony following the Defense Department's annual
Veteran's Day observance at the Tomb of the Unknowns, the privately financed
memorial and its new statue will be turned over to the United States Park
Service, for perpetual maintenance by the Government.

A New Image for Veterans

But Veterans' Day 1984 also is planned as a transition of another sort. A number
of Vietnam veterans' groups are launching ''Salute II,'' an upbeat program to
end what they believe are ''distortions'' in the nation's perception of Vietnam
veterans.

The weekend, also called ''Salute II,'' is to mark the kickoff of a new group
called the National Vietnam Veterans Network, an umbrella organization of
Vietnam veterans' groups. Its aim is to ''spread the word,'' as its president
put it, that the average age of Vietnam combat veterans is now 38, that 97 per
cent of Vietnam veterans were honorably discharged, that 90 per cent of ''heavy
combat'' veterans are proud of their military service and that 80 per cent of
them have made a successful transition to middle-class American life.

Thomas J. Wincek, the network president, said his group will begin placing
full-page ads in major news magazines next month that depict briefcase-carrying
men and women in civilian clothes as ''paratroops,'' jumping confidently in
parachutes from an aicraft, under the headline, ''We Land Professionals.''

Public Relations Equation'

In an interview today, Mr. Wincek and Robert A. Sniffen, the board chairman of
the National Vietnam Veterans Network, said the network wants to end ''the
public image of Vietnam veterans as a problem.'' This goal underlies the new
organization's effort to inform veterans about Government and other programs
offering help with job training and business and professional assistance.

''The public relations equation has gone from one where we were scapegoats to
one of sympathy,'' said Mr. Sniffen, who, like Mr. Wincek, is a combat veteran.
''We want to show that the rest of the equation is that these men and women, who
are full of the love and loyalty spawned in Vietnam, are a precious national
asset''.

The theme of ''healing'' was repeated by George Sullivan, the chairman of the
Salute II weekend. He said that the program was designed, in part, to ''bring
side by side the veterans and young people, so they can see that we aren't
crazies and our guys can see they don't have horns.''

The stereotype - in some few cases the reality - of the estrangement of many
Vietnam combat veterans from post-war civilian society is among ''the downside
issues'', as Mr. Sniffen called them, that a proliferation of Vietnam veterans'
organizations hopes to address.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A dispatch from Washington yesterday about Veterans' Day observances incorrectly
described Robert A. Sniffen, chairman of the National Vietnam Veterans Network.
Mr. Sniffen, a Navy enlisted man from 1960 to 1962, did not serve in combat.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SKETCHES OF ASTRONAUTS ON MOON

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 722 words


Anna L. Fisher

A physician . . . she has a 14-month-old- daughter, Kristin Anne, and thus is
the first mother in space . . . mission specialist, scheduled to use mechanical
arm to snare two failed satellites . . . fourth woman in space . . . husband,
Dr. William Fisher, also an astronaut . . . On career and family, she says:
''You're juggling all the time. Your husband and you both have to be in tune. If
it's a sacrifice at all, you sacrifice personal time. When I come home I want to
spend all my time with Kristin or Bill. I used to be an avid reader and since
Kristin was born I've read one book. When I use the word sacrifice that's not
correct because Kristin's going to be this little for such a short period of
time and I'm going to have ample time to myself and perhaps wish to have this
time back.'' . . . Born in St. Albans, Queens . . . high school in San Pedro,
Calif. . . . graduated cum laude in chemistry from University of California at
Los Angeles in 1971 . . . spent year in graduate school in chemistry at U.C.L.A.
. . . earned M.D. from there in 1976 . . . met husband in medical school . . .
read of requirements for mission specialist in 1977 while intern . . . selected
as astronaut in January 1978 . . . continued emergency room work in spare time
in early days at NASA . . . assisted in development and testing of shuttle's
mechanical arm . . . worked as physician in rescue helicopters . . . is 5 feet 4
inches tall, weighs 110 pounds.


Frederick H. Hauck

Commander of Discovery . . . Navy captain . . . 43 years old, has been in space
program for six years . . . widely regarded as one of the program's
intellectuals . . . holds bachelor's degree in physics from Tufts University . .
. master's in nuclear physics from Massachusetts Institute of Technology . . .
third-generation naval officer . . . flew 114 missions as pilot in Vietnam . . .
nine Air Medals . . . in 1972, named Navy's outstanding test pilot . . . married
to Dolly Bowman of Washington, D.C., where he grew up . . . two children . . .
previously in space as pilot of Challenger on six- day mission last year.

Joseph P. Allen

Mission specialist on current flight, also mission specialist on Columbia in
fifth shuttle flight in 1982 . . . 47 years old . . . will make his first space
walk to recapture one of two faulty satellites . . . 5 feet 6 inches tall,
weighs 125 pounds, one of smallest of male astronauts . . . selected by NASA as
a scientist astronaut in 1967 . . . doctorate in physics from Yale . . . NASA
assistant administrator for legislative affairs in Washington, 1975-78 . . .
logged 3,000 hours in jet aircraft . . . more than a dozen awards for flying,
scientific achievements and contributions to NASA . . . quick wit, reputation
for philosophical turn of mind . . . of this, he says: ''It's a rumor I keep
starting but nobody seems to believe it.'' . . . hobbies include photography,
music, racquet games, windsurfing, sailing and skiing . . . born in
Crawfordsville, Ind. . . . married to Bonnie Jo Darling of Elkhart, Ind.

Dale A. Gardner

Navy commander, 35 years old . . . served in western Pacific aboard carrier
Enterprise . . . on his second space flight . . . primary tasks on space walks,
to stow one inoperative satellite after recovery and capture other . . . born in
Fairmont, Minn., grew up in Sherburn, Minn., and Savanna, Ill., where he
attended high school . . . graduated from University of Illinois in 1970 . . .
bachelor's degree in engineering physics . . . took part in testing and
evaluating F-14A Tomcat at Naval Air Test Center in Maryland, as project officer
. . . parents live in Clinton, Iowa, which he considers home . . . married to
Sue Grace Ticusan of Indianapolis . . . two children . . . all live in Houston
area.

David M. Walker

Pilot of mission . . . 40, making his first space flight . . . Navy commander
who won six Air Medals in combat in Southeast Asia . . . graduated from
Annapolis . . . after flight training, served as a fighter pilot aboard carriers
Enterprise and America . . . became astronaut candidate in 1978 . . . born in
Columbus, Ga., considers Eustis, Fla., home . . . attended Eustis High School .
. . mother, Anne G. Rundle, lives in Boston . . . now single . . . two sons,
Michael and Matt.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David Walker, Joseph Allen, Dale Gardner,Capt. Frederick Hauck
and Anna Fisher

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

INSTIUTE RUSK FOUNDED NAMED FOR HIM AT LAST

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1043 words


At last they are hanging Dr. Howard A. Rusk's shingle on the hospital he founded
and ran for more than 30 years.

The whole time, everybody from the patients to taxi drivers always called the
Institute of Rehabilitation Medicine at New York University Medical Center ''the
Rusk Institute'' after its director and moving force. Finally, it's official.

Dr. Rusk retired in 1982. Today, the name of the 83-year-old physician will be
added on the entrance canopy of the building at First Avenue and 34th Street,
which was erected in 1951.

His successor, Dr. Joseph Goodgold, said that to understand the magnitude of Dr.
Rusk's achievement, ''you have to know that rehabilitation medicine as a field
of specialization didn't exist before him.''

''Orthopedics, yes, and artificial limbs,'' Dr. Goodgold said, ''but nothing
much was done for the handicapped to restore their will to live, to help them
learn to overcome their disabilities and get back into life.''

'Treat the Whole Person'


''I've said it so many times I almost gag,'' Dr. Rusk said in an interview in
his office at the institute, which he still goes to every day. ''Physical
medicine isn't enough; you've got to treat the whole person.''

He has used what he calls ''the phenomenon of hope'' to train people ''not just
within the limits of their ability, but up to the heights of their latent
ability - to help them live the very best lives possible with what is left.''

His lifelong maxim is contained in three words he spoke once again the other
day: ''Action absorbs anxiety.'' Anybody who has ever been a patient at the
institute - for stroke, spinal cord injuries, amputations, broken bones or one
of a multitude of neurological or muscular diseases - knows what that means.

The scene at the institute every day from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M. resembles not a
hospital, but a vocational school or a gymnasium or even Lourdes, with mobs on
crutches or in wheelchairs out of their beds and crowding the corridors. They
are on their way to workouts in the Ambulation Room or the swimming pool or to
various other kinds of the most sophisticated physical and occupational therapy
available anywhere.

A Return to Independence


For the most seriously afflicted, the simplest yet most crucial tasks of eating,
washing and dressing are learned, the first steps on the long road back to
independence.

The effort to rehabilitate the whole person also involves job counselors, social
workers, psychologists and psychiatrists. The attitude of the best of the
nurses, physicians and therapists combines toughness and tenderness. They are
both demanding and caring, and self-pity is not encouraged.

There have been 1,042 admissions in the last year to the 152-bed institute,
which includes 35 beds reserved for children. In addition, 8,000 outpatients
were in regular therapy during the last 12 months. Over the years, 60,000
physically disabled children and adults have taken part in institute programs.

Some of the patients have been famous. The Dodger catcher Roy Campanella,
paralyzed from the neck down in an automobile accident in 1958, received
intensive treatment there and returned to a productive life. The photographer
Margaret Bourke-White was an inpatient and so was Joseph P. Kennedy after his
stroke in 1961. The writer Joseph Heller recovered there in 1982 from
Guillain-Barre syndrome, which left him totally paralyzed for months.

Man From Missouri


Renee Katz Simon, whose right hand was microsurgically restored after being
severed by a New York City subway train, also went through rehabilitation at the
institute.

Dr. Rusk, the man from Missouri who gave new hope to the handicapped, made his
reputation in internal medicine during the 1920's and 1930's in St. Louis. He
began developing his innovative techniques while he was a major in the Army Air
Corps during World War II. Running the 1,000-bed hospital at Jefferson Barracks,
Mo., he was appalled by the apathy and boredom of convalescing young patients.

''Many weren't recuperating, they were vegetating,'' he recalled.

A program he introduced there was duplicated in all Army Air Corps hospitals.
Mechanics worked on altimeters and carburators from their beds, radio operators
practiced codes, others identified enemy and Allied aircraft from models hung in
their wards.

Return to Duty


Dr. Rusk's goal was to return the sick and injured, when possible, to active
duty. By 1943, his methods were being used at 12 special centers for the
severely wounded - paraplegics, amputees and the blind.

In 1945, Dr. Rusk arrived in New York as chairman of the New York University
Medical School's department of physical medicine and rehabilitation, a
department Dr. Rusk said ''was all in my head.'' He established the first center
in two bare wards at Bellevue Hospital.

Three years later, he received more than $1 million from the financier Bernard
Baruch. This gift and other pledges that Dr. Rusk obtained by what he called
''gentle persuasion'' from rich and influential New Yorkers made possible the
building of the institute. It was the first university-affiliated hospital in
the United States devoted entirely to rehabilitating the disabled.

Dr. Rusk believes that ''the disabled, if properly placed and trained, are good
workers with a better production rate, lower accident and absentee rates and a
labor turnover 10 times less than normal workers.''

Many Projects Abroad


His concerns have gone far beyond the United States. He is the founder and
president of the World Rehabilitation Fund, he directed refugee and health
programs during the Korean and Vietnam Wars and he recently established a
project that brings doctors in Israel and Egypt together to care for the
brain-damaged. Dr. Rusk and his staff have trained more than 3,000 physicians
and 1,000 brace and limb makers from 125 nations.

Dr. Rusk, whose 200 awards include three Albert Lasker Foundation prizes, was
asked why it took 33 years to name his own hospital after him. Others on the
staff had said he had repeatedly resisted the idea.

He answered, ''I didn't want it named until I felt sure we had all the elements
of an institute of excellence.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dr. Howard Rusk

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A. AIDE IN SAIGON SAYS DATA WAS 'ENORMOUS'

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1045 words


The former chief of Vietnamese Affairs for the Central Intelligence Agency
testified yesterday that Gen. William C. Westmoreland's command was so generous
with information on enemy troop strength that many intelligence analysts
complained it was ''too much for their in-baskets.''

George A. Carver Jr., who appeared in Federal Court in Manhattan as the 13th
witness for General Westmoreland in his $120 million libel suit against CBS,
said the command provided ''an enormous amount'' of both ''raw data'' and
analyses for the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies in South Vietnam in
1967.

Mr. Carver said that, while the C.I.A. and military intelligence officers
differed ''conceptually'' over how best to keep tabs on enemy strength, General
Westmoreland's command made every effort to enlighten ''anyone who had any
interest'' in the subject.

''They never withheld raw data from anybody in the intelligence community,'' Mr.
Carver said.

Former Aide Only Feet Away


As Mr. Carver testified, a former aide at the C.I.A., Samuel A. Adams, sat only
feet away at a table reserved for the defendants in the case. Mr. Adams was a
paid consultant for CBS in its preparation of the documentary and is one of the
individuals named in General Westmoreland's libel action.

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam between 1964 and
1968, claims that CBS defamed him in a 1982 documentary by saying he had
deceived President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and
nature of enemy forces in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968.

The CBS broadcast - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - said the
''highest level'' of military intelligence had engaged in a ''conspiracy'' to
minimize enemy strength by deleting the Vietcong's self-defense units from the
military listing of enemy strength and by setting an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of
300,000 on that listing.

The narrator of the program, Mike Wallace, described the removal of the
Vietcong's self-defense forces as a ''tactic'' by General Westmoreland and said
the C.I.A. ''suddenly, without explanation, reversed its position and gave in to
all of General Westmoreland's demands.''

The documentary focused on the events surrounding the formulation in 1967 of a
new intelligence estimate on Communist strength in Vietnam for President
Johnson. The C.I.A. and General Westmoreland's command wrangled for months, with
each side, as they made clear in cables, aware of the ''political and public
relations'' impact of any determination.

Mr. Carver, whose testimony will continue today, was Special Assistant for
Vietnamese Affairs to the Director of Central Intelligence from 1966 to 1973.
During 1967, the director was Richard Helms, who is expected to testify later in
the trial.

Mr. Carver did not appear on the CBS documentary. A week after the program was
completed - ''locked up'' in television parlance - and 12 days before it was
aired, he was interviewed for an hour by the documentary's producer, George
Crile.

However, two aides to Mr. Carver at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley, Va., in
1967, whose names arose frequently in testimony yesterday, were seen on the
broadcast. One was Mr. Adams. The other was George W. Allen, Mr. Carver's
deputy, who said on the broadcast that the Vietcong self-defense forces were
''an integral part of the military potential of the Communist forces in South
Vietnam.''

Yesterday Mr. Carver described the 49-year-old Mr. Adams as a man of
''enthusiasm, energy and imagination'' who felt there was something ''improper''
in the way General Westmoreland's command ''approached the problem'' of enemy
strength and the way ''it handled some of the data.''

Mr. Carver said, however, that Mr. Adams was also ''very prone to jump to
conclusions and very intolerant of people who did not share the conclusions to
which he jumped.''

Judge Pierre N. Leval, ruling on an objection by David Boies, CBS's lawyer,
ordered Mr. Carver's characterization struck from the record.

Admonished Defendant


Mr. Carver recalled an incident in June 1967 when he had to admonish Mr. Adams
for sending an ''unauthorized'' cable to the C.I.A. station in Saigon regarding
enemy strength. The cable, Mr. Carver said, contained ''a judgment we didn't
support'' and had ''a approved. Mr. Adams was going off half- cocked as he was
sometimes wont to do.''

Mr. Carver, who said he had never known an estimate of enemy strength to be
drawn up that wasn't the object of ''disagreement,'' suggested that General
Westmoreland's position on the nature, if not the number, of Communist forces in
South Vietnam in 1967 wasn't all that different from his own - and perhaps not
that different from Mr. Allen's or even Mr. Adams's.

Over objections by Mr. Boies, the jury was told of a memorandum written by Mr.
Allen on July 5, 1967, which summarized conversations between Mr. Carver and his
two aides. Mr. Carver was taking the memo with him that week on a visit to
Saigon with Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara.

Mr. Allen wrote at the time, and Mr. Carver testified yesterday, that the
Vietcong's self-defense forces were ''largely unarmed'' and were an
''indifferently trained and unindoctrinated force'' that, like the Vietcong's
political cadre, ''would not - and should not - be used in assessing military
matters.'' Mr. Carver said Mr. Adams had also read the memo then and did not
dissent from it.

But Mr. Allen, like many of his C.I.A. colleagues, believed these so-called
''home guard'' units should be included in a separate ''nonmilitary'' listing of
enemy strength. General Westmoreland's position was not only that the
self-defense forces should be removed from the order of battle but that they
could not be accurately counted. The C.I.A. estimated their strength at 125,000.

Mr. Carver acknowledged yesterday that the C.I.A.'s estimate of self-defense
force strength was ''spongy'' and ''suggested a degree of precision and solidity
which our evidence did not support.'' So, on his visit to Saigon in July 1967,
he said, he looked favorably on a proposal from General Westmoreland's command
that the self-defense units only be ''described verbally'' in intelligence
documents.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A. VIETNAM ANALYST

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 296 words


George A. Carver Jr., who appeared yesterday as a witness in Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's libel suit against CBS, was the chief Central Intelligence Agency
analyst of the Vietnam War. Though he testified in behalf of the general, he had
sometimes clashed with him during the war and oversaw studies that suggested the
war was unwinnable.

Mr. Carver, now 54 years old, began work in the Far East division of the C.I.A.
in 1962, and was the Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs from 1966 to 1973.
He spent his childhood in China, where his father was chairman of the University
of Shanghai's department of English.

He retired from the C.I.A. in 1979 and is now a senior fellow at Georgetown
University's Center for Strategic and International Studies and president of C &
S Associates, a consulting firm he founded.

In a pretrial deposition this year, Mr. Carver testified that in the mid-1960's
Secretary of Defense Robert S. McNamara summoned him to the Pentagon to discuss
the war. Mr. Carver gave a gloomy assessment and expected to be ''thrown out.''
Instead, Secretary McNamara asked him to return for further informal dialogue.

Mr. Carver testified that he had seen all subsequent Secretaries of Defense on
approximately a weekly basis until after the end of the war.

Under the supervision of Mr. Carver, the C.I.A. prepared two long, ''top
secret'' assessments of the military and political situation in Vietnam in
August 1966 and May 1967. They seemed to suggest that the war was unwinnable and
clumsily prosecuted.

The now-declassified C.I.A. reports said that 27 months of bombing had
''remarkably little effect'' on North Vietnam's ability to continue the war and
that ''the longer the war lasts the more intractable our problems will become.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 9, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GOOD NEWS ON FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By T.D. Allman ;
T. D. Allman is author of ''Unmanifest Destiny,'' a study of illusion in
American foreign policy.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 709 words


Events - at home, not abroad - have made me optimistic about America's potential
for playing a more useful, constructive, humane and effective role in the world.

The reason for this optimism isn't that Ronald Reagan won or that Walter F.
Mondale lost. It is that the campaign forced both to talk surprising sense about
some of our most intractable foreign policy problems.

Take terrorism. President Reagan once said it was a problem with a simple
solution: ''swift and sure retaliation.'' Yet in the last debate, he sounded
almost dovish in arguing that it made no sense killing thousands of innocent
people in Beirut in an attempt to punish a handful of terrorists whose
identities the Central Intelligence Agency did not know.

The most important foreign policy change the election forced on him concerns
relations with Moscow and nuclear arms control. Whereas he previously called the
Soviet Union an ''evil empire,'' now he speaks of nuclear arms control as his
major objective.

Election year changes weren't limited to Mr. Reagan. Mr. Mondale emphasized his
commitment to America's strength so often it sometimes seemed he, not Mr.
Reagan, was the hawks' candidate. Political expediency no doubt explains these
permu

tations - indeed, that is what gives grounds for optimism. Both Mr. Reagan and
Mr. Mondale are astute politicians; their foreign policy politicking revealed an
emerging grassroots consensus on what the center of foreign policy should be.
There are three main elements in this nascent consensus. The first, which not
only the Reagan victory but Mr. Mondale's emphasis on America's strength
reflected, is that most Americans, not just Reagan Republicans, want America to
remain a major force - a strong nation that keeps its commitments.  The second
element, which the President's electoral tactics reflected, is that, however
serious the Soviet ''threat'' may be, the threat of a nuclear Jonestown is even
greater and that real progress toward arms control is an absolute necessity.
The third - far less certain - element, which Mr. Reagan's electoral emphasis on
nonmilitary solutions in Central America and the Middle East also reflected, is
that most Americans really have come to sense that American military
intervention in the third world neither helps nations there nor serves our
national interest.  Does this mean we may finally be moving toward a foreign
policy based on what America can and cannot achieve? It would be absurd to
predict that the next four years won't see instances of American arrogance in
the third world - and would be wildly over-optimistic to suggest that some
unprecedented breakthrough in American-Soviet relations will occur. It
nonetheless is useful to ask what the talk about a Reagan ''mandate'' really
means for foreign policy.

Was the President given a mandate to invade Nicaragua? A mandate for ''Star
Wars'' and unlimited confrontations with the Russians? Landslides in 1964 and
1972 turned to dust when the victors falsely interpreted victory as an unlimited
mandate. But there can't be much doubt left that Mr. Reagan is far too astute a
reader of public opinion to imagine he has been given a foreign policy blank
check.

No landslide can confer a coherent world view on a leader. Political suppleness
does not change the fact that Mr. Reagan carries too much ideological baggage to
achieve a historical reorientation of foreign policy.

The saddest foreign policy result of the election is that we may have to wait
until 1988 to get past our leaders' - not our own - obsession with the legacies
of the Vietnam War and the cold war.

But the good news is that there clearly exists an unexpectedly broad basis of
support for a foreign policy consensus built on America's continuing commitment
to its treaty obligations, on the avoidance of military intervention in the
internal affairs of third world nations, and, most important, on the need for
progress toward control, and eventual elimination, of the threat of a nuclear
holocaust.

Much - perhaps even the prospects for the nation's survival - will depend on
whether Mr. Reagan remains as sensitive to the public's real foreign policy
priorities as political expediency forced him to be in the campaign. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EX-C.I.A. AIDE CITES WESTMORELAND'S HELP ON TROOP FIGURES

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1002 words


The former chief of Vietnamese affairs for the Central Intelligence Agency
testified yesterday that he believed for a few days in 1967 that Gen. William C.
Westmoreland had imposed a ceiling of 300,000 on reports of the size of enemy
forces in South Vietnam, perhaps to avoid criticism by the press.

But the witness, George A. Carver Jr., said in Federal Court in Manhattan that
when he confronted General Westmoreland with his concern at a private meeting in
Saigon on Sept. 13, 1967, the general ''immediately, firmly and emphatically
denied that he had given any such order.''

Moreover, Mr. Carver told the jury in General Westmoreland's $120 million libel
suit against CBS, the general was instrumental in helping to quickly arrange an
accord on enemy strength figures between his own intelligence officers and the
C.I.A. after months of dispute in which the C.I.A. had favored reporting higher
troop figures than General Westmoreland's command.

The 1982 CBS Reports documentary that prompted the suit - ''The Uncounted Enemy:
A Vietnam Deception'' - said that officers at ''the highest levels'' of military
intelligence had conspired to minimize enemy strength by setting an ''arbitrary
ceiling'' of 300,000 for Communist forces.

Cablegram Is Cited

To achieve that end, the broadcast said, General Westmoreland adopted the
''tactic'' of deleting the Vietcong's self-defense units from the official
listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle.

Mr. Carver's purpose in visiting Saigon in September 1967 was to reach an
agreement on new order of battle figures, which would be incorporated in a
special estimate of enemy strength for President Johnson. In a cablegram to
C.I.A. officials on Aug. 30, 1967, Richard Helms, then Director of Central
Intelligence, described the issue as ''charged with political and public
relations overtones.''

Yesterday, Mr. Carver cited that cablegram and others that he himself had sent
to Mr. Helms from Saigon early in September 1967. Mr. Carver's frustration
before he talked to General Westmoreland was captured at the beginning of the
first cablegram he addressed to Mr. Helms - on Sept. 10, two days after his
arrival in Saigon.

By that time Mr. Carver and aides who had come with him from C.I.A. headquarters
in Langley, Va., had met with Maj. Gen. Phillip B. Davidson Jr., General
Westmoreland's chief of intelligence, and the general's intelligence analysts.
Among Mr. Carver's aides was Samuel A. Adams, who, 14 years later, would become
a consultant for CBS on its Vietnam documentary.

But General Westmoreland, on Sept. 10, 1967, was on leave in Manila.

Frustration Is Noted

''So far, our mission frustratingly unproductive since MACV stonewalling,
obviously under orders,'' Mr. Carver wrote Mr. Helms, using the initials for
General Westmoreland's command. ''Unless or until I can persuade Westmoreland to
amend those orders, serious discussion of evidence or substantive issues will be
impossible.''

Mr. Carver said the ''root problems, as we all recognize, lie more in political
public relations realm than in substantive difference'' and added that the
discussions ''all point to the inescapable conclusion that General Westmoreland
(with Komer's encouragement) has given instruction tantamount to direct order
that VC strength total will not exceed 300,000 ceiling.''

The parenthetical reference was to Robert W. Komer, General Westmoreland's chief
civilian deputy, who was away at that time in Bangkok.

Mr. Carver told Mr. Helms that General Westmoreland's ''rationale seems to be
that any higher figure would not be sufficiently optimistic and would generate
unacceptable level of criticism from the press.''

Yesterday, Mr. Carver said that in his ''distress'' he had used ''purple prose''
in the cablegram. ''The MACV people were so obtuse and difficult,'' he said,
''that I made the inference they were under orders.''

Estimates of Strength Differ

When Mr. Carver arrived in Saigon, C.I.A. officials leaned to a total enemy
strength figure ranging from 311,000 to 371,000, excluding an estimated 120,000
part-time forces in the self-defense units. The order of battle total at the
time was 298,000. General Westmoreland's command proposed a total figure of
213,000 - excluding a newly estimated figure of 85,000 for political cadre that
was counted in the C.I.A. total and that had been carried in the existing order
of battle at a figure of 40,000.

Military intelligence officials also differed with the C.I.A. over the self-
defense forces, which were listed in the existing order of battle at about
70,000. Senior C.I.A. officials said they agreed with General Westmoreland's
command that the self-defense forces had little offensive military ability. But
the C.I.A. wanted these units counted - if only in a ''nonmilitary'' appendix to
the order of battle - and General Westmoreland's officers insisted they not be
counted in the future.

General Davidson, Mr. Carver said yesterday, took a ''take it or leave it''
approach to the dispute. And, on Sept. 12, he and Mr. Adams and other C.I.A.
representatives in Saigon, he said, took another look at the C.I.A. figures.
They now arrived at a total enemy strength of 229,000 to 259,000, with a
separate listing of 80,000 to 90,000 for political cadre and no formal counting
of the self-defense forces.

Within hours of his meeting with General Westmoreland the next morning, Mr.
Carver testified, an agreement was reached on an enemy strength range of 224,000
to 249,000, plus a separate listing of 75,000 to 85,000 for political cadre. The
self-defense forces would not be counted in the order of battle but they ''would
be described verbally'' and, in the estimate for President Johnson, note would
be taken they they had once been as high as 150,000.

''Circle now squared,'' Mr. Carver cabled Mr. Helms, ''chiefly as a result of
Westmoreland session.''

Mr. Carver's testimony will continue on Tuesday.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MANAGUAN HELD UNLIKELY TO GET ADVANCED JETS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: MANAGUA, Nicaragua, Nov. 9


There is little prospect that Nicaragua will receive advanced jet aircraft
anytime soon, in the view of most foreign diplomats and independent military
analysts here.

''The Russians have made it fairly clear that they aren't going to donate the
planes,'' a senior Western diplomat said here a few days ago, ''and the
Sandinistas have no money to pay for them anywhere else. For strategic and
financial reasons, these guys are going to have to live with pretty much what
they have now.''

But the diplomats said they believed that the Government might well manage to
obtain some less powerful aircraft to bolster its small air force.

Government leaders have reiterated in recent days that they believe they are
entitled to buy any weapons system they believe they need, including advanced
jets. Yet despite repeated efforts over many months, they have not been able to
obtain such fighters.

Stronger Concerns Cited


''The Soviet Union has an important bilateral agenda with the United States that
includes things like arms control, Asian security and the conflict between NATO
and the Warsaw Pact,'' an experienced American official said in Managua
recently. ''Compared to those matters, Nicaragua is not all that important to
them. They are not going to sacrifice the possibility of progress in those other
areas in order to get some planes to the Sandinistas.''

A knowledgeable Latin American diplomat said this week that he considered the
new American charges against Nicaragua part of a strategy to keep the Government
on edge. ''You Americans still know how to throw a little country into
turmoil,'' he said with grudging admiration.

Turmoil has indeed been the reaction in Managua to what the Government regards
as a direct threat. The allegations about Soviet-made MIG fighters were taken
seriously here not because they were believed, but rather because, in the view
of some Government leaders, the charges were concocted to prepare American
public opinion for an invasion of Nicaragua.

Continual Government Meetings


High-ranking leaders here have been in almost continuous meetings since Tuesday
night, when the first disclosures about a supposed shipment of MIG's were
broadcast on American television. ''They were extremely worried, and I can tell
you that some of them stayed up all that night,'' said a diplomat who follows
their movements.

On Thursday evening the Minister of Agrarian Reform, Jaime Wheelock, told
several thousand young people who were about to leave to cut coffee in the
northern hills that at least some of them would instead be mobilized into
military brigades to defend the capital against a possible armed attack.

''We have made the decision that it is better to let the coffee fall than to let
the nation fall,'' Mr. Wheelock said.

As what they say is evidence that a plan to invade may be afoot in Washington,
Nicaraguan leaders point not only to the apparently false warnings that advanced
planes were about to be unloaded at their ports. They also say United States
surveillance planes have been flying over the country, and Thursday and today
they were blamed for sonic booms. In addition, an American warship was sighted
off the Pacific port of Corinto, and rumors of mysterious movements of American
troops were circulating in Government offices.


Western military analysts in Managua say they believe the Nicaraguan Government
is in the process of obtaining a small number of helicopters to bolster their
fight against insurgents. There are also said to be indications that Nicaragua
is negotiating to obtain Czech-made L-39 trainer planes, which are similar to
the American A-37 Dragonflies that were used effectively against guerrillas in
Vietnam and have proven effective in El Salvador.

U.S. Assailed in U.N.



UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., Nov. 9 - Nicaragua's delegate to the United Nations
condemned the United States in the Security Council tonight for ''acts of
aggression'' against his country and said increased American military activity
represented part of the preparation for an invasion.

The delegate, Javier Chamorro Mora, charged that similar maneuvers preceded the
invasion of Grenada by the United States last year. ''We see a number of
coincidences which cannot be concealed,'' he said.

Richard Schifter, the American representative, said the charges were ''totally
without foundation.'' He criticized Nicaragua for staging Council meetings as
''media events'' at ''regular monthly intervals.''

The Council, convening at the urgent request of Nicaragua, heard only the two
speakers and adjourned after an hour.

Mr. Chamorro Mora listed what he said were a series of violations of Nicaraguan
territory, which included American flights and incursions by American ships in
its territorial waters. He was especially critical of reconnaisance flights ''by
the SR-71.''

He said Nicaragua was acquiring some land-to-air missiles for its defense.
''What does the United States consider a threat - helicopters, tanks, missiles,
hand grenades?'' he asked.

Mr. Schifter said it was ''ironic that a Government which has deliberately
chosen to engage in a process of militerizing its country, whose own military
buildup does indeed constitute a serious threat to its immediate neighbors in
the region, should be coming to this Council with a totally unfounded claim that
it considers itself militarily threatened.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTIONS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 40 words


A dispatch from Washington yesterday about Veterans' Day observances incorrectly
described Robert A. Sniffen, chairman of the National Vietnam Veterans Network.
Mr. Sniffen, a Navy enlisted man from 1960 to 1962, did not serve in combat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
''Cambodia'' Lives

BYLINE: By James F. Clarity and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 283 words


Sometimes the United States

finds modest ways to emphasize the nuances of its foreign policy. This is the
case with Cambodia.

The Communist-led Government that was responsible for the widespread slaughter
of Cambodians in the late 1970's is out of power but still holds a seat in the
United Nations. The United States policy is to support this situation ''in the
absence of a superior claimant'' to the seat.

The current functioning Government of Cambodia is considered by the United
States a puppet of Vietnam; the North Vietnamese took control of Phnom Penh and
much of Cambodia five years ago.

But in various ways the State Department tries to show that it does not favor
the Communist group, once led by Pol Pot, that was pushed into jungle
insurgency. The United States' Cambodian friends, despite the United Nations
situation, are Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the country's former ruler, and Son
Sann, a former Prime Minister and head of an non- Communist, anti-Vietnamese
group.

United States policy is to give political and humanitarian support to these two,
but not to the Communists. And, to emphasize, at least in the diplomatic
community, where the heart of American policy is, the department is changing the
name of one subdivision in its Bureau of East Asian Affairs.

The division that deals with Cambodia was for years called the Office of
Vietnam, Laos and Kampuchea Affairs. ''Kampuchea'' is what the Communists and
the pro-Vietnamese Government call their country. But Prince Sihanouk and other
non-Communist leaders call it Cambodia, so the State Department, in deference to
its friends, is knocking out ''Kampuchea'' and putting ''Cambodia'' back in the
office's title.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

STATUE COMPLETES VIETNAM MEMORIAL

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 9


A bronze statue of three wary, weary American servicemen was unveiled today by
veterans who said they hoped to dispel the ''myth'' that survivors of the
Vietnam war were outcasts in their homeland.

The unveiling ceremony, attended by about 4,000 people, sounded the themes of
healing and pride that President Reagan is expected to stress Sunday when he
formally accepts the completed Vietnam Veterans Memorial for the Government.

The first part of the monument, a roll of the nation's 58,022 Vietnam dead and
missing, etched in black granite, was opened on Veterans Day in 1982 as part of
a ''national salute'' to servicemen of the Vietnam era.

The second part is the statue, which, like the monument, was paid for by private
contributions.

300,000 Expected at Ceremonies

Sponsors of this weekend's ''Salute II'' program have said that as many as
300,000 people may attend the ceremonies Sunday at 3:30 P.M. The ceremony was
delayed to allow Mr. Reagan to arrive by air from his California ranch.

The dedication will follow the traditional Veterans' Day wreath-laying at the
white marble Tomb of the Unknown Soldier in Arlington National Cemetery, just
across the Potomac River. Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger is to lay
the Presidential wreath and deliver the principal address at 10:30 A.M. Sunday.

At the statue's unveiling today, Everett Alvarez Jr., a former Navy fighter
pilot, said, ''As a nation we are finally coming to grips with Vietnam, and much
of that adjustment has occurred in the two years since this memorial opened.''

''In that sense,'' he said, ''the memorial itself becomes a part of history.''
Mr. Alvarez, who was shot down over Vietnam and spent eight and a half years in
a prisoner of war camp, is now the Deputy Administrator of the Veterans
Administration.

Speakers Attack Vietnam 'Myths'

Speaker after speaker at the dedication of the statue today addressed what they
called the ''myths'' of the Vietnam war. Jan C. Scruggs, the former enlisted man
who founded and eventually became president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
Fund in 1979, said it was ''not true'' that ''Vietnam veterans are loners,
people to feel sorry for, and that our field commanders let us down then, and
have walked away from us now.''

He introduced as ''the father of this statue'' Gen. Michael S. Davidson,
retired, a former West Point commandant who commanded troops in Vietnam. When a
controversy arose over the design of the memorial, Mr. Scruggs said, General
Davidson brought conflicting sides together in a compromise that resulted in the
commisioning of the statue. It was made by Frederick E. Hart, a Washington
sculptor.

Speaking to ''all who served in Vietnam,'' General Davidson solemnly declared,
''We fellow citizens respect you, we admire you, we honor you and we offer you
our profound gratitude.''

That was the theme, too, of Maj. Gen. Frederick Davidson, a troop commander in
Vietnam. ''Never has America had a better set of men in the field,'' he said,
''and as long as we can have that type of man, America will always be good.''

A Gold Star Mother and Her Son

The first visitors allowed beyond the baricades at the memorial after the
half-hour of dedication remarks were veterans in wheel-chairs and members of the
Gold Star Mothers, whose sons died in combat.

One of them, Bernice Wise of Baltimore, stood on her toes, clasping her white
Gold Star Mothers overseas cap to her gray hair, and pointed with the inverted
staff of a small American flag. High on the glistening black slab of the
adjoining monument was the name of Donald Crutchley, a Marine killed in Vietnam
Dec. 18, 1965.

''That's my son,'' she said, ''and today is his birthday. He would have been 43
years old.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A Washington dispatch on Saturday about an unveiling ceremony at the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial misattributed remarks about the Vietnam War. They were made by
John P. Wheeler, chairman of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, not Jan C.
Scruggs, the fund's president. A statement by Mr. Wheeler was also rendered
incorrectly; he said it was untrue that Vietnam veterans were ''losers'' (not
''loners''). A speaker described as the father of the new statue - for his role
in its construction - was misidentified. He was Gen. Michael S. Davison.


GRAPHIC: photo of spectators

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS VOICE FUTURE CONCERN

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 9


Charles T. Manatt, the Democratic Party chairman, asserted today that in future
Presidential elections the party should balance its ticket regionally and reach
out for independent and blue-collar voters with a message of economic growth and
opportunity.

Mr. Manatt's comments reflected what Gov. Charles S. Robb of Virginia, chairman
of the Democratic Governors' Conference, called ''the hand- wringing and
hand-holding'' after the party's overwhelming Presidential defeat last Tuesday.

In the three days since the election, Democratic politicians around the country
have been voicing concern that the latest defeat has underscored a long-term
decline of party support among conservative voters, especially Southern whites,
and more recent disaffection among urban blue-collar Roman Catholic voters in
the North, as well as the party's difficulties this year in appealing to younger
independent- minded voters.

Primary System Is Faulted


Several, like Mr. Robb, found fault with the Democratic primary system,
contending that this year it brought Walter F. Mondale under early pressure from
special interest groups and party activists and earned him the early endorsement
of organized labor, only to limit his appeal in the general election campaign.

Others, such as Gov. Mark White of Texas, suggested the party would get a more
effective and representative nominee if the calendar of Democratic primaries was
changed to put larger states such as Illinois, Texas, Florida and Ohio ahead of
New Hampshire, ''which isn't going to vote for a Democratic nominee in the
general election anyway.''

Under pressure from Senator Gary Hart and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, the Democratic
convention agreed in San Francisco last July to set up a commission to
re-examine the rules for the Presidential primary system.

Mr. Jackson, feeling his delegate total did not equal his popular vote strength,
wanted the party to lower the threshold at which a candidate could win
delegates, from 20 percent to 10 percent of the popular vote. Mr. Hart, feeling
he suffered from the early backing Mr. Mondale won from members of Congress who
were unelected delegates, said he wanted the selection of these delegates to
take place later in the primary season.

Manatt Stresses Message


But Mr. Manatt, whose four-year term ends in January and who has privately
indicated to friends that he would probably not seek re-election by the
Democratic National Committee, urged today that the party not get bogged down in
a major effort at internal change but instead work harder at getting a more
appleaing message to independent and blue-collar voters.

''We need to look outward rather than inward in the years ahead,'' Mr. Manatt
said in a luncheon appearance at the Washington Press Club. ''It isn't little
technical adjustments in the rules that are needed. It's an outward-bound
message that's got to get across.''

This year, he said, a major problem for the Democratic ticket of Mr. Mondale and
Geraldine A. Ferraro was ''our not getting across a message of economic
opportunity.''

Several political scientists and election specialists, among them William
Schneider of the American Enterprise Institute, a conservative research group
here, suggested that the Democratic Party risked being hurt by a racial
polarization in the South.

Nonpartisan analysts such as Mr. Schneider and Richard M. Scammon, Director of
the Elections Research Center in Washington, and another scholar of the American
Enterprise Institute, suggested that the Democratic Party faced basic problems
that went beyond the overwhelming personal appeal of President Reagan.

''The giant statistic of the 1984 election,'' Mr. Scammon said, ''is that in the
last 10 Presidential elections, the Democratic Party has nominated seven
non-Southerners and three Southerners, and not one of the non- Southerners has
won the Presidency with 50 percent of the popular vote.''

Mr. Scammon noted that Lyndon B. Johnson won in 1964 and Jimmy Carter in 1976
with more than 50 percent. He added that Harry S. Truman won in 1948 and John F.
Kennedy in 1960 but with less than 50 percent of the vote.

At an earlier breakfast session with reporters, Mr. Manatt suggested that the
party's ticket should be regionally balanced rather than be made up of two
Northern liberals, as it was this year.

Two-Streams of Voters Cited


Mr. Schneider contended that this year's election left the Democratic Party
without a majority by continuing the party's loss of two streams of traditional
Democratic voters.

One trend, he said, was the steady defection of conservative voters, mostly
Southern whites, dating back to the late 1960's, primarily because of
dissatisfaction over civil rights issues and foreign policy, especially the
Vietnam War.

The second stream of defections, begun in 1980 and repeated this year, he added,
was that of ''the blue-collar ethnic voters who were uncomfortable on social and
foreign policy positions before but who had stayed with the party for economic
reasons, seeing the party as insurance against economic adversity.''

''But Jimmy Carter's record persuaded them the Democratic Party did not have
anything for them in 1980,'' he said, ''and Reagan's success on the economy
record showed them in 1984 the Republican Party did have something to offer
them.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 10, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Sculpture Unveiled at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Jim Lehr and Charles Eatley, right, both disabled Vietnam veterans,
saluting at a ceremony in Washington.  Near them, in wheelchair, is Vernon Berg.
Behind them are Senator John W. Warner of Virginia and Jack Wheeler, right, of
the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund.  The statue is to be formally dedicated
tomorrow. The New York Times/George Tames

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI CALLED HESITANT TO LET FOES GO



BYLINE:
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


Reagan Administration officials said today that differences within Vietnam's
leadership may have delayed a response to an offer by the United States to
accept thousands of political prisoners.

Secretary of State George P. Shultz said Sept. 11 that the United States was
ready to take up a Vietnamese offer to release the prisoners from ''re-education
camps'' to the Americans. In testimony before Congress, he said that over the
next two years the United States was ready to take 10,000 prisoners who had ties
to the United States or had served in the old South Vietnamese Government, which
fell in April 1975. Figures vary, but 10,000 has been cited by Vietnamese
authorities.

Mr. Shultz also said that the United States would accept all Asian-American
children and their close family members over the next three years. The so-called
Amerasians, largely fathered by American soldiers during the Vietnam War, have
already been coming to the United States through a United Nations-administered
program. Administration officials said that, after Mr. Shultz's speech, they had
urged Vietnam to accelerate the processing of children eligible to leave.

Children's Exit Is Slow

Vietnam has said that all Amerasians can leave, and it has said that the United
States has been slow in taking them. American officials say Vietnam shares
responsibility by not assigning enough personnel to the children's emigration
program.

With the children's program continuing, the United States had now begun to focus
on the apparent Vietnamese hesitation to allow the departure of the political
prisoners, who with their families make up about 30,000 people.

''From some conversations we have had,'' an American official said, ''we are
getting the impression that the security officials in Hanoi are very wary about
releasing these prisoners to the United States. From the questions we have been
asked there seems to be a worry in Hanoi that these prisoners will be turned
into some kind of rebel military force against them, and they are in no rush to
let them out.''

In 1982 Foreign Minister Nguyen Cao Thach said Vietnam would release the
prisoners if the United States took them in. This was repeated last May, in an
interview in Newsweek magazine, by Prime Minister Pham Van Dong.

 Pham Van Dong Is Quoted

''We are quite prepared to allow all of those left in the camps to leave
tomorrow for the United States, but the United States Government has rejected
that suggestion,'' he said. ''They prefer to leave these criminals free in
Vietnam but not in the United States.''

The United States had not rejected the offer, but it was not publicly accepted
until Mr. Shultz's testimony on Sept. 11. Since then there have been two
meetings with Vietnamese officials to discuss the matter.

On Oct. 4 in Geneva, Robert L. Funseth, a State Department refugee official, met
with Deputy Foreign Minister Le Mai and outlined specific suggestions.

The United States initially wanted to process the prisoners through the program
administered by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. But Vietnam
wanted the matter dealt with directly by the United States, and Washington
agreed.

Another issue raised by the Vietnamese was that the United States must take all
the prisoners. Washington wanted to limit the program to those who have had some
sort of affiliation with the United States or with the former South Vietnamese
Government.

All May Be Eligible

''We have told the Vietnamese that we have to have a list of who is in the camps
and how many there are,'' a State Department official said. ''Who knows, maybe
when we see the list it will turn out that everyone would be eligible.''

Richard Childress, the National Security Council expert on Indochina, met with
Mr. Thach in New York last month when the Vietnamese Foreign Minister was there
for the United Nations General Assembly.

Mr. Thach gave Mr. Childress the impression, a State Department official said,
that he was in no hurry to move on the question of the prisoners. He was
reported to have expressed concern that the prisoners might take the lead in an
insurgency.

This suggested that even though he and Mr. Dong had publicly said all the
prisoners could leave, the Vietnamese leadership had not yet reached a final
decision.

Mr. Thach indicated that the children's program would continue in any event, and
he was urged to speed the procedures.

U.S. Seeks 450 Children a Month

Last month 250 children and their relatives left Ho Chi Minh City for Bangkok,
Thailand, on their way to the United States. The United States would like to
raise monthly departures to at least 450, a State Department official said.

On the political prisoners, the United States plans to take the initiative if it
does not hear soon from Vietnam. Some members of Congress, such as
Representative Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of New York, are planning to visit
Vietnam by the end of the year, and State Department officials said that by then
the Vietnamese would probably decide what to do.

State Department officials say that the talks with the Vietnamese have been
limited to refugee matters and to the issue of finally accounting for all the
Americans missing in action in the Vietnam War, and have not touched on a
resumption of diplomatic relations.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Amerasian children

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WAR-SCARRED ASSEMBLE AT VIETNAM MEMORIAL

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 930 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 10


Thousands of Americans wounded, in one way or another, by the war in Vietnam
came here today to share in what sponsors planned as a collective healing.

At the outset of this sunny Veterans' Day weekend, a decade after the most
divisive national military commitment of the century, a phenomenon that planners
of the ''Salute II'' Vietnam veterans' program hoped would come with the throng
of 40,000 visitors seemed to be crystallizing.

Amid reunions of fighting men whose heightened sense of comradeship in combat
had turned at home to feelings of isolation and rejection, the day seemed for
some the beginning of a recovery from a nightmare, a reconciliation.

''Until today, it was like walking out in the middle of a movie,'' said Neil
Hunt, 34 years old, who was a Navy enlisted man in Vietnam. ''A day like today
makes you feel like it's over.''

Shoulder to Shoulder

At the Vietnam Veterans Memorial on the Mall, within sight of the Lincoln
Memorial, a shoulder-to-shoulder line of quietly meditative men, women and
children, many of them men now in their 30's but wearing the Vietnam combat
uniform of their teens, moved patiently along the 494 feet of polished black
granite bearing the names of the 58,022 Americans lost in Vietnam.

Contrasting with the somber sheen of the wall, with its leafy reflections of a
nearby grove of young trees, were scores of small American flags and bright
bouquets of flowers, placed beneath the chiseled roster of the dead and missing
along a narrow border of green grass.

The chevron-shaped memorial wall forms a shallow amphitheater at its center,
where the vertical slabs of stone are 10 feet high. And at nearly every
available spot along it were brief vignettes of tragedy and memory - and what
seemed, for many, of catharsis.

Scores of relatives and friends of the dead stopped to make paper rubbings of
the names of loved ones cut into the stone. Frank Kesar, a former medic in
Vietnam from Rhode Island, was making two rubbings - of the adjoining names of
Kenneth C. Nokes and Kirka Woolley, medics from his unit killed in combat.

A Child Offers Comfort

Down on one knee, bent forward with his hand at his chin as if to wipe away his
tears, a man in civilian dress, too involved in his own thoughts to give his
name, scanned the list of dead at the bottom of a granite slab, sobbing. His
wife and son, in a stroller, were behind him. The child leaned forward
comfortingly against the father's back saying, ''Don't cry, Daddy, don't cry.''

Maurice Cole, a veteran of Vietnam from Norfolk, Va., making his first trip to
the ''the wall,'' as many were today, found the name of Howard Owens, a buddy in
his unit killed in action. Tears welled from his eyes as he stood, with his own
reflected image embracing the list of the dead.

Farther on, a hand-lettered cardboard placard stood propped above a beribboned
pot of florist's chrysanthemums. The placard read: ''To those men of D. Com, 1st
Bn., 35th Inf. Div., who were lost in the battle of Chu Pa mountain, January
21-22-23, 1969, because of their BRAVERY - I am here today.'' It was signed
''Staff Sergeant Lavender, Pennsylvia.''

On the grass overlooking the highest point of the memorial wall, where the long
arms of granite bend at a 125-degree angle and the walkway before the ranks of
names dips lowest, two fatigue-uniformed members of Post 4796 of the Veterans of
Foreign Wars, in Wickliffe, Ohio, a suburb of Cleveland, stood at attention
beside a memorial wreath. They held large parade-size flags. One, in blue, red
and gold, identifed the V.F.W. post. The other, black with white lettering,
said: ''MIA-POW - You Are Not Forgotten.''

Pin-Up's Voice Joins In

References to the missing in action and to the belief of some that living
American prisoners of war remain prisoner in Vietnam were everywhere, in booths
thrown up on the Mall and on lapel buttons.

This afternoon, at the east end of the Mall, before the white edifice of the
Capitol at Fourth Street N.W., the ''Salute II'' sponsors staged an outdoor
musical program with, among others, Chris Noel, the disk jockey and pin-up girl
whose smoky voice on Armed Forces Radio was heard by millions of troops in
Vietnam on transistor radios.

The Park Police estimated there were 40,000 listeners at the concert and 20,000
at the wall itself. Even larger crowds are expected tomorrow for the dedication
of a statue of three soldiers as an addition to the stark memorial.

Between musical numbers at the concert, the mothers and kin of missing men
stepped to the microphone, appealing to a throng of several thousand for someone
who knew them to come forward with information.

Capitol Briefing on Stress

At the Capitol itself there was other evidence that not all the trauma of the
Vietnam War was over. About 100 parents and relatives of veterans at a morning
seminar in the auditorium of the Dirksen Senate Office Building sponsored by the
Vietnam Veterans of America, the largest of scores of Vietnam veterans'
organizations, were briefed by a panel of experts on ''post traumatic stress
disorder'' - the ''shellshock'' syndrome of Vietnam.

Dr. Arthur Blank, a psychiatrist who served in Vietnam and now heads the
Veterans Administration's readjustment counseling service, said the service's
136 veterans' centers around the county - small storefront offices designed to
assuage disturbed veterans' fear and hostility toward government agencies - have
counseled 325,000 people in their five-year existence. He said that ''new
clients'' are still coming in at the rate of 6,300 a month.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of visitors to Vietnam Veteran Memorial in Washington; photo of
Rick Holen and Robert Kinard

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MURDER TRIAL SET IN COAST SLAYING

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Nov. 10


A preliminary hearing into the slaying of a California university professor has
ended with as much mystery as it began.

At the conclusion of the three-day hearing this week, Judge Daniel T. Brice of
the North Orange County Municipal Court ordered Minh Van Lam, a 20-year-old
Vietnamese immigrant, to stand trial for the murder of Edward Lee Cooperman, a
professor of physics at the California State University campus in suburban
Fullerton.

But it remained in dispute after the hearing whether Dr. Cooperman's death was a
political assassination, an accident, suicide, or a result of a quarrel between
friends.

A member of the university's faculty since 1967, the 48-year-old Dr. Cooperman
was director of the Foundation for Scientific Cooperation with Vietnam. Among
other things, it was evaluating the effects of the defoliant Agent Orange on the
Vietnamese people, financed in part by a grant from the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.

He Had Close Ties to Vietnam


An early critic of the United State involvement of the war in Vietnam, Dr.
Cooperman visited Vietnam often since the fall of South Vietnam to Communist
forces and maintained close personal and professional ties to the regime,
according to his friend.

The police said they found Dr. Cooperman shot to death in his office at the
university Oct. 13 after they went there in response to a call from Mr. Lam, who
said he had entered the office and found his body.

Several hours later, detectives arrested Mr. Lam on a charge of murder,
asserting they had found inconsistencies in his story and physical evidence that
linked him to the shooting. Mr. Lam, as a student, was in one of Dr. Cooperman's
classes in 1983.

Three days after the slaying, according to the police reports, Mr. Lam called
Dr. Cooperman's widow, Klaaske, from a jail telephone and admitted shooting her
husband, but he said he had done so accidentally while the two of them were
''playing around'' with a pistol at Dr. Cooperman's suggestion.

The killing touched off angry protests from other faculty members at the
state-run univerity, who asserted that Dr. Cooperman had been assassinated by
anti-Communists in the local Vietnamese community who were unhappy with his open
support of North Vietnam.

1,000 Vietnamese Students


Situated about 20 miles south of here, Fullerton is in Orange County, where more
than 50,000 Vietnamese refugees have settled in recent years. About 1,000 of the
university's 22,000 students are Vietnamese.

Lieut. Lee DeVore of the Fullerton Police Department, however, disputed the
contentions that Dr. Cooperman's slaying was politically motivated.  He said the
police investigation had determined that the death stemmed from the ''personal
relationship'' between the two men. He gave no further details of the
prosecution's theory on the motive for the shooting.

At the hearing before Judge Brice, Mr. Lam's lawyer, Alan May, contended that
Dr. Cooperman and Mr. Lam were very close personal friends. He asserted the
professor had arranged to have himself shot by Mr. Lam in a staged struggle
because he was despondent over being in trouble with Vietnamese officials.

The reason, Mr. May contended, was that Dr. Cooperman had embezzled money from
the project financed by the United Nations group he directed. Mr. May also said
that Dr. Cooperman might have been interested in having a homosexual
relationship with Mr. Lam.

Prosecution officials as well as Dr. Cooperman's friends said there was no truth
to these theories.

Sheldon Maram, a professor of history, said he and his colleagues would demand a
Federal grand jury investigation if the local authorities did not investigate
adequately ''the strong possibility that he was a victim of political
assassination.''

Cooperman Expressed Fear


Mr. Maram said Dr. Cooperman had told friends he had received death threats,
that he was afraid of being killed by right-wing Vietnamese gangs and that he
had predicted efforts might be made to camouflage his death so it would not look
like a political assassination. Friends said he had acquired a pistol for
protection.

Whatever the truth, Mr. May presented evidence at the hearing that left several
mysteries about the popular college professor.

Several witnesses testified that Dr. Cooperman was frequently seen wrestling
with young Asian students, that he kept a large collection of photographs of
young men wearing leather jackets in his office, and had given leather jackets
to two young Asian students.

Dr. Cooperman's wife testified that whenever her husband, who earned about
$38,000 a year, made one of his frequent trips to Vietnam he took about $50,000
in cash with him. She said she did not know where the money came from. Mrs.
Cooperman also testified that last year her husband lent at least $33,000 to
colleagues at the university.

She said that after making a trip to Vietnam in August her husband had seemed to
become fearful for his life. On the morning of his slaying, she said, he
received a call from Vietnamese officials and, as a result, said he would have
to make a hurried trip to meet them in New York.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FIM VIEW;
DIRECTORS EVOKE MANY AMERICAS

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1631 words


America, meaning mostly the United States, is not an easy concept to comprehend.
It may be appropriate that it was discovered by a Genoese sailor, in the service
of the Spanish crown, looking for some place else and that, for the next half-
century, it was treated as a geographical impediment to be gotten through or
around in order to reach some far-more-profitable other side.

America was born with an inferiority complex - not altogether unhealthy - that
no amount of subsequent wealth and power has ever completely erased. For all of
his common sense and skepticism concerning things European, Mark Twain was as
affected by these feelings as were the furious America Firsters who, in 1939,
1940 and 1941, fought to keep this country out of Europe's war against Hitler.

Just as the continent initially failed to excite the imaginations of Europeans
and then resisted their attempts at colonization, it has continued to defy
simple definitions - which is as it should be. More than anything else, perhaps,
it's a mirror into which our artists, including American and European
filmmakers, look and find that which, for whatever reasons, they have been
conditioned to see.

The American dreamlands reflected in the Hollywood movies of the Great
Depression were as often made by transplanted European directors as by those who
were native born. Most of these movies - there were many exceptions, of course -
may not have been especially true to life, but they were true to the fantasies
of the people who saw them, here and abroad.

Like everything else, fantasies, whether optimistic or terrifying, are subject
to change. In the late 1960's, when opposition to the Vietnam War was becoming a
major political issue, Dennis Hopper's seminal ''road'' movie, ''Easy Rider,''
became a huge hit in this country and in Europe. The ad line - if I remember it
correctly - said something to the effect that ''They went out looking for
America - and found nothing there.''



''Easy Rider'' was not a great movie, but it was an accurate if overstated
dramatization of the fears of many people, especially young people, who were
shocked down to their shoes to realize that, perhaps, there were flaws in the
system. Almost immediately, Michelangelo Antonioni came along to make
''Zabriskie Point,'' an apocalyptic view of a fascistic America as seen by him
with a lot of help from his friends, including Fred Gardner, Tonino Guerra,
Clare Peploe and Sam Shepard, who apparently withdrew from the project when he
saw the mess it was becoming.

''Easy Rider'' was a successful film, and ''Zabriskie Point'' was a disaster,
though it continues to be of historical interest for the way it defines a
certain kind of European intellectual's approach to this country. That Mr,
Antonioni really didn't know much about this country was beside the point. The
problem was that his vision was so limited as to be unintentionally hilarious.
There can be more to art than mere accuracy.

However, ''Zabriskie Point'' was less disturbing for any inaccuracies than for
its patronizing point of view. It was a European aristocrat's record of his
visit to the colonies. It was also a major disappointment - there's a lot that
we can learn from the way we appear to outsiders.

Far more successful in this regard are two current films that look at America
through the eyes of filmmakers who - I don't think it's patronizing to say -
continue to see this country with the curiosity of informed tourists. They are
Wim Wenders's ''Paris, Texas,'' written at least in part by Mr. Shepard with
contributions by L. M. Kit Carson and Mr. Wenders, and ''Repo Man,'' a
wonderfully lunatic farce written and directed by Alex Cox, a young Englishman
who studied at the film school at the University of California at Los Angeles.



By a remarkable coincidence, both films star Harry Dean Stanton, a character
actor now coming into his own as a movie icon, possibly because, more than any
other actor at work in this country today, he is able to project a sort of
intense, sometimes conscience-stricken sleaziness that reflects large areas of
the American landscape.

''Paris, Texas'' comes to us with all sorts of fancy credentials. The
German-French co-production, shot entirely in this country, took the top prize
at this year's Cannes Film Festival and is currently one of the big hits in
Paris where, I'm told, grown men are seen to be awash in tears when the lights
come up at the end. Americans, I suspect, are not going to be as susceptible.

As long as ''Paris, Texas'' sticks to the almost surreal world of Sam Shepard,
the actor (''Country,'' ''Days of Heaven'') and Pulitzer Prize-winning
playwright (''Buried Child''), it is funny, mysterious and moving. In a most
general way it's a tale about a hapless drifter named Travis (Mr. Stanton) and
his relations with the small son (Hunter Carson) he abandoned four years earlier
and with his conventional brother (Dean Stockwell), who has become the boy's
foster father.

When first seen, Travis is wandering across a Texas wasteland, seemingly a
catatonic mute, from nowhere to nowhere. After being reluctantly reunited with
his brother and his son, Travis attempts to re-enter the world from which he
earlier elected to escape. Mr. Wenders and Mr. Shepard, as well as their actors,
are awfully good when they are effortlessly showing us what life is like in
rural Texas and suburban Los Angeles.



The ''look'' of this world, sometimes bleak and parched, sometimes artifically
watered and intensely green, full of labor-saving appliances, describes the
contradictory quality of the lives of the characters who, up to this point, are
pure Sam Shepard. That is, they are the work of one of our most original
playwrights (''Fool for Love,'' ''True West,'' ''Curse of the Starving Class'').
Mr. Shepard is not great at plots. He's best at dramatizing the agonizing
relationships by which members of a single middle-class family obtain some small
inkling of what life is all about. He's the poet laureate of the inarticulate.
He's also, I suspect, someone who writes by instinct and whose work doesn't
necessarily improve by being made more shapely and orderly.

This, unfortunately, is just what Mr. Wenders and Mr. Carson appear to have
tried to do with the screenplay for ''Paris, Texas,'' the last half-hour of
which - the half-hour that leaves Paris audiences weeping - is a howler. The
film, we are suddenly told, is about the difficulty of communications between
men and women, not, as has been shown earlier with great feeling and humor,
between brothers or between a father and his son.

The film's penultimate sequence is a scene in which Travis is reunited with his
wife, Jane (Nastassja Kinski), who works in what, in New York, used to be called
a ''rap parlor.'' The metaphor here is that the husband and wife are separated
by a thick glass partition and can only communicate through a small speaker.
They eventually see each other but they cannot touch. In any ordinary rap
parlor, the woman in the glass booth is supposed to enact the sexual fantasies
of the customer, along with appropriately stimulating narration.



It's the terrible conceit of ''Paris, Texas'' that Travis and Jane don't talk
dirty but, instead, talk a lot of nonsense about their lives together, about
loving each other too much and about being unable - I think - to grow up. I
cannot believe that Mr. Shepard wrote this dialogue willingly or with any
conviction. It is, however, just the sort of dialogue - much given to abstract
generalities - that, for reasons I've never understood, so fascinates European
audiences.

Because it comes at the end of ''Paris, Texas,'' it has the effect of destroying
all of the good things that have gone before.

The German-born and bred Mr. Wenders is not a stranger to America. He lives in
New York and he has made other movies here, including ''Hammett'' and ''The
American Friend,'' both of which are best in the manner in which they reflect
the American films that Mr. Wenders admires. ''Paris, Texas,'' which starts so
well, finally comes to sound like a film made by someone who is unfamiliar with
America but who knows what he thinks it should sound like.



Much less ambitious but, ultimately, far more satisfying is ''Repo Man,'' in
which the English- born Mr. Cox sees life in America as a science-fiction farce
involving some unexplained creatures from outer space as well as a parody of all
of the lonely gunslingers who have stalked through our classic westerns. This
character, Bud, played by the incomparable Mr. Stanton, is the best man in his
field, which just happens to be repossessing cars on which payments have lapsed.
The adventures of Bud, who works for the Helping Hands Acceptance Company,
cannot be synopsized but they are far more entertaining and accurate, as a
commentary on American life, than anything that happens after the first hour or
so of ''Paris, Texas.''

It's a paradox, I suppose, that ''Stranger Than Paradise,'' written and directed
by Jim Jarmusch, an American born and bred, looks and sounds much more like a
Wenders film than ''Paris, Texas.'' ''Stranger Than Paradise,'' which Mr.
Wenders helped Mr. Jarmusch to get made, has the seedy black-and-white look of
the early Wenders films, especially ''Kings of the Road'' and ''Alice in the
Cities.''

It also has the manner of a movie about America made by an extremely well
informed European who resolutely refuses to impose on it any preconceived
notions about the country. The movie looks extremely chilly, but it's also very
funny and nonjudgmental. It's Mr. Jarmusch's odd achievement to be responsible
for one of the best European films ever made about America. We do live in
peculiar times.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
TERMINATE THE NEUTRALIZE

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1215 words


IT IS POSSIBLE TO NEU

tralize carefully selected

and planned targets,'' wrote the author of a Central Intelligence Agency manual
for insurgents in Nicaragua, ''such as court judges, police and state security
officials, etc.''

In that context, what did neutralize mean? Spookspokesmen hustled to their
dictionaries to point out that the word came into the English language in 1759,
meaning ''to make chemically neutral'' with that chemical definition extended to
''to counteract the effect of, make ineffective.'' Viewed benignly, the manual's
verb could mean merely to reduce the effectiveness of local officials, and to
replace them with ''friendlies.''

Most readers aren't prepared to allow the manual- writer such dexterity,
especially with the word ''targets'' as the verb's object. Moreover, neutralize
has carried for centuries another meaning: ''to destroy by an opposite force.''
Edmund Burke, in his 1795 letter on the proposals for peace with the Regicide
Directory of France, criticized the author of a pamphlet for claiming ''It was
the monarchy that rendered France dangerous: Regicide neutralizes all the
acrimony of that power and renders it safe and social.'' The Regicides were the
killers of King Louis XVI, and Burke's use of neutralize in connection with them
lays a historic basis for its use in the C.I.A. manual.

What other bureaucratic euphemisms were available for murder? In the Vietnam
War, special forces were said to use terminate with extreme prejudice. This was
a lawyer at work (''Let's terminate all the lawyers,'' Shakespeare almost said).
When litigation ends ''without prejudice,'' the case is settled but the
plaintiff is free to bring the same case back in the future. When the case ends
''with prejudice,'' that ends it; serve your papers elsewhere. There is no legal
extreme prejudice; that was some assassin's creative intensifier, and it became
catnip for spy novelists. The C.I.A. never authorized the phrase in manuals or
at the locker room in Langley.

Dispatch has been overlooked lately in cutting orders for cutting life short.
This verb began with the meaning ''to send off with speed,'' but by 1530 had
gained the sinister connotation of ''to kill with swift efficiency.'' The
English poet Algernon Charles Swinburne, agreeing with Thomas Carlyle, wrote,
''If any poet or other literary creature could really be 'killed off by one
critique' or many, the sooner he was so dispatched the better. . . .''

A quick review of thesauri offers rub out, knock off, wipe out, bump off, the
specialized frag and the all-purpose zap. The headline-writer's favorite remains
slay, and reporters like execute gangland- style (not even in Chicago are
victims taken for a ride anymore - and whatever happened to fit him for cement
shoes?). English novelists still do in, but political heavies no longer send up
Salt River; they prefer the intellectual eliminate or liquidate.

Pity Arnold Schwarzenegger. He is just coming out in a movie titled, with all
ominous intent, ''The Terminator,'' when the hot new thing to be in the
executioner's world is ''The Neutralizer.''

Hacking It

TOWARD THE END OF the recent political campaign, Lyn Nofziger, the longtime
Reagan political associate who is now a private consultant, was observed aboard
Air Force One. He was asked if he should be described as a key aide (one who
unlocks doors for a candidate staggering home late at night) or an adviser, and
he shunned those pretentious bogus titles. His preference reflected an inner
serenity: ''Just call me a hanger-on.''


The Effect Effect

IN POLITICAL WRITING, nothing beats the application of a scientific phrase to
the murky art of politics.

Immediately after the first Reagan-Mondale debate, some polls showed a 10-point
victory for the challenger; after the commentators and opinion leaders had their
say, this spread increased to an overwhelming 50-point decision for Mondale. I
fully expected some public-opinion savant to cite this as an example of
Lazarsfeld's Theory of Two-Step Communication, but I was mistaken; something
more esoteric was in the works.

''This seemed to be a political application,'' wrote George Church in Time
magazine, ''of what in physics is known as the Heisenberg uncertainty principle:
the very act of measuring a phenomenon changes the phenomenon being measured in
such a way as to make future readings unpredictable.'' One week later, Sidney
Blumenthal wrote in The New Republic about the Bush-Ferraro debate: ''And the
polls, partly reflecting the Heisenberg effect of media influence, showed Bush a
slight winner.''

Who is Heisenberg, and what is he doing to warp the views of the people being
buttonholed by pollsters?

Werner Karl Heisenberg, a German physicist and quantum mechanic who died in
1976, saw his ''uncertainty principle'' stolen from physics in 1970: ''There is
the possibility,'' wrote The Times of London, ''of a Heisenberg effect: the act
of trying to outguess market psychology itself becomes a factor in the
psychology and may invalidate the conclusion.''

Richard Reeves, the columnist who introduced the popcorn diet to his fellow
pundits, is probably responsible for importing this phrase onto the United
States political scene. Writing about President Jimmy Carter in The New York
Times in 1977, Reeves observed: ''No one does or can do the same things onstage
that he does unobserved. It's the popularized Heisenberg effect: the act of
observing inevitably changes the process under observation.''

This effect is similar to the Hawthorne effect. In the 1920's, at the Western
Electric Company's Hawthorne Works in Cicero, Ill., experiments to improve
worker performance yielded an odd result: the fact that management paid such
attention to worker conditions in itself raised morale and productivity. Lights
were turned up, productivity rose; then lights were lowered, productivity rose
again, its cause having less to do with the lighting than the fun of being part
of an experiment.

I asked Sol Steinmetz of Barnhart Books to run a fast check through the last
effects, and he reports: ''The first effect I found was the halo effect, a
psychological term from 1928, defined as 'a bias whereby one fundamental
characteristic of an individual (such as friendliness) influences the overall
judgment of his character.' Others include effects named for some person, such
as the Einstein effect, or some thing, such as the Hawthorne effect. Lately,
we've had the echo effect, the ratchet effect and the ripple effect. Recently,
scientific naming has received general application by analogy.''

We can expect more furrowed-brow use of scientists like Heisenberg, making all
our commentary sound like the titles of Robert Ludlum novels. What about
Austria's physicist Christian Doppler? In the Doppler effect on frequencies, the
closer you get, the higher they sound; this has yet to be applied to a
politician talking about the deficit.

But all is not lost: if this study of the vogue use of effect in nonscientific
parlance makes analogists self-conscious about using the term, we will be
witnessing the Heisenberg effect on the Heisenberg effect.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

ALLEN GINSBERG: INTIMATIONS OF MORTALITY

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines; Francis X. Clines covers the White House for The
Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 68, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5163 words


HEY FATHER DEATH, I'M FLYING home,'' sounds the voice of the bald, gray-bearded
poet singing to his dead sire. The song threads through the cobwebbed corridors
of the abandoned Ellis Island immigration center, the haunting relic of a past
age of hope that seems a perfect setting for the latest in Allen Ginsberg's
endless experimenting with words and emotion and time.

Ginsberg is performing his poetry for the music video camera, happily tinkering
with the newest twist in message- bearing. A witness, sensing the riverbound
borough of Manhattan teeming at the horizon beyond the sad lyric hall, can
easily imagine that a preceding literary eccentric, Walt Whitman, might also
have rushed to play himself on music video if the chance had been his. For Allen
Ginsberg, the poet laureate of protest, here is a new audience, another chance
to sing of death, the subject that gives peace to his life.



''Genius Death your art is done/ Lover Death your body's gone/ Father Death I'm
coming home,'' sings Ginsberg, his voice slow and deep against a reedy musical
background that sends a sweet grief through the spiritual catacombs where the
nation's lifeblood once washed in.

A few actors are in the foreground, dressed as anxious peasants at their meal of
passage into the New Land. Ginsberg, a modern American rebel born of that
immigrant tide, walks ghostlike among them with his poetry. He seems far from
his Beat Generation roots of shaggy youth. He is modestly barbered and bears his
words before the camera dressed in a dark business suit straight from the
middle-class shadows that still limn his soul despite all the years of Bohemian
flight and labor. The day, reflected in the city's harbor, is aglow beyond the
dim building with the same brilliance of nature that ignited Whitman's voice.
Ginsberg seems at peace and his nostalgia is as blue-chip as ever: he is
sporting the necktie of his beloved father, Louis Ginsberg, New Jersey
schoolteacher and poet.

''Father Breath once more farewell/ Birth you gave was no thing ill/ My heart is
still, as time will tell.''

The stanza becomes a take. As the camera crew moves on to another setting,
Ginsberg waits and looks around at dusty past details. He is the celebrity poet
who once piped a flood of hippie humanity into Golden Gate Park in the 1960's on
the strength of ''flower power.'' He is the poet of resistance who once could
rile authorities with the single syllable ''om,'' his mantra chant against the
Vietnam War sounding through the Chicago tear gas of '68. He is the symbol of
social iconoclasm and doctored mind expansion, one of the first to sing brazenly
beyond the closet of homosexuality.

He is also getting old, he says. He stands quietly on Ellis Island in suitcoat
and tie and lapses into the meditation of the Buddhist ritual that now provides
daily comfort and exercise to him. He spies a cracked old songbook left from the
immigrant past and he reads, then sings, to no one in particular verses from
''Go Down Moses'' and ''Love's Old Sweet Song.'' The poet smiles like a newborn,
showing none of the doubt, uncertainty and anger of his own lyrics.

As relentless as it is, Ginsberg's intimation of mortality is not joyless. He
will talk death casually while walking confidently on streets strewn with
garbage and junkies on the Lower East Side where he lives and writes. He will
talk death against the mountains out at his serene literary retreat in Boulder,
Colo., the Naropa Institute, where each summer he teaches poetry and Buddhist
meditation to a new generation of the aspiring avant-garde. Right now, as he is
in China for a two-month visit to teach poetry, his yearning each sunrise
undoubtedly is to fully sense life's fact of flight on a new edge of the Earth
and find peace in the melancholy transaction. He calls this ''the dearness of
the vanishing moment,'' the heart of all his work.

From this perpetual concession to death's advent, Allen Ginsberg has fashioned
an elemental, efficient literary engine that has driven him far beyond the
stereotypical days of his hippiedom. Along the way, he has steadily produced
poetry, journals, political writings and letters - a ''lifelong poem,'' as he
calls this continuing effort, and one that is about to provide a sturdier stake
for him than he has ever had. Harper & Row will publish 33 years of his
collected poems shortly in a single hardcover edition, the first time he has
ever ventured beyond such pioneer alternative publishers as City Lights Books,
the San Francisco haven of his friend Lawrence Ferlinghetti, who helped find the
early audiences for Ginsberg. He continues composing, most recently producing
''White Shroud'' (facing page), in which he finds himself still concerned with
the theme of reconciliation with death. It is the title poem of another
collection, to be published by Harper & Row in 1986.

The more-than-800-page collected poems is hardly a comment on the legitimization
of Allen Ginsberg. He will still reside in a $260-a-month slum walkup and toss a
visitor the key to the steel shielded main door in a balled-up sock. On any
morning after his contemplative exercise and hot tea and lemon, he is still
capable of bounding down to a fresh cause in that nomadic, Hasidic way of his
that Kenneth Rexroth once described as ''in the direct line of the nabis, those
wild men of the hills, bearded and barefoot, who periodically descended on
Jerusalem, denounced king and priesthood, and recalled the Chosen People to the
Covenant.''

The Harper publication is rated by Ginsberg mostly as the means to a larger
worldwide audience and to some needed funds, a sum surprising to him - $160,000
for six books across four years - but relatively modest in an age given to
celebrity millionaires. As a poet, Ginsberg long ago moved closer to the
literary mainstream, even if the general public's impression still has him
ossified in time as a dope-headed, peace-chanting caricature of the
self-indulgent artist. He carefully claims no large place in American
literature, but his labor and style alone, regardless of the esthetic judgments
of later generations, currently put him as a major working writer in the
nonclassical tradition of Walt Whitman and William Carlos Williams. The latter
is a key figure, because Ginsberg was raised in the same Paterson, N.J., area
where Williams worked as poet and physician, conceiving innovations of American
prosody - the use of the daily working language to build a more natural meter
and verse that early delighted Ginsberg for seeming closer to ancient poetry.

At the age of 58, Ginsberg is a gentle, thoughtful man who works hard at his
obligations to writing, to his family and to what remains of the rambunctious
community of free souls who first helped him find flight. He now is energized by
his daily meditations, not the marijuana and LSD of his past. In the 60's,
Ginsberg regularly enraged college administrators, public-morals officials and
parents with his advocacy of the legalization of marijuana and his
experimentation with psychedelics as an aid to writing, the latter a total of 30
times over 15 years, according to his own Congressional testimony. Some critics
said the result was predictable in the frequent appearance of obscenities in his
poems and graphic sexual narrative. For him, these are devices for working
toward an eventual, overall human lyricism; his confessional poems can be
coarse, but Ginsberg was no less coarse and graphic in denouncing the Vietnam
War. As a counterculture celebrity, he came to be courted as much as condemned
by some publicity-minded authorities. He played this role with irony, once
testifying before Congress that psychedelics at least gave him the power to stop
hating President Lyndon B. Johnson and start praying for him.

Ginsberg still studies Whitman, but, nearing three score years, he is intrigued
by the house in Camden, N.J., that was Whitman's old-age retreat. He seems to
identify with Whitman's planning his own tomb from the sketches of William
Blake. A running plot line in Ginsberg's dreams and talk is his yearning for a
happy place to die and a loving soul to give him his final bowls of soup. Yet,
morbid is not the word for Ginsberg, for he can peel down to the humor in almost
any fact.

He remains a busy poet who has been taken as something far more serious than a
coffee-house versifier ever since 1956, when his first important poem, ''Howl,''
appeared. Its opening line crashed against the gray complacency of the
Eisenhower years:

I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness, starving hysterical
naked, dragging themselves through the negro streets at dawn looking for an
angry fix, angelheaded hipsters burning for the ancient heavenly connection to
the starry dynamo in the machinery of the night

That poem, which is widely anthologized these days, was begun in a moment of
freedom and sadness, Ginsberg recalls. Freedom in having despaired at that point
of ever succeeding as a poet; thus he finally lost the inhibitions and
pretentions that stood in the way of a personal style. Sadness in thinking of
the lost lives of self-destructive friends in the Beat Generation and, more
obliquely, of his mother, Naomi. She was a Russian emigre who began in this
country as a Marxist idealist of great enthusiasm and ended as a tragic, raving
paranoid, tortured in the world by her own ideas and in institutions by
electric- shock treatments and a lobotomy.

Ginsberg grew up in New Jersey as a leftist, Jewish atheist, a gifted student
who used his Y.M.H.A scholarship at Columbia University to fall into the life of
a happy literary bum with his young friend Jack Kerouac, the prose voice of the
Beat Generation. Allen had spent a miserable youth helping to shepherd his
mother to sanitariums, but her death occurred as he was finding full-fledged
freedom in San Francisco as a young poet and a homosexual finally out in the
open, almost 30 years ago. Among other things, ''Howl'' was a pounding release
of disguised sympathy for Naomi as Ginsberg finally hit upon a powerful,
strophic style to call his own. After that came another of his most popular
poems, ''Kaddish,'' in which he grieved openly for Naomi's lost life, asking:
''It is only the sun that shines once for the mind, only the flash of existence,
that none ever was?''

The poet-son wept for his mother:

Ai! Ai! we do worse! We are in a fix! And you're out, Death let you out, Death
had the Mercy, you're done with your century, done with God, done with the path
thru it - Done with yourself at last - Pure -Back to the Babe dark before your
Father, before us all - before the world - There rest. With such words already
on paper, Ginsberg need hardly elaborate as he smiles gently and answers the
foolish, necessary question of whether he is happy: ''Like everybody else, I'm
miserable.'' He looks down and adds, ''But misery and happiness are one taste.''

This is as good a description as any of his own peripatetic, experimental,
heartfelt, bardic life. The main events in his life involve imagination -
mystical visions, he says, in describing the blinding sense in 1948 of having
William Blake's poetry upon his tongue. He says it was a sensation not at all
heightened by drugs, but rather a sudden sense of a ''beatific'' universe that
eventually frightened him. Similarly, the late paintings of Cezanne, with their
spare use of white space and juxtaposed color swatches, left him ''shuddering''
years ago and sensing a similar power in juxtaposed words to force the mind to
invent ''the sensation of existence.''

Like Whitman, Ginsberg's sense of self-celebrity makes him veer toward the orbit
of other pop figures such as Bob Dylan, the folk-song versifier, or Ginsberg's
New Wave buddies in such rock groups as the Clash. Ginsberg has sung with both.
His delight with on-the-spot expressionist art dates back to the earliest
writings of Kerouac and to the Beats' pleasure with the work habits of jazz
musicians and blues singers.

All his years of freedom and complaint have left Ginsberg with a look veering
somewhere between the world-weariness of a shopkeeper and the netherworld
bemusement of a Talmudic scholar. Working quietly one recent morning, Ginsberg
sat in his apartment down the street from Mary Help of Christians convent and
wrote in the journal that feeds his literary life. The day's jotting is about
his latest visit to the sick and dying, to his Uncle Abe, bedridden at the age
of 87 in the Daughters of Israel Geriatric Center in West Orange, N.J., to old
Aunt Clara in a different old-folks home, and to Julian Beck, his old friend and
Bohemian soulmate from the Living Theater, who is weakened by cancer but still
sits up to discuss the arts with Ginsberg.

''Actually I was just learning from them,'' Ginsberg says of his visits to the
sick. ''It was very edifying. It's not that tough. It's life. It's poignant.
It's grief. Some tears, not many. Abe was the black sheep. Now he's the
survivor, finally grown up. And he's the wisest, lying there.''

Ginsberg has the same deep voice in conversation as he does in reading poetry,
and his thoughts often come uninhibited, not merely with the multifarious sexual
vulgarity he helped pioneer in modern culture, but more impressively with
emotional openness. The only chance for meaning and success in a life, he says,
is ''to the extent you get beyond yourself and serve others.'' That is the
meaning of the old people he visits, he says. ''Create some pocket of beauty,
something that will make it more bearable to ease the pain and suffering of
others and of yourself.'' His personal horror, accordingly, is that his life
will have been ''an egotistical monument'' of waste out of which ''there might
only have been 10 moments of something useful to others.''

''I wished I had spent more time visiting my uncles and aunts rather than
spending so much time on abstractions,'' says Ginsberg. He has had to review all
his life's work for the Harper's book, and he is speaking of his poetry in the
60's in particular: ''Politically obsessed, ephemeral, too much anger, not
enough family, not enough of my personal loves.''

Ginsberg is happy to say he has had a number of loves, beginning when he was 20
years old with Neal Cassady, who as Dean Moriarty is a character in Kerouac's
picaresque novel ''On the Road.'' Cassady eventually died of a drug overdose, as
Kerouac died of alcoholism. William Burroughs, the drug-addicted novelist, was
another of Ginsberg's old loves, and now he is a frequent visitor to the Jack
Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics, the summer institute Ginsberg helped
found at the Naropa Institute. There the two of them talk nostalgically of
younger days of writing, and Allen shows old films and is a host of seminars on
the Beats, protectively summoning their spirit back for each new summer's crop
of young writers.

Ginsberg is grateful for all his loves, and the most important in his life has
been Peter Orlovsky, a quiet-spoken, husky man who first moved in with Allen 30
years ago this Christmas. Orlovsky is primarily heterosexual, Ginsberg says, but
he still has had a happy life across the years with Allen, with their
relationship waxing and waning but surviving. Just recently, Orlovsky decided he
wanted to raise children, so he is living next door to Ginsberg in the East
Village with a woman he loves. The two men remain close and seem like the most
well adjusted of sundered couples.

''Allen encouraged me,'' says Peter. ''Life is constantly changing. It's full of
surprises.''

''It's a great idea for him,'' Ginsberg says. ''He has no erotic or family
future with me.'' The poet who worries so about death rejected a reproductive
reach beyond his time in once writing, ''Between me and oblivion an unknown
woman stands.'' She will remain unknown.

The parting sounds complicated as Ginsberg discusses it, but not for the decades
of emotional ties the two men are reweaving. Instead, the complications are of a
most worldly order - how to stay together and finance an extended family on the
basis of Ginsberg's limited income; how to prepare for children, yet attend to
the elderly in both the Orlovsky and Ginsberg families. It is startling to
witness this mundane anxiety in two of the surviving souls of the Beats, the
artists who were so refreshing in thumbing their nose at the materialist
preoccupation of post-war America.

Jerry Aronson, a film maker who has been shadowing Ginsberg for two years at
work on a documentary on the poet's life, says it is charming to hear Ginsberg
and Burroughs exchange tales of their ailments like two old pensioners. Aronson
recognizes this as more an aspect of Ginsberg's gift for listening to
everything, to being an omnivorous archivist of the ever fading life: ''He
listens and makes you feel what you're saying is important. He wants to hear
you.''

Ginsberg, for all the earlier doctoring of his mind with drugs, is among the
least preoccupied with material life among successful American writers. He took
vows of penury when he made Buddhism the center of his life. He uses what money
he earns in readings and his writing to keep moving around the world, visiting
and observing and writing. Over the years, his annual income has never been
higher than the low tens- of-thousands, he estimates, and friends note that a
decent part of this has gone into a foundation, the Committee on Poetry, that he
created years ago as a device to funnel bits of charity to needy writers and
friends. In this way, he aided his friend, Imamu Amiri Baraka, the black poet,
when he was embattled in lengthy, expensive court cases in New Jersey. Friends
say Ginsberg is always creative in his generosity, as with, for example, his
donation of the ''Kaddish'' manuscript to Julian Beck when he had his own court
battles in New York to finance.

IN THE MIDDLE-CLASS way of the world, young Allen Ginsberg, the product of a
tragic marriage of leftward intellectuals, studied literature at Columbia,
appreciating a few teachers and delighting in the flare of genius in Kerouac, a
fellow student. For himself, he wondered whether he might work with words in
some conventional way in television or at Time magazine. He underwent eight
months of psychiatric care during that period and was pleased to be pronounced
by the doctors as neither psychotic nor schizophrenic, but ''just an average
neurotic.'' ''That was helpful,'' he says. ''I had been eccentric and wondered
whether it was my own madness or the world around me.''

Much as Whitman was a wandering printer and writer, Ginsberg, the literature
major, learned the new trade of marketing research, which he found to be the
manipulation of public opinion through the use of ''hand- tooled phrases.'' He
says he savors the latest Reagan slogans with the same professional ear he once
applied to the Ipana toothpaste account in his 52d-floor office in the Empire
State Building, measuring whether ''sparkling'' or ''glamorous'' was the more
manipulative adjective to attract the masses. ''I was writing already then,'' he
says. ''I knew what I was doing, getting right into the middle of the
mass-communications movement. I got great experience in the way language is
artifacted.''

In this period he created such poems as ''The Green Automobile,'' a vivid cross-
country tour of lyrical experience: ''we can see together/ the beauty of souls/
hidden like diamonds/ in the clock of the world.''

Ginsberg's marketplace trade gave him the freedom to break away to San Francisco
and greater independence, but there he was taunted by the dream of dropping his
business-suited life in the office for that of full-time poet and open
homosexual. A psychiatrist told him to do it because that was what he really
wanted. The simple wisdom of that advice still amazes Ginsberg, but,
characteristically, he has a motherly way of worrying yet about its full
implications and its effect on his quest for a peaceful place to expire.

''I asked him, 'But what will happen when I'm older and stained and nobody
visits me, with no source of income or honor in the community?' '' Ginsberg
recalls with a big smile. ''He said, 'Don't worry about it now. You're an
interesting guy. You'll have friends later.' ''

Ginsberg followed the advice, and says he quickly discovered the end of much
restraint, some personal happiness, and ''a burst of imaginative energy'' for
his writing. ''I began seeing life more as a Charlie Chaplin movie than a horror
movie,'' he says, describing the great change in going more deeply into the
world of imagination. ''I could get up in the middle of the night and write down
a dream without worrying about getting up in the morning.''

In that world of imagination, he finds, ''There's no bar to us proclaiming our
delight, and that's the strength of poetry.''

He is referring there to a beautiful poem, ''Rain,'' by his mentor, William
Carlos Williams, which measures love's endless passage through the physical
world and half-laments:

Unworldly love that has no hope of the world  and that cannot change the world
to its delight.

Ginsberg concedes that hard fact, but says the important thing is to not
hesitate to express ''the actuality of our desire.'' It is enough, he says, that
it exists ''in the area where we all live, in our imaginations,'' and is
concerned with ''everything that's impractical, everything we want that we can't
have but still remains as a residue of desire because it's genuine.'' His own
life seems quietly summoned up as he speaks of this point: ''What we really
want, as distinct from what we dare ask for, once you say what you really want,
maybe it's not that impossible.''

''What else do we have?'' he asks, edging as he often does toward the world of
politics to make a point about poetry. ''We have our imaginal world, whether
it's me or Kissinger. His world is no more real than mine. He has this vision of
Russia and I have this vision of my mother. We're all entangled in our own
projections. The people that realize they're entangled are at a little better
advantage than those who don't and go around thinking that their own projections
are the absolute realpolitik reality.''

Ginsberg's long avocation with politics is visible in his old file cabinets in
his East Village apartment: ''Late 60's CIA/FBI/Dope.'' Knowing drugs from the
streets, he still amasses information on the Government's role in drug policing,
with what he sees as its pernicious problem of official corruption and with what
he long has contended is an international scale of conspiracies. Ginsberg speaks
as a one-time celebrant of such psychedelics as LSD, fed from the hand of his
old friend, Timothy Leary, in describing how avidly the Government used its
drug-busting machinery against protesters of the Vietnam War.

More mind-boggling than any drug he ingested, he says, was the level of
Government ''evidence'' justifying his classification as a security risk that
Ginsberg discovered when he finally obtained his personal dossier from the
Federal Bureau of Investigation. In a celebrated May Day incident in 1965,
Ginsberg was elected Kral Majales (King of May) at a festival of 100,000 young
people in Prague. The Government of Czechoslovakia felt so scandalized by the
gesture that it quickly expelled Ginsberg as ''a bearded American fairy dope
poet.'' Ginsberg earlier had been expelled from Cuba for protesting the Castro
regime's repression of homosexuals, and he took both censurings as blithe merit
badges. But later he discovered in his F.B.I. file that American authorities had
cited the Czechoslovak condemnation of him as a ''narcomane and an alcoholic''
as a proof of his unworthiness as an American. ''They were backing the
Commies!'' the poet cries out, arguing that police bureaucracies have more in
common than not.

Through such incidents, the public may have missed the point that Ginsberg has
long warned against such addictive drugs as heroin, and as early as ''Howl'' he
grieved for addict-friends like the writer Herbert Huncke slipping away into the
criminal life. At the same time, Ginsberg says that the Government's
manipulation of the problem, and the public's fear of it, makes it easier not
for a ''police state'' to flourish, but for a ''surveillance state'' to quietly
accrete. ''First you create a class called 'fiends,' and you need to have more
cops, then more cops when these expert cops tell how big the problem is, and the
thing grows,'' he says, recalling official warnings about marijuana as ''reefer
madness'' in his youth. ''No one now believes pot drives you crazy,'' says the
poet who helped popularize it in the middle-class.

In recent years, Ginsberg's political energy has been directed against nuclear
weapons, and he has declaimed with demonstrators outside the Rocky Flats
plutonium works north of Denver. ''Plutonian Ode'' was composed for the occasion
and shows a blend of Ginsberg's old 60's vehemence with his Buddhist
breath-control regimen as a way of pacifying the world. He implores the bomb
makers:

Take this wheel of syllables in hand, these vowels and consonants to breath's
end take this inhalation of black poison to your heart, breathe out this
blessing from your breast on our creation, ''enrich this Plutonian Ode to
explode its empty thunder through earthen thought-worlds Magnetize this howl
with heartless compassion, destroy this mountain of Plutonium with ordinary mind
and body speech

In becoming a poet, Allen Ginsberg turned almost 40 years ago to Dr. Williams,
his fellow New Jerseyan who was not then fully appreciated, but even so was
quietly watching and re- imagining their town in his epic poem ''Paterson,'' and
working on his great love poem ''Asphodel.'' ''He was considered a crank back
then, a local eccentric, nowhere near the heavyweight he is now,'' Ginsberg
says.

From Williams, Ginsberg discovered most clearly that he had to ''stop writing
poetry'' - recombining the existing literary imageries of the past - and start
paying attention to life and jotting down his plain observations.

He remembers Williams's making the point best by taking out his physician's
prescription pad to show something he had heard spoken that day by a Polish
workman on his block: ''I'll kick yuh eye.'' The words defied iambic pentameter
and the other basic meters taught then as the classical method of poetry. But
they had syncopation rooted in honest speech idioms, and Williams was excited to
use them in a poem. Thus was Ginsberg quickly beguiled by Williams's use of the
''American measure,'' the study of people's living speech patterns, rather than
a few textbook measures, for the basic rhythms upon which to create poems.
Ginsberg embraced this approach, which already was being separately championed
by some poets across the river in New York City and others out in San Francisco.

''Rather than fake something which sounds arty, it should be our own speech
intensified, not anthology speech synthesized,'' Ginsberg says, summarizing what
is well accepted now.

For years, Ginsberg has been taking photographs of everyone he cherishes. His
early pictures of Kerouac, Burroughs, Gregory Corso, Robert Creeley, Anne
Waldman and numerous other writers are basic archival material now, and his
technique is appreciated enough to merit a gallery show of Ginsberg's photos
next year in New York. The picture-taking reinforces another tenet of Ginsberg's
writing technique, the description of ''epiphanous moments,'' a kind of freeze-
framing in words of a witnessed moment ''under the aspect of eternity'' that
artists crave. Seeking that aspect, Ginsberg writes to capture ''the dearness of
the vanishing moment and the realization that the show, life, lasts a limited
number of years.''

''I'm 58 and it becomes more and more poignant as it goes along,'' he says. ''In
my poetry, I would show that.'' This seems the challenge he finds most pressing
in such poets as Whitman. He is fascinated with Whitman's witnessing of Lincoln
and of Lincoln's suffering as what Ginsberg calls a ''poignant moment'' that
existed more than a century ago for those two men, yet survives now in Whitman's
writing. ''Whitman's basic tone toward Lincoln was tenderness,'' says Ginsberg,
who makes the point that accuracy through subjective witnessing, not applied
emotion, must bear the artist into the future: ''And Whitman's tenderness comes
not from an arbitrary infusion of good will, but from the very circumstances of
suffering.''

Ginsberg always gets back to suffering. ''Some sense of sympathy is the ultimate
social reality,'' he says. He remains ultimately in touch with suffering through
the life, witnessed and imagined, of Naomi Ginsberg, the mother who died crazed
and suffering as he strove to be a poet. She was alive when he thought of her
and created ''Howl'' 28 years ago, and he symbolically sent a copy to her, a
mute patient in a madhouse, never expecting a reply. She shocked him by
responding with a letter of eerie clarity that was written, he estimates, no
more than a day before she suddenly died from a stroke. When Ginsberg later
wrote ''Kaddish'' for her, he ended with her strange but welcome words of
concern from the letter: ''The key is in the window, the key is in the sunlight
in the window - I have the key - Get married Allen don't take drugs - the key is
in the bars, in the sunlight in the window. Love, your mother.''

Ginsberg recently returned to his mother through the imaginal world of his
poetry. A year ago, he relates, he had a vivid dream of wandering the Bronx,
looking for his ever-elusive place for a happy death, and in the dream his
mother appeared in an alley as a shopping-bag lady ''habiting this old city-edge
corner, older than I knew her before her life disappeared.'' She was still poor
and in need of care, but she was finally able, beyond all the incoherent
shrieking years of madness, to talk with her son so they could reconcile. She
asked for help and Allen was relieved to stay with her and shop for her and cook
for her. And next to her shopping-bag station was a vacant apartment for an
aging poet. Ginsberg awoke from the dream ''in tears and in peace'' and
immediately began writing ''White Shroud.''

''At long long last, my search was ended in this pleasant way,/ time to care for
her before death, long way to go yet,'' he wrote, as if simple shelter itself
was that time-defying aspect of eternity sought by poets.

''It gave me a chance to go back again and have a conversation with her,''
Ginsberg says so gratefully, making it clearer than ever that the world of
imagination is his final shelter. ''Now that I'm 58, I'm able to envision
something in my heart that's perhaps larger than I was able to do when she died.
I'm able to envision a world a little bit more open. How open our imaginations
are! The reality of it is amazing and overwhelming.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
In The New York Times Magazine of Nov. 11, the middle name of John Holmes was
misspelled in a caption on page 71. His middle name is Clellon.

GRAPHIC: photo of Neal Cassady and Jack Kerouac (page 94); photo of Allen
Ginsberg (page 88); photo of Allen Ginsberg with Peter Orlovsky, Lawrence
Ferlinghetti, William Burroughs, Gregory Corso, John Clennon Holmes, Carl
Solomon and Robert Frank (page 71); photo of Allen Ginsberg (page 69); photo of
William Burroughs, Peter Orlovsky, Gregory Corso and Allen Ginsberg

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ROOTS OF REVOLUTION

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 6; Page 72, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4408 words


Flora Lewis is foreign affairs columnist for The New York Times.

THE ARGUMENT KEEPS RETURNING, FOCUSED ON Central America now: Are contemporary
revolutions the fruit of the tireless efforts of an international conspiracy led
by the Soviet Union? Or are they national movements that rise of their own
accord, not, at first, necessarily hostile to the United States, but eventually
driven to Moscow by American opposition?

This argument has been fueled by a good deal of material that has recently
become available - from documents seized on the island of Grenada, from
revolutionaries who changed sides in Nicaragua and Cuba, from memoirs of older
ex-Communists, as well as from shadowy and sometimes contradictory reports
attributed to ''intelligence sources.'' The details are usually mobilized to
support one side or the other, and the results are seldom persuasive except to
those already convinced. I suggest that there is no right answer. That is
because the questions put are the wrong questions in the first place.

What all revolutions have in common, contemporary ones and those in the past, is
resistance to a perceived tyranny. It makes a big difference if the tyranny is
seen as an imposition from outside, as it was in America in 1776, and in this
century, in India and elsewhere, or if the tyranny is seen to reside in an
internal structure, as in France in the 18th century and Russia and China in the
20th. The purpose of all revolutionaries, nevertheless, is to achieve power. In
some instances, it may suffice simply to shift power to local hands and leave
the social order essentially unchanged. This is what happened in the American
Revolution. In others - as was the case in France and Russia - power is
redistributed and the society is turned upside down.

The more familiar kind of Latin American upheaval, the palace coup - such as
numerous ones in Guatemala and Bolivia, countries referred to by the disdainful
term ''banana republic'' - aims at scarcely more than replacing a few leaders.
The United States has usually stood aside in these cases, accepting the overturn
as the undeveloped countries' version of an electoral upset. These coups don't
involve many people. Therefore, they don't need myths or ideologies to mobilize
broad support among the populace, and the leaders usually don't bother to create
them. Because only the immediate winners and losers are involved, the leaders
can admit, without great difficulty, that the stake was simply being in power,
and they can go on to rule without stirring the people.

But when the aim is to use power in order to impose basic changes on society, as
in Cuba, Nicaragua or Iran, much more is required. The attempt at drastic change
can provoke civil war. In any case, it requires an appeal to large numbers of
people whose enthusiasm and will to sacrifice can be aroused only by promise of
a brighter future. The revolutionary leaders do not always need to explain in
any detail how the better life will be achieved. If the populace has a wide
perception of injustice, indignity and misrule, then it suffices to set the goal
at wiping out existing power. Many people will be prepared to believe that
things can't be worse. Many people, with quite different visions of the way
ahead, will be prepared to join in the belief that they will have a determining
influence on the shape of post-revolutionary rule.

So the question should not be whether foreign or domestic Communists launched
the revolutionary impulse, or whether it came from the non-ideological
frustrations of people who see the barriers to a fresh start as insurmountable
without the use of force. Instead, the questions should be concerned with how
the revolutionary dynamic develops once it has begun - what pressures, what
personalities and often what accidents determine its direction.  R
EVOLUTIONARIES WHO aspire to eminence have a better chance of becoming leaders
if they can offer a coherent philosophy with which to persuade their followers
that they know where they are going. The ability to inflame, evoke and maintain
allegiance takes more than an exciting personality. It takes a show of great
conviction and assurance. Marxism, particularly in parts of the world far
distant from the countries where its preceptors rule daily life, offers
rhetorical guidance. But it isn't the only possibility. Francisco Franco, in
Spain, and Juan Peron, in Argentina, led successful revolutions of the right.
Both were anti- Communist and both were capable of evoking deep emotions. In
their days, Fascism still had a populist aspect. That is no longer true.
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini found an older method in fundamentalist religion and
a return to what he was able to portray as the sources of purity, strength and
glory.

Democracy is less useful as a revolutionary vision today than it was in the 18th
century - in the American Colonies, for example. Democracy is, after all, a
method for exercising freedom; it doesn't prescribe exactly what freedom should
achieve. To function in practice, democracy requires sturdy institutions and a
general acceptance of the rule of law. People who have long been cheated by a
facade of democratic ritual with fake elections can be vulnerable to the
argument that it will take a more muscular system to satisfy their urgent
grievances. Besides, revolutionaries who are prepared to submit themselves and
their deeds to free, democratic approval would be uniquely modest, a rare breed
unlikely to sustain for long the burden of their revolutionary vision.  IF THE
POWER UNDER

attack doesn't just collapse of its own exhausted weight, as it did in Portugal
in 1974, there is a natural urge for revolutionaries to seek sympathy and aid
from outside. It is almost always necessary for them to seek participation in
their crusade from compatriots who share no more than their opposition to the
power in being.

But not always. In Grenada, Maurice Bishop's New Jewel Movement took over in an
almost bloodless coup while Prime Minister Eric Gairy was away in 1979. The new
leaders were welcomed by the people, and only later did they run into problems
of sustaining their popularity as their gloss wore off and discontent resurged.
In Cuba, Fidel Castro was embraced when he came down from the mountains by a
middle class grown disgusted with the crudity of Gen. Fulgencio Batista's regime
and his willingness to cooperate in an obscene exploitation of their country by
American gangsters. In Bolivia and some other Latin American countries, and in
Italy and West Germany in the 1970's, revolutionaries sought to provoke general
repression by acts of terrorism. They hoped that masses of people, peasants and
urban workers, would respond with growing militancy to the state's use of
counterforce. That didn't work.

Despite these exceptions, what has usually happened in recent revolutionary
campaigns is that when the small band - and it starts with a very small band -
of power seekers manages to arouse enough of their compatriots to organize a
real guerrilla movement, but not one strong enough to win, the seekers are
driven to look elsewhere. They look for arms, money, political support and
sanctuary. But note the important point: They ask. They do not wait for foreign
powers, or foreign agents, to bring gifts of subversive tools. It is true that
revolution cannot really be exported, but there is frequently a very determined
attempt to import it.

The rebels in El Salvador did not first get a promise of Cuban and Soviet
supplies and then set out on their campaign. Their friends and foes agree that
the rebels did not begin to get any serious help until the several factional
groups that had already gone into clandestine opposition finally accepted
Havana's demand that they unite in an organized front.

A study by the World Affairs Council of Pittsburgh, which sets out to prove
Cuban-Soviet responsibility for revolution in Central America, makes much of
what it calls ''Cuba's strategy of unification'' as the key to foreign
''centralized control.'' But such a strategy is clearly as much an effort to
make sure that aid is not frittered away in foolish, inconclusive operations or
wasted in the almost inevitable intramural fighting among divided rebels for
domination of their own movement. This kind of attempt from an outside helper to
achieve maximum effectiveness is mirrored in United States pressures on the
Nicaraguan contras - who are supported by Washington - to consolidate their
command. Eden Pastora, the Costa Rica- based ex-Sandinista, has told plaintively
of the rebuffs he met from the United States because of his refusal to join with
Nicaraguan contras based in Honduras under the leadership of ex-supporters of
the deposed dictator Anastasio Somoza.

In both Cuba and Grenada, the revolutionaries won initially without a flow of
foreign arms. But to consolidate their power, they, too, soon turned abroad for
weapons to defend their regimes against outside challenge. Grenada is so small,
and the Bishop regime faced so little internal opposition at first, that its
case was somewhat special. However, there is a uniquely detailed record of the
progress of this revolutionary movement because of the American capture of
documents after the 1983 invasion.

As often happens when minutes of meetings are made public, Grenada's secret
papers show an enormous amount of trivial dispute and much less single- minded
plotting than outsiders suppose. For example, an urgent question about a travel
junket runs through the documents and is the cause for many messages to Moscow.
Grenada officials sought to find out how many people could be included in the
Soviet invitation offering ''five places'' for a V.I.P. holiday in the Crimea.
The then Deputy Prime Minister, Bernard Coard, his wife, Phyllis - both of whom
went on trial last month on charges in connection with the murder of Bishop -
and their three children wanted to go. But the leadership had to know whether
this would use up all five places, or whether a single family could be counted
as one place. The inquiries were still being pressed when the coup occurred.

The most interesting revelations, however, are how insistently and energetically
the regime pressed for arms and supplies from the Communist countries. They
became worried about their ability to hold the domestic base of their power. In
the six months before the coup that led to the United States invasion, the
minutes show discussion after discussion on the danger of collapse. Some members
of the ruling group predicted that unless something dramatic were done, they
could last only one more year; some said half a year.

The captured documents also show that there was strong disagreement about what
the leaders should do next. All of them called themselves Marxist-Leninists. All
of them proclaimed dedication to pursuing the goal of a full Communist
revolution, although in public they proclaimed support for a mixed economy, with
a lively private sector and eventual elections. The issue among them, however,
was whether to slow down the introduction of Marxist measures and indoctrination
programs or leap forward to save their power. Other evidence also indicated that
Prime Minister Maurice Bishop, with Cuban encouragement, wanted to move toward
moderation and make concessions to local businessmen, critics, and ordinary
people getting tired of propaganda campaigns, so as to revive public confidence.
He wanted to ease Grenada's isolation by improving relations with Washington and
so revive tourism.

Bernard Coard, on the other hand, was a hard-liner. He demanded to share power
with Bishop, but in a way that would evidently give him control. Implicit in his
position was a tough crackdown that would ''complete'' the revolution quickly
and then maintain it with the considerable force available. His quarrel with
Bishop was doubtless the source of the coup in which Bishop and three other
ministers were murdered and a military junta installed under Gen. Hudson Austin.

Later, both Grenadians and American officials said there seemed to have been a
plan to kill Bishop at the airport on his return from a trip to Eastern Europe
and to blame the Central Intelligence Agency for the murder. It is unknown
whether Bishop was forewarned of this plan, but he returned early and
unexpectedly to Grenada. He was shot in cold blood a few days later.

Because of this frightening coup and the suspicion, later confirmed to an
unimagined degree, that Grenada had accumulated a large stock of arms that could
be used to attack the neighboring - and undefended - islands, English-speaking
Caribbean countries asked the United States to intervene. And these countries
joined the American action. Until now, Washington officials seem unaware of how
much understanding the United States lost in the rest of the world by barring
press coverage of its invasion. Full reportage would have made clear immediately
to everyone how ecstatically the United States intervention was welcomed.

Coard's purpose was forestalled by Washington's quick reaction to the coup. And
that purpose, it can now be seen, was to create a revolutionary fait accompli in
Grenada - not so much to oppose the United States, but to force the hands of
Cuba and the Russians, making them either choose him as their surrogate or
violate their own principles and abandon a self-proclaimed Marxist-Leninist
ally. Every indication is that the ploy was his, not theirs. Havana was
evidently taken by surprise.  CASTRO'S INVOLVEment with Moscow is not so
different. There is still controversy over whether Castro was a pro- Soviet
Communist before he won power, or converted later because of Washington's
hostility. Castro has told the story both ways. So have some of his former
revolutionary comrades who turned against him.

Carlos Franqui, who has written about his campaign with Fidel and knew him
intimately in the early days, says: ''Was Fidel a Communist or not? Let's begin
by trying to be objective, which means not taking Fidel seriously when he says,
'I am not now nor have I ever been a Communist.' '' (That was to The Chicago
Tribune's Jules Dubois in a 1958 interview, in which Castro also said that
Batista accused him of Communism to gain United States support.) ''Or,'' Franqui
continues, ''by the same token, not taking Castro seriously in a December 1961
television speech, in which he said, 'I am a Marxist-Leninist, and I shall be a
Marxist-Leninist until the day I die.' ''

Franqui stresses Castro's tremendous appetite for personal power and his
willingness to be ambiguous on ideology. The ex-comrade points out that the
official Latin American Communist parties opposed ''adventurism'' and began to
lose out to more militant leftist groups inspired by Mao Zedong and later by
Castro and Che Guevara. The television speech quoted above was after the Bay of
Pigs. Castro was secretly pleading for guarantees of aid from Moscow. Cuban
officials say flatly, and credibly, that the missiles Nikita S. Khrushchev sent
in 1962 were his response to Havana's urgent request for something sure to
prevent a renewed attack by the United States. The missiles were not sent on
Moscow's initiative.

Castro was furious when Moscow agreed with Washington behind his back to
withdraw the missiles in return for withdrawal of American missiles in Turkey.
The guarantee the Cuban leader finally wound up with came in the form of
President John F. Kennedy's pledge against future invasion, a pledge made in
return for Khrushchev's pledge not to install offensive weapons in Cuba.


There is considerable evidence now that Castro chafes at his dependence on
Moscow. He refused to attend the Communist bloc economic summit last June. He
held out until the last in joining the Soviet-led boycott of the Los Angeles
Olympics, and then he ostentatiously received Olympic organizer Peter Ueberroth
in Havana to express his continued devotion to the games. He told the American
writer Tad Szulc last January that he had felt ''humiliated'' by the way the
missile crisis had been resolved over his head in 1962. And he put it to
Representative William V. Alexander Jr., Democrat of Arkansas, last August that,
since America was able to treat Communist China as ''another sovereign state,
why not Cuba?'' THE REVOLUTIONS in Eastern Europe were delivered by the Red Army
at the end of World War II. Only Yugoslavia's Tito made his own, and he soon
broke away from Moscow's heavy-handed tutelage. Vietnam's Ho Chi Minh used the
Soviet Union and China to help win his revolution. Now, Vietnam relies on the
distant Russians to support it against neighboring China.

In the Western Hemisphere, revolutionaries start off lonely, inspired perhaps by
ideas and word of victories from afar, but moved by their own inner flames.
Mexico's Emiliano Zapata was an example. Nicaragua's Augusto Sandino was
another.

Sandino's revolt in 1927 was a fully native movement - at once social and
national in the sense that it sought far-reaching changes in the system imposed
by the local authoritarian regime, and it felt that the changes were blocked by
the presence of foreign power playing a colonial role in denial of effective
independence. The 2,000 United States marines who were on hand to reinforce the
Somoza government were perceived as, and indeed were, the allies and enforcers
of a local order based on repression and greed. Sandino's movement was wiped
out, but not his memory. It took more than two generations of the gradual decay
and corruption of the initially vigorous dictatorship of Anastasio Somoza for
Sandino's ideas to be revived. Somoza's theft of much of the $200 million of
humanitarian aid sent in 1972 - after an earthquake devastated Nicaragua - and
his contemptuous disdain for his compatriots' suffering turned the tide of
apathy.

The revolutionary movement collected many disparate elements in the effort to
oppose Somoza. There was help, sought for and granted, from outside - weapons
and political support from Cuba, sanctuary and political support from democratic
Costa Rica, for example. There were Communists, and militants to the left of the
Communists, and there were businessmen, middle-class professionals, publishers,
dedicated democrats. They succeeded, after a ravaging civil war, in overthrowing
existing power. Toward the end of the struggle, the United States withdrew the
support it had continued to provide Somoza in accord with its standing policy of
backing ''legitimate'' governments. Somoza fell, and the United States joined
with the Organization of American States in recognizing the new ruling junta.
But because of the new government's ideological mix, Washington was tentative
with urgently needed reconstruction aid.

The United States seems to prefer to deal with monochromes - all white hats or
all black hats. We have a way of intensifying polarization instead of countering
it. That serves the extremists.

I was in Havana in 1979 when there was a summit meeting of non-aligned countries
and when the newly victorious Sandinistas appeared on the international scene
for the first time, jubilant in their camouflage suits and gun belts. I had the
impression that Cuba then was positively encouraging them to look and sound as
radical as possible. The object was to scare off Washington and thus to isolate
the moderates, and, as a result, to develop a strong alliance with Cuba. It
worked rather well. The internal fight for supremacy that comes after every
successful mass overthrow of power isn't finished yet in Nicaragua, although the
moderates have been progressively excluded.

The situation in El Salvador hasn't evolved as far. But there, too, the rebels
consist of a mixed ideological group. They have internal arguments, as did the
Bishop regime in Grenada. Which way they'll go depends on whether the dramatic
meeting between President Jose Napoleon Duarte and the rebel leaders in the town
of La Palma last month will lead anywhere.  ASENIOR AMERican diplomat who is
known as a hard-liner (he spoke on the condition that he not be named) noted
recently that it was important to realize that initiators of current revolutions
in Central America come from the middle class. There is, he said, ''a big moral
element'' in their commitment. They are the ones who know some history,
especially the history of the Monroe Doctrine, which began as the promise of a
young United States to protect newly independent Latin America from colonial-
minded Europe. It evolved into Theodore Roosevelt's ''big stick,'' to stop what
Roosevelt called ''chronic wrongdoing or an impotence.''

These rebels seek help from the enemy of their local enemy, and too often they
find the United States in support of their enemy. The late Senator Frank Church
said in a speech in 1972, trying to explain the failure of the Kennedy
Administration's Alliance for Progress to promote democracy in Latin America:
''We failed because we had neither the ability to impose reform from the
outside, nor the will to pursue it from within. The one was simply impossible;
the other went against the priority of our own interests as we conceived them.
However much we may have wanted reform and development, we wanted stability,
anti-Communism, and a favorable climate for investment, even more.'' And 11
years later, shortly before he died, Church said again, ''Those who ought to be
our allies - those who are ready to fight for justice for the impoverished
majority - find themselves, as revolutionaries, opposed not only to the ruling
forces in their own societies, but in the United States.''

This is why the important question isn't whether or not revolutionaries start
out as Communists. They start out seeking power to change society, and they use
the opportunities they can find or create. They collect allies as best they can,
sincerely or insincerely promising democracy. They may not always know
themselves which are their most basic beliefs. They may start with the
conviction that ''the people'' will know what to do when freed from a dead hand
of authority, and they may move on to a view that their own society is not yet
competent to practice democracy under their self- perpetuating tutelage. Or they
may start with the arrogant conviction that they know what is best for ''the
people.'' Doubt and tolerance are not the agitator's tools.

The intention is less decisive, however, than the way the struggle develops. The
longer and harder it is, the more the most ambitious, most intransigent and
shrewdest among them is likely to come out on top. People who reject brass
knuckles aren't as adept at infighting as those who use them, and the fiercer
the battle, the more likely that victory will go to the toughest. The fiercer
the battle, too, the more temptation there is for the toughest to importune the
enemy of their enemies for help - even at the risk of endangering independence
in the future.

After the toughest victory, their appeal tarnishes. Revolutionaries promise too
much. Running a country well takes a different set of skills from fighting a
revolution. As consent wanes and achievement flags, they tighten the reins and
look for outside guarantees. One way is to move closer to Moscow. Another is to
break out of isolation and create allies by supporting other revolutionaries in
the region. The conditions, not only of coming to power but of justifying it as
time goes by, have a crucial impact on behavior. As Carlos Franqui said, quoting
Castro, ''All criticism becomes opposition and all opposition becomes
counterrevolutionary.'' THIS IS NOT A REASsuring analysis. But it is more
descriptive than either the thesis that Moscow launches all the trouble or the
thesis that anti- Communist reformers are driven to Moscow by American
antagonism. They are not, but American hostility helps the pro-Communists
overwhelm the moderates. Senator Church urged a longer-range approach, creating
''conditions in which the logic of geographic proximity, access to American
capital and technology and cultural opportunity can begin to exert their
inexorable long-term pull.'' Then, he said, ''the wicked little oligarchies, no
longer assured of American protection against the grievances of their own
people, may even be forced to make the essential concessions.'' He predicted
that, as free-enterprise countries set the standard, ''We will marvel at the
progress in our own neighborhood, measured from the day we stopped trying to
repress the irrepressible and exchanged our unreasonable fear of Communism for a
rekindled faith in freedom.''

It isn't just a matter of shoveling out money, as the Peruvian writer Mario
Vargas Llosa has made clear. Aid helps, but more important is encouragement of
the dispersion of political power, the breaking down of barriers to change by
support for moderates of all kinds. The best vaccine against totalitarian
revolution, Vargas Llosa insists, is democracy. Repression equals compression.
It builds up a head of steam, and no revolution can proceed without the impetus
of such pressure. The masses can't be mobilized for sacrifice if they can move
toward their goals by voting, and voting the leaders out again if they don't
deliver. It is true that there are always a few who want to be in society's
vanguard, a desire that itself shows an appetite for power. But most people are
preoccupied with everyday life, and if they feel they have a fair chance to
influence change, they will accept progress achieved step-by-step. They will
push aside fanatics, utopians, the call for all-or-nothing.

In 1957, when he was a United States Senator, John F. Kennedy said, ''The most
powerful single force in the world today is neither Communism nor capitalism,
neither the H-bomb nor the guided missile - it is Man's eternal desire to be
free and independent.''

What Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, chief United States representative to the United
Nations, calls ''friendly authoritarians'' may seem less of a threat to the
United States than what she calls ''hostile totalitarians,'' but both types of
regimes are subject to this compulsive yearning of their people to be free. The
leaders of both are dangerous to their neighbors and to security. The way toward
a truly free world is also the way toward a peaceful world because of the nature
of revolution and of its antidote, democracy, which means perpetual re= form.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Fidel Castro (page 82); photo of Sandinista militiamen

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE NEW YORK TIMES BOOK REVIEW PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 776 words


Nov. 11, 1984Fiction*1

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  *2

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  *3

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  *4

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) A human
detective from Earth investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.
*5

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.  *6*

SINNERS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) Sex and scandal in Hollywood.  *7

BLOOD AND ORCHIDS, by Norman Katkov.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four Hawaiian youths
are accused of raping a Navy officer's wife.  *8

FIREFOX DOWN!  by Craig Thomas. (Bantam, $3.95.) The theft of a secret Soviet
warplane.  *9

THE FRANCHISE, by Peter Gent. (Ballantine, $3.95.) Behind the scenes of
professional football.  10

WINGS OF OMEN, edited by Robert Lynn Asprin and Lynn Abbey. (Ace Fantasy,
$2.95.) Eight stories by various authors about a universe called ''Thieves'
World.'' 11*

DINOSAUR PLANET SURVIVORS, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) In
this sequel to ''Dinosaur Planet,'' two natives awaken after 40 years to find a
new generation of sinister inhabitants.12

THE VULCAN ACADEMY MURDERS, by Jean Lorrah. (Pocket, $3.50.) Mr. Spock and his
crew investigate dirty doings on his native planet, Vulcan: a ''Star Trek''
novel. 13

MORETA: Dragonlady of Pern, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.) On a
distant planet, humans and dragons fight a spore invasion.  14

WHEN LOVE COMMANDS, by Jennifer Wilde.  (Avon, $3.95.) An Englishwoman in the
clutches of a sadistic Russian count.  15

GRANDMASTER, by Warren Murphy and Molly Cochran. (Pinnacle, $3.95.) Two chess
prodigies in the world of espionage.





 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.  *An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.



 Nonfiction

General *1

MOTHERHOOD, THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION, by Erma Bombeck. (Dell, $3.95.) Humor
by the syndicated columnist.  *2

CORONER, by Thomas T. Noguchi with Joseph DiMona. (Pocket, $3.50.) Accounts of
celebrity deaths by the former Los Angeles County coroner.  *3

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) Americans flee an
Iranian prison.  *4

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  *5

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  *6

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy League
graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  *7*

BLESS YOU BOYS, by Sparky Anderson with Dan Ewald. (Contemporary Books, $7.95.)
A diary of the Detroit Tigers' 1984 season by its manager.  *8

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspiration. *9*

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) A helicopter pilot's life in
Vietnam.  10*

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) Men who won't grow up. 11*


INTREPID'S LAST CASE, by William Stevenson.  (Ballantine, $3.95.) How the famous
spymaster looked for a mole in British intelligence.



Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous *1

GARFIELD LOSES HIS FEET, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.  *2*


NO MORE SECRETS FOR ME, by Oralee Wachter.  (Little, Brown, $4.95.) How children
can defend themselves against sexual abuse.  *3

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  *4

IN SEARCH OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson.  (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $4.95.) A
new collection of the syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

In The Times Book Review today ranks several fiction titles incorrectly. The
affected positions, with their correct titles, are 5 (''Sinners,'' by Jackie
Collins), 6 (''The Auerbach Will,'' by Stephen Birmingham), 8 (''The
Franchise,'' by Peter Gent), 9 (''Firefox Down!'' by Craig Thomas), 10
(''Dinosaur Planet Survivors,'' by Anne McCaffrey), 11 (''Moreta: Dragonlady of
Pern,'' by Anne McCaffrey), 12 (''When Love Commands,'' by Jennifer Wilde), 13
(''Grandmaster,'' by Warren Murphy and Molly Cochran), 14 (''Cherokee,'' by
Donald Clayton Porter) and 15 (''First Love, Wild Love,'' by Janelle Taylor)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BRITAIN'S AMERICAN BAND

BYLINE: By Robert Palmer

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1131 words


Robert Palmer is a rock critic for The New York Times.  DANCE WITH THE DEVIL

The Rolling Stones and Their Times.  By Stanley Booth.  Illustrated. 385 pp. New
York: Random House. $16.95.  SYMPHONY FOR THE DEVIL The Rolling Stones Story.
By Philip Norman.  Illustrated. 413 pp. New York: Linden Press/Simon & Schuster.
$17.95.


Now that the private lives and public accomplishments of the Beatles have been
subject to the minutest scrutiny in books written by friends, enemies, former
business associates, astrologers, wives, lovers and journalists of every stripe,
the publishing industry has focused its attention on the Rolling Stones. Leading
the fall list of Stones studies are two ambitious books cursed with silly,
interchangeable titles, Stanley Booth's ''Dance With the Devil'' and Philip
Norman's ''Symphony for the Devil.'' The Rolling Stones have not posed or
postured as diabolists for well over a decade, nor do the titles accurately
reflect the books' contents. Furthermore, titles and subjects are practically
the only thing these books have in common.

In ''Dance With the Devil,'' Stanley Booth gets closer to the essence of the
Rolling Stones and their world than any previous author. His book recounts the
band members' histories from childhood through adolescence, and on through the
1960's to the end of an entire generation's rock dreams at Altamont, where
members of Hell's Angels, hired as security guards, killed a concertgoer during
a Stones performance. More important, the book is a chronicle of Mr. Booth's
seduction by Glimmer - a word that became synonymous with the Stones' dark
allure when Mick Jagger and Keith Richards began calling themselves the Glimmer
Twins - and what it cost him.

Armed with a contract to write a book about the Stones, Mr. Booth approached
them in the mid-60's, and he rapidly became a member of the band's inner circle,
traveling with Mr. Jagger and Mr. Richards by limousine, private jet and
helicopter, staying up all night with them listening to blues and soul tapes and
talking music. He virtually lived with them and with the other Stones all day
every day throughout their 1969 tour. After witnessing Altamont at first hand
from behind Keith Richards's amplifier (his description of this rock debacle is
the most authoritative and insightful account in print), he continued his
research by living for several months as Keith Richards's house guest in
England. He returned home to Memphis, Tenn., with a taste for expensive and
dangerous drugs and without the woman who, he insists, was the great love of his
life. For the next 15 years he lived in a cabin in Arkansas's Ozark Mountains,
where he wrote, and rewrote and wrote again, ''Dance With the Devil.''

Mr. Booth seems to have kept his eyes wide open and his pen poised throughout
his adventures with the Stones, despite his participation in their life style.
And his affection for the band did not keep him from writing about the seamy
underside of the Stones' world in the 60's. The drug dealers who followed the
band from town to town and hotel to hotel and were on call 24 hours a day; the
associates paid to hold drug supplies so that the Stones themselves were not in
jeopardy when traveling and crossing borders; the venal tour personnel who
filled their hotel rooms with groupies by promising to introduce them to Mick
Jagger - they are all here.

Bill Wyman and Charlie Watts, the band's incomparable rhythm section, have been
given short shrift in other books about the Stones. In ''Dance With the Devil''
they emerge as three-dimensional characters who shun drugs, have both been
happily married since the mid-60's and are still somewhat bemused by the
accident of fate that made them key members of the world's most celebrated and
most notorious rock and roll band.

''Dance With the Devil'' is not a potted history of the Rolling Stones, nor does
it pretend to be. Like Michael Herr's ''Dispatches,'' another definitive book
from the 60's that absorbed its author's energies for more than a decade, it is
a personal vision of how the 60's, from Vietnam to Altamont, shaped us all. As
such it is the only book about the Stones that I would recommend both to the
general reader and to the most devoted fan. Both will find an epiphany on almost
every page.

Philip Norman's ''Shout! The Beatles in Their Generation'' was an admirable
social and cultural history. The subject brought out the best in Mr. Norman, a
seasoned British journalist who is a clever and thorough researcher and writes
concisely elegant prose. His point of view is unabashedly British and the
Beatles were an unabashedly British band who indulged in nostalgic evocations of
their childhoods, like ''Penny Lane'' and ''Strawberry Fields Forever.'' Songs
such as these are not to be found in the collected works of the Rolling Stones,
a British band whose musical idiom and cultural stance are unabashedly American.

Pop-diabolism notwithstanding, American music, especially black music, has
always been the Rolling Stones' true religion. Apparently, blues and its
stepchild, rhythm and blues, are subjects about which Mr. Norman knows little
and understands less. He devotes only two pages to the music that was the
Stones' original inspiration, and they are pages rife with cultural
misunderstanding and factual error. ''When the black man was alone and
destitute, he played the blues,'' Mr. Norman solemnly informs us. ''With a roof
over his head, however leaky, he played rhythm and blues.'' These sentences are
typical of the attempts at musical analysis scattered throughout the book.

If ''Symphony for the Devil'' was a detailed and astute chronicle of the Stones
in their milieu, its musicological faults could easily be overlooked. But the
book's most engaging portrayals of swinging London in the 60's are rehashes of
material Mr. Norman put to better use in ''Shout!'' And in failing to understand
the mystique of the blues and the Stones' plunge into its dark undertow, he has
failed to understand their most basic motivations. His month-by-month chronology
of the band's lives and times ends at the dawn of the 1970's; the last 15 years
are covered in two brief chapters, in a fragmentary, muddled sort of way. Mr.
Norman chooses to overlook the Stones' continuing creativity and resilience
because he is not that familiar with the careers of their early influences, men
like Chuck Berry and Bo Diddley who have been active for 30-odd years and are
still vital, still rocking.

''Symphony for the Devil'' has its moments - interesting details, clever turns
of phrase. But on the whole it is half-baked, a slick study in futility. It
fails to justify its retelling of an all too familiar tale with fresh ideas,
observations or insights.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Mick Jagger in performance

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 11, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOR L.I.'S VETERANS, MEMORIES ARE MIXED

BYLINE: By SHELLY FEUER DOMASH

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 1, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1808 words


FOR over a century, veterans of foreign wars have been returning to Long Island.
Veterans of World War II and the Korean conflict, sensing unparalleled
opportunities, took advantage of low-cost mortgages and the proximity to New
York City to spur the Island's growth.

Many, particularly veterans of the ''older'' wars, retain proud memories of
their service. Others, reflecting the experience of unpopular conflicts, such as
the one in Vietnam, sometimes seem bitter or disillusioned.

The Island has one of the highest concentrations of veterans in the United
States. According to the Veterans Administration Center in Northport, 343,300
veterans live in Nassau and Suffolk Counties. As the nation gets set for the
annual Veterans Day observance, here is a look at some Long Island veterans.

For Mike Santora, 89 years old, remembering what war was like is a little
difficult now, but being a patriot is not. His fellow members of the Veterans of
Foreign Wars post in East Meadow boast that he never misses a meeting.

Mr. Santora is proud of the time he served in the military, both in the action
against Mexico's Pancho Villa under Gen. John J. (Black Jack) Pershing and later
in World War I. Today his life revolves around his love for his country and his
love for his seven children, 27 grandchildren and 10 great-grandchildren.

Born in Italy, Mr. Santora came to this country in 1912. Five years later, he
enlisted in the United States Army to serve in Mexico, and he recalls living in
tents with gas lights while Pancho Villa's men attacked. ''They could see us but
we couldn't see them,'' he said.

He remained fighting in Mexico until he was assigned to combat duty in Europe
during World War I. As his ship approached Europe, it was attacked and sunk.
Swimming to shore, Mr. Santora began his first of three years in a command
dubbed ''The Sightseeing Six'' because of the members' peregrinations in Germany
and France.

Smiling as he recalled the experience, Mr. Santora said: ''We had fun.''

He was to see more wars in the ensuing years, but it is the Vietnam war that
still gets him angry. ''It was a politics war,'' he said. ''They would reach a
place and then stop. Those poor boys died for nothing.''

Now retired, Mr. Santora spent much of his life as a bricklayer on the Island.
Today he has his memories, his family and his country. ''I'm proud of this
country,'' he said. ''It's my life.''



Cyrus Juster is also proud of his country and of the time he spent in combat.

He grew up in Oyster Bay, returned after World War II and now lives there with
his family. For Mr. Juster, it was not Long Island that changed because of the
war but the world around it, as well as himself.

When Mr. Juster was 19 years old, he left his job at the Grumman Corportion and
enlisted in the Army. During that time, he said, there was no hesitation about
enlisting. ''It was very simple - there was a lot of respect for the draft
board,'' he said. ''It was no question of choice. It was a war of dedication.''

While he was being trained in this country to become an engineer, he was
transferred from his school, almost overnight, he remembers, to overseas duty.
It was July 1944, and he soon saw action in France, Belgium, the Netherlands and
Germany. In January 1945 he was wounded by a sniper.

''I don't remember the pain, suffering or the cold,'' he said. ''I can laugh at
the problems now.''

''At that time,'' he went on, ''the Army was notorious for re-routing vets back
into Europe through replacement depots.'' He was one of those, and he continued
to serve in the war until March 1946.

''We spent our first night on the line in the foxholes,'' he said. ''I was
scared, and the quietness didn't help. Suddenly the stillness was shattered by
the noise of an object falling into my foxhole. I expected a grenade to explode.
How long I waited for the blast I don't know, but it seemed ages. Finally I felt
around in the darkness until I found the missile. It was an apple that had
fallen from a nearby tree.''

After three years in the service, he returned home. ''It was exactly the same,''
he said. ''When you come home to a village like Oyster Bay, things just weren't
that different. It is still the same today.''

As for the war itself, Mr. Juster said: ''It was a simple war. They had rifles,
we had rifles, they had tanks, we had tanks, they had airplanes, we had
airplanes. It was an honest war, different from Vietnam and Korea. When we came
back, they honored us. There were fireboats and spray. We won the war and freed
a lot of people who needed help. It was instant freedom. Not the same as other
wars.''

When Mr. Juster came home, he took advantage of opportunities. Under the G.I.
Bill of Rights, he entered Adelphi University as one of the first male students.

''I don't think I would've entered college,'' he said. ''I would've been forced
to seek employment and go on from there. Tuition in those days was expensive,
only a wealthy person's capability, especially on Long Island.''

Today Mr. Juster is the chief financial officer for Haddad and Sons, Ltd.

He says he has no desire to go back to Europe to see where he fought.



Coming home to the Island was not as easy for Jack Montalbono, 64. He still
finds it difficult to talk about the war. Having fought in both World War II and
Korea, he says he still keeps most of his experiences to himself, and does not
discuss them even with his wife and children.

''Even my wife, she'll never know what I've been through,'' he said. ''I try to
blank it out of my mind.''

For Mr. Montalbono, Korea was much different from World War II. ''I was a
prisoner of war in World War II,'' he said, ''and when I came home there was a
big hullabaloo. In Korea, we were wondering what we were all doing there, and we
never found out. We never even knew what Korea was then.''

He recalls a lot of young boys fighting. ''They didn't know what it was all
about,'' he said. ''A few of us veterans, we straightened them out. They never
had even heard a shot fired before they arrived.''

During the Korean War, Mr. Montalbono recalls helping to push back the North
Korean army in Inchon, and then seeing Chinese soldiers. ''We thought the war
was over, and we were told we would be home by Christmas,'' he said. ''Then we
saw the Chinese behind us and realized we were trapped.''

''They put us in ships, sent us back to Seoul, gave us some clothes and sent us
back to fight the Chinese again. We never did get home for Christmas.''

When he came back to Long Island, he said, he was tired of people and of just
about everything. ''My wife straightened me out,'' he said.

He is now retired from the Brooklyn Union Gas Company.



Dealing with soldiers who were hit was part of Dr. Frank Capelli's duties during
the Vietnam War.

In 1968 he was a pediatric resident at Long Island Jewish Hospital in New Hyde
Park. His wife was three months pregnant when he received his orders to report
to Vietnam. Today he lectures at the hospital on tropical medicine and on what
it was like to spend a year in Vietnam.

Although it was a difficult experience, he used his time in Vietnam as a
learning experience, one that he used to build on in his career.

Assigned to the 27th Surgical Hospital in Chu Lai, Vietnam, Dr. Capelli soon
found himself on the graves detail.

''We had to examine American bodies and sign death certificates and cause of
death,'' he said. ''Those were the most depressing days - some bodies were
totally unidentifiable.''

Some of the worst injuries, he recalls, were those of burns caused by napalm
bombs. ''The burns were devastating. Within a few days, most of the victims
would die.''

Coming home was a difficult adjustment, eased somewhat by having to spend an
additional year in the Army in this country.

''I was a lot wiser,'' he said. ''I had to deal with death for a full year. I
lived with it every day. I learned to appreciate life more. When I came home,
Vietnam was very unpopular, and no one wanted to talk about it.''

Dr. Capelli relives his experiences every year as he shows his Vietnam slides to
residents at the hospital. He recalls the horrors, the death, but he also
recalls the closeness of the people who were thrown together to fight a war from
a hospital.

Today his practice is devoted to Long Island children, children far different
from those he saw during the war. Time has healed some of his emotional wounds,
and today Dr. Capelli is able to have a degree of distance from his experiences.
''It bothers me that it hasn't affected me more,'' he said.



It has affected Paul M. Portz. He still lives with horrors he witnessed as a
marine in Vietnam, and still tries to cope with them. Although he has a good job
and a loving family, he still has to deal with what happened 15 years ago.

At 19 Mr. Portz tried to find a job on the Island, but everywhere he applied,
potential employers knew he would be drafted, he says, and he was denied
employment. He decided to enlist in the Marines, and with his orders to report
to Vietnam in his back pocket, he got married. Two weeks later, he was in
Vietnam.

''It didn't hit me all at once,'' he said. ''It was one thing to learn to shoot
a gun in training, but when you landed and heard the shooting, you knew it was
the real thing and that they weren't fooling around.''

It was dealing with death that he found most difficult.

''Some of the hardest times were in boot camp,'' he said. ''You got all the way
through it with the same guys and then get to Vietnam and in a couple of days
lose them. They would tell you when you got there not to make friends because
you might have to bury them. After a few months, I would tell the new guys the
same thing.''

When he returned home, he remembers feeling hatred for the Vietnamese and
bitterness at his experiences.

''They took time out of my life and killed a lot of my friends,'' he said.
''When the Government granted amnesty to the draft resisters, that was the worst
part. We had been slapped around so much, how much more can we take? They ran
out when their country needed them. They may have had a legitimate gripe, but
when your country calls you, how can you run away?''

Today Mr. Portz is the first Vietnam veteran to command the 2736 East Meadow
Post of the Veterans of Foreign Wars.

After the war, Mr. Portz said, he spent many lonely moments reflecting and many
sleepless nights. Today, he knows he has put up a wall to protect himself
against those feelings, but sometimes that wall is shattered.

He recalls the time his 11-year-old daughter asked him a question that had been
asked him numerous times before, ''Daddy, how many people did you kill?''

He couldn't answer her. ''I just cringed,'' he said, ''and walked away.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dr. Frank Capelli; photo of Cyrus Juster ; photo of Jack
Montalbono; photo of Paul Portz; photo of Mike Santora

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

PRESIDENT ACCEPTS VIETNAM MEMORIAL

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 975 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 11


President Reagan formally accepted the privately financed Vietnam Veterans
memorial for the nation today, calling it a symbol of healing.

''This memorial is a symbol of both past and current sacrifice,'' Mr. Reagan
said to a throng estimated by the United States Park Police at 150,000 people.

''The war in Vietnam threatened to tear our society apart, and the political and
philosophical disagreements that separated each side continue, to some extent,''
he said. ''It's been said that these memorials reflect a hunger for healing.''



'Loyalty and Valor' Praised

''I do not know if perfect healing ever occurs,'' Mr. Reagan continued, ''but I
know that in one sense when a bone is broken and it is knit together well, it
will in the end be stronger than if it had not been broken. I hope that before
my days as Commander in Chief are ended the process will be completed.''

Mr. Reagan praised the veterans of Vietnam, calling them ''true patriots'' and
Americans of ''loyalty and valor.'' He made several references to the 2,500
American servicemen still listed as missing in action in Vietnam. ''Some may
still be saved,'' he said.

As the President left the dais at the two-acre memorial beside the Lincoln
Memorial, he was cheered.

Jan C. Scruggs, the president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, which
transferred ownership of the memorial to the National Park Service today,
announced that there would be another reunion of Vietnam veterans in 1988.

Mr. Reagan delivered part of his brief address in such a subdued voice that many
in the crowd had difficulty hearing him. In some passages, the elaborate public
address system failed to make his voice audible above the noise of jet planes
taking off from the nearby National Airport.

Most in the crowd also could not see the President.  They had been concentrated
by the police at the northwest corner of the Lincoln Memorial reflecting pool,
where they were unable to see the dais because of intervening trees and a
20-foot-high scaffolding for television cameras.

Concern About Security

Concern about security, cited as the reason for Mr. Reagan's absence from the
first ''national salute'' to Vietnam veterans when the memorial was opened two
years ago, was unusually high today.

Spectators were required to pass through long lines of metal detectors set up
under the trees, and the President's arrival at the dais was shielded from view
by a 40-foot-long plywood tunnel through which he and Mrs. Reagan walked from
their car.

The President's voice fell as he made what has by now become a common, often
awestruck, comment of visitors: that each person's reflection in the dark,
polished stone of the memorial wall seems to embrace the names of the dead
inscribed there. ''Those who fought in Vietnam were part of us,'' he said.
''They reflect us.''

''Let me say this to Vietnam veterans gathered here today,'' Mr. Reagan said.
''When you returned home, you brought solace to the loved ones of those who
fell, but little solace was given to you.''

'There Has Been Rethinking'

''Some of your countrymen were unable to distinguish between their native
dislike for war and the stainless patriotism of those who suffered its scars,''
he continued. ''But there has been a rethinking there, too. Now we can say to
you, and say as a nation, thank you for your courage.''

The ceremony today was to transfer the memorial wall to the Government, and also
a new statue unveiled last week in a gesture of compromise to critics of the
memorial's design.

The monument was originally designed as a sunken, 494-foot-long wall of polished
granite bearing the names of 58,022 Americans killed or missing in Vietnam. The
new statue is placed before the broad ''V'' formed by the wall.

While the wall, which the Park Service says is on its way to becoming
Washington's most-visited monument, has received emotional and generally
favorable responses from visitors, its critics denounced it as ''a wall of
shame.'' The statue, dedicated Friday, is of three American servicemen who seem,
like today's visitors, to be scanning the wall for their names.

'Bravo!' for WestmorelandBefore the President arrived at 4:30 P.M., in the
remarks by leaders of veterans' organizations and officers who had commanded in
Vietnam, the retired Army Gen. William C. Westmoreland, the former Vietnam
theater commander, received a rousing welcome. There were cries of ''Bravo,
West!''

Many in the crowd, which gathered in chilly weather under a gray sky, wore
jungle-camouflage combat uniforms.

Mr. Scruggs, a former enlisted man in Vietnam, whose group raised $7 million in
private donations to complete the memorial, reminded the crowd of the struggle
to build the monument when he introduced Secretary of the Interior William P.
Clark.

''I have a few words to say for Jan Scruggs,'' Mr. Clark began. ''Instead of
Vietnam veterans building a memorial to give the Government,'' he said, ''maybe
the Government should have built a memorial to give the Vietnam veterans.'' The
remark brought cheers.

After his remarks, the President sat at a desk on the dais and, using several
pens, signed the document transferring the memorial to the Park Service. As he
rose to leave, he handed Mr. Scruggs one of the pens.

This morning, Defense Secretary Caspar W.  Weinberger was the President's
representative at the traditional Veterans Day wreath- laying at the Tomb of the
Unknown Soldier at Arlington National Cemetery. ''A nation which forgets the
sacrifices of its heroes risks its very existence,'' Mr. Weinberger said in
remarks to about 5,000 people, many of them Vietnam veterans.

He said that unlike those who served in Vietnam, servicemen today ''do not bear
the burden of wondering whether the American people understood or appreciated
their tremendous sacrifice.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 14, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, a Washington dispatch on Monday, about the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, misattributed the comment that ''instead of Vietnam veterans
building a memorial to give the Government, maybe the Government should have
built a memorial to Vietnam veterans.'' The speaker was Jan C. Scruggs,
president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, not Secretary of the Interior
William P. Clark.


GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan (page A16); photo of Edward Manuel and Larry
Downing (page A16); photo of Philip Whicker and Sam Davis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REV. KING DIES AT 84; WITH SON, A LEADER IN RIGHTS MOVEMENT

BYLINE: By PETER KERR

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1175 words


The Rev. Martin Luther King Sr., one of the South's most influential black
clergymen for decades and the father of the slain civil rights leader who bore
his name, died of heart disease yesterday in Atlanta. He was 84 years old.

Mr, King, who suffered from cardiac problems in recent years, was stricken at
home yesterday evening and rushed to Crawford W. Long Memorial Hospital in
Atlanta where he was pronounced dead, a hospital spokesman said.

For 44 years Mr. King served as pastor of the Ebenezer Baptist Church, one of
the South's leading black congregations, and he remained a major force in the
civic life of Atlanta after retiring from that pulpit.

Though he was a pioneer leader in Atlanta civil rights battles, the national
influence of ''Daddy King,'' as he was called, came largely through his son.

In the years after the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. was assassinated in 1968,
Mr. King often made public appearances in which he invoked the memory of his son
and, with Bibilical imagery and rolling spiritual cadences, reminded listeners
of the themes the younger Mr. King had preached: a concern for the poor, a faith
in God, and the promise of change through nonviolence.

''God grant that the President remember always the least,'' Mr. King declared
before the Lincoln Memorial as part of the inauguration ceremony for President
Carter in 1977. ''There will always be more of them than the rest.''

In many ways the life of Martin Luther King Sr. was an American success story.
He rose from the poverty of black rural life in turn-of-the-century Georgia to
become an early and effective civil rights activist, an influential religious
leader, and the father of the Nobel Peace Prize winner who helped inspire the
greatest period of social change in the South since the Civil War. But his life
was stained by repeated tragedy. In 1969, one year after Martin Luther King Jr.
was struck down by an assassin's bullet, Mr. King's only other son, the Rev. A.
D. King, the 38-year- old pastor of a Baptist church in Louisville, Ky., drowned
in a swimming pool accident. Five years later Mr. King's wife, Alberta W. King,
69, was killed by gunfire as she sat at the church organ during a Sunday morning
service. The gunman said that he had gone to the church to kill Martin Luther
King Sr.

But in his last years, Mr. King refused to speak with bitterness about his
family's losses, nor did he swerve from his commitment to nonviolence and his
faith in the ultimate designs of a loving God.

''I do not hate the man who took the life of my dead son,'' he said at a
bicentennial ceremony in Dallas in 1976. ''I am not going to hate the young man
who came and killed my wife. I am every man's brother. I'm going on with my
job.''

Grew Up in GeorgiaMartin Luther King was born Dec. 19, 1899, one of 10 children
in the family of a cotton sharecropper in Stockbridge, Ga., a small town outside
of Atlanta, where he received a sixth- grade education and worked with his
father behind a mule and plow.

When he was 16, the stocky young man left home for Atlanta, with a pair of shoes
slung over his shoulder and the intention of completing his education and
achieving the affluence that only white people in his childhood had known. He
worked as a mechanic's helper and a railroad fireman by day, attended school at
night, and by 1925 had earned a high school diploma. Six years later he received
a bachelor's degree in theology from Morehouse College.

Mr. King had begun preaching in Stockbridge with his mother's encouragement, and
in his early years in Atlanta he became the pastor of two small churches,
leading services at each on alternate Sundays.

In 1926 he married Alberta Williams, the daughter of the pastor of Ebenezer
Baptist Church. After the Rev. Adam Daniel Williams died in 1931, Mr. King took
over the pastorate, which he used to swell the membership of the church and to
launch numerous local drives for the rights of blacks.

Fought Early Legal BattlesAs a member of the N.A.A.C.P. Social Action Committee
he helped win a legal battle to equalize the salaries of black and white
teachers in Atlanta. He also fought to desegregate the elevators in courthouses,
and challenged restrictaons on voting rights by paying the required poll tax and
passing Georgia's severe ''literacy test'' for blacks. In 1936, he led several
hundred blacks to City Hall in a voting rights march, an event both highly
unusual and dangerous in that era.

Mr. King also became a major figure in black business and educational circles in
Atlanta, serving on the board of a local bank and the governing boards of
Atlanta University, Morehouse College, and the National Baptist Convention.
While never wealthy, Mr. King established his family securely in Atlanta's
middle class.

The second of three children in the King family, Martin Luther King Jr., grew up
in a gingerbread house three blocks from the church. The elder Mr. King was a
stern and commanding figure who, his children recalled, demanded the same thrift
and discipline among his children as he had required of himself. He also
impressed upon his two sons and daughter the immorality of racial discrimination
and the need to fight it.

According to Coretta Scott King, the younger Mr. King's widow, her husband
recalled a day in his childhood when he and his father were stopped in the
family automobile by a police officer.

''Boy, show me your license,'' the police officer said.

Mr. King pointed to Martin Jr. and said: ''You see this child here? He's a boy.
I'm a man.''

Worked in the BackgroundIn later years, when Martin Luther King Jr. led the
battles against racial segregation in Montgomery, Birmingham, Selma and other
cities, his father remained a less public figure in Atlanta, working with the
black community there and looking after his congregation.

Even when the younger Mr. King joined his father as pastor at the Ebenezer
Baptist Church and established the headquarters of the his organization, the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, down the street from the church, the
senior Mr. King played a limited role in the national civil rights movement.

It was after the assassination of his son in April 1968 that Martin Luther King
Sr. became more of a national figure, often appearing on occasions when his
son's work was honored.

The elder Mr. King was a strong supporter of Georgia's former Governor, Jimmy
Carter, in his race for the Presidency in 1976 and 1980, and delivered
invocations to the Democratic National Convention in both years. In 1980 he
testified as a character witness in the Atlanta trial of Bert Lance, the Georgia
banker and former Federal budget director who was aquitted of charges of bank
fraud.

In 1979, he delivered a eulogy at the funeral of Nelson A. Rockefeller from the
pulpit of Riverside Church where his son had once made a major speech denouncing
the war in Vietnam.

''We tarry for a while here,'' he said ''but one day we shall all get home. Thou
has given us a beautiful world.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rev. Martin Luther King Sr. (page B15)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 40 words


A dispatch on the Washington Talk page Oct. 30 about the addition of a statue to
the site of the Vietnam Memorial incompletely described the memorial's black
granite wall. It lists Americans missing in action as well as those killed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


MONDAY, NOVEMBER 12, 1984 International

Israel offered to begin a cease-fire in south Lebanon with the Shiite Moslem
militia there. The move was a response to Lebanon's suspension of troop
withdrawal talks over the arrest of a group of Moslem militiamen. (Page A1,
Column 4.)

Israel destroyed 28 homes of Palestinian farmers in the West Bank of the Jordan
Valley. Israel has now destroyed nearly 80 such houses in the last 10 days,
according to a spokesman for the Civil Administration, the Israeli agency that
governs occupied territories, who said the houses were built without permission.
(A14:4.)

U.S. officials appeared to differ about whether new military and diplomatic
measures were under consideration to counter what the Reagan Admininstration
asserts is an increased flow of Soviet-bloc arms into Nicaragua. The issue of
the arms shipments gained prominence last week after Administration officials
said a Soviet freighter that had arrived at a Nicaraguan port might contain
advanced MIG's fighter planes. (A1:5.)

Salvadorans will meet in Los Angeles Wednesday for a public debate on peace
prospects in El Salvador. Both sides confirmed that senior Salvadoran Government
and leftist rebel officials agreed to participate in the debate, which is being
sponsored by the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions at the
University of California at Santa Barbara. (A7:1.) National

Roman Catholic bishops denounced many elements of present economic practices in
the first draft of a pastoral letter on the United States economy. In calling
for ''a new commitment to economic justice'' the draft proposes sweeping reforms
to better aid the poor. The 120-page draft, ''Pastoral Letter on Catholic Social
Teaching and the U.S. Economy,'' was prepared over a four-year period by a
five-member committee headed by Archbishop Rembert G. Weakland, of Milwaukee.
(A1:6.)

The Vietnam Veterans Memorial, which was built near the Lincoln Memorial in
Washington with private financing, was formally accepted by President Reagan for
the nation in ceremonies attended by 150,000 people. Mr. Reagan said the
memorial was a symbol for healing. (A1:1.)

Baby Fae showed the first signs of rejecting her implanted baboon heart two days
ago but now appears to responding favorably, her physicians said. The rejection
flare-up was treated with drugs and appears to have subsided, they said. (A1:6.)


Users of computer bulletin boards are rallying to the defense of Thomas G.
Tcimpidas, a 33-year television engineer in Los Angeles whose home computer was
seized by the police in May. He was using his computer as a high- technology
version of the supermarket bulletin board to which other computer owners could
connect their computers at no charge. But one of the messages on his board
contained unauthorized telephonecredit card numbers. He is facing charges that
he published the numbers with the intent they be used by people to avoid
telephone charges. (A1:1.)

The New Orleans World Fair closed in debt for more than a $100 million, a figure
that is expected to grow. When the 1984 fair opened in May it was already
burdened with money troubles. Hopes for a total attendance of 15 million were
never realized. (A16:2.) Metropolitan

A fire destroyed a Brooklyn church on the eve of its 125th anniversary
celebration planned by the congregation. Members of the Janes United Methodist
Church at 174 Reid Avenue in the Bedford-Stuyvesant section held Sunday services
at the nearby parsonage. Officials said the fire was suspicious. (A1:3.)

A fire in Waterbury, Conn., that killed four adults and four children is being
investigated by the Fire and Police Departments. The fire destroyed the
wood-frame building at 909 North Main Street. (B1:5.)

Eugenia Sheppard, fashion writer, died of cancer at a Manhattan hospital. She
started her career in 1940 at The New York Herald Tribune. Her Herald Tribune
column, ''Inside Fashion,'' established her as one of the most influential
fashion writers of the 1950's and 60's. (B15:3.)

VETERANS DAY



Parade - Begins at 10 A.M., moving

south on Fifth Avenue from 39th

Street to the Eternal Light Monument on 24th Street. Ceremonies

end about noon.

Parking - Alternate side rules suspended.

Sanitation - No collections; no street

cleaning.

Federal, state and municipal offices

- Closed.

Post offices - Closed; special delivery and express-mail delivery

only.

Banks - Closed.

Stock and commodity markets -

Open.

Transportation - Subways, buses,

Long Island Rail Road, Metro-

North and N.J. Transit trains on

regular weekday schedules; some

N.J. Transit bus schedules may be

altered.

Libraries - Closed.

Schools - Closed.


Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 12, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARMY PERSONNEL ARE SUPPORTING WESTMORELAND

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 769 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland's suit against CBS may not have started fires in
the minds of the public but it has rallied the Army behind the general - not
simply the serving Army but thousands of former officers and enlisted men who
feel that his cause is theirs too.

This strong sentiment appears to arise from two principal sources: the pride and
cohesiveness of the officer corps, and the lingering resentment among officers
and a surprising number of former enlisted men over the role they believe the
media played in eroding public support for the military effort in Vietnam.

The officer corps in this or any professional army is a close-knit body linked
by common and often dangerous experience and fiercely jealous of the honor of
the Army. Dozens of conversations with active and retired officers disclosed
that, although they are concerned with what they consider the wrong done General
Westmoreland, they are equally concerned over what they consider the damage done
to the Army by the 1982 CBS broadcast that gave rise to his $120 million
lawsuit.

Consequently General Westmoreland's ability or popularity is not the major
factor that has shaped opinion. Rather it is the present and future position of
the Army in public opinion.

'More at Stake Than Suit'


''There's a good deal more at stake for the Army and the country than simply
this suit,'' a retired colonel said. ''We have to take the future into account.
It harms the Army, and the other services, if there is a lack of public
confidence in what they report. And if public confidence weakens in that area,
where else will it weaken?''

Expressing resentment over the role of the media, many said they blamed
television for the erosion of public support for the mission of the Army. Others
put the onus on newspapers. Most saw the 1982 CBS documentary, ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' as another example of the media's basic antagonism
toward the military.

Many officers agreed that a state of perfect trust between the military and the
media is impossible in present circumstances. One retired general argued that
the testimony emerging from the Westmoreland trial - which continues tomorrow in
Federal District Court in Manhattan - was ''as good evidence as you can get to
show that the military is a hell of a lot better organized and more
conscientious in dealing with important issues than most of its critics.''

Support From Enlisted Men


General Westmoreland's support does not come solely from active or retired
officers. Over the last year hundreds of former enlisted men and some still
active have sent small sums to help meet his legal fees. One letter writer said
that although he was unemployed, he was sending $5 to help the general in his
fight. Other letters include harsh, and unprintable, attacks on the media.

One retired general who spoke anonymously said: ''You people have to understand
that people like Westmoreland don't lie. They may make mistakes, I don't doubt
Westy made some. But they don't lie period. If they do, then the whole basis of
trust which itself is the basis for command is at risk.''

''Many of us disagreed with some of the things Westy did then,'' a retired
colonel said, ''but nobody would ever accuse him of not being ready to study and
discuss his actions. Hell, when you think of it few men could have brought the
Army through those years with as little damage. In retrospect it was a real
accomplishment.''

'Those Guys Believe That Stuff'


A former sergeant who feels that he lost two years of his life in Vietnam put
the case more pungently: ''Those guys believe that 'duty, honor, country' stuff
they swallow at West Point, and they follow it. You get some bums among the
officers but not those that have that training.''

Some retired and active military personnel expressed the opinion that the worst
possible result of the present court case would be a continuation of the hostile
relationship between the media and the military, which is rooted in the Vietnam
experience.  But some officers feel that the CBS-Westmoreland case will benefit
the services because it will make understandable the Army's interest in getting
on with a war and winning it, and will raise questions about the media's
involvement in covering a war.

''You people always cite the First Amendment,'' a retired general said, ''and
you are correct to do so. What do we cite? Only that we are there to defend the
United States against all enemies. Perhaps someday we could put this to a
national referendum. Like a small bet on the winner?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TRANQUIL LIVES OF DECEPTION: THREE FUGITIVES AND FAMILIES

BYLINE: By ROBERT HANLEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1881 words

DATELINE: NEW LYME, Ohio, Nov. 9


The three fugitives and their wives and 12 small children lived in Ohio for more
than two years, their lives on the lam shielded by carefully stitched
subterfuge.

Everybody was fooled - teachers, landlords, neighbors.

The patterns of deception matched. The men - sought in the murder of a New
Jersey state trooper, an attempted murder or bank robberies - were seen around
the houses only on weekends. The wives kept to their homes, staying away from
schools, shunning chitchat and avoiding neighbors and social commitments except
for occasional car pooling.



A String of Aliases


The exterior of their homes bore images of the innocence of childhood. Inside,
the F.B.I. said, was the stuff of violent radicalism.

While the adults shied away from other adults, the children were allowed to
interact. Principals and teachers, who now are aware of the secrets in the
fugitives' lives, say the youngsters, all from elementary school grades, never
did anything to betray their parents. They emerged as model students. And they
always responded to the latest of a string of aliases that they had spent most
of their young lives mastering.

The fourth grader everybody knew as Eric Carr, for instance, was an honors
student at Pymatuning Valley Middle School this fall. During the summer, Eric,
the oldest son of the couple known as Stephen and Leah Carr, was the star
pitcher on the New Lyme Dodgers, the best Little League team in this town of
about 1,000 people about 50 miles east of Cleveland in the bleak flatlands of
northeastern Ohio.

''He fit in quite well and got along quite well,'' the school's principal,
Robert Dravesky, said. ''He never gave any indication that anything was amiss at
home. I guess he was trained to make friends and do nothing that would cast any
suspicions on himself or his parents.''

The boy's achievements here ended abruptly a little over a week ago. His parents
packed him and his younger sister and brother into a car and headed out again in
their eight-year flight from the law.

Their quick departure was triggered by the arrests on the morning of Sunday,
Nov. 4, of three of his father's friends and fellow fugitives by heavily armed
teams of F.B.I. agents and police officers in a middle-class neighborhood in
Cleveland and in the small farming town of Deerfield, an hour's drive south of
Cleveland.

Among those arrested were Raymond Luc Levasseur, 38 years old, a bank robbery
suspect and fugitive on the Federal Bureau of Investigation's 10-most-wanted
list since 1977; Richard Charles Williams, 36, the accused triggerman in the
murder of the New Jersey state trooper, Philip Lamonaco, in December 1981, and
Jaan Karl Laaman, 36, a German native accused of attempting to murder a
Massachusetts state trooper in February 1982.

Children in Custody


The children of the arrested fugitives have been put into the custody of county
welfare officials and are to be placed with relatives.

In reality, the authorities said, Eric Carr's father is Thomas William Manning,
who is under indictment in the murder of the New Jersey trooper, as well as two
bank robberies in Maine in 1975. While Mr. Manning's friends are in jails now in
Cleveland, he and his family are the object of a nationwide manhunt.

People who knew the families are stunned - not so much by the police recitation
of the violence in the pasts of the men but by the elaborate facades hiding
their identities. No one interviewed along Dodgeville Road, where the Mannings
lived here, or in Cleveland or Deerfield could recall a slip that compromised,
let alone pierced, the disguises.

The authorities came to the Mannings' house in the predawn darkness about 16
hours after the other arrests. It took them that long, they said, to trace a
telephone number for the Mannings uncovered in the earlier arrests.

In the Mannings' apparently hasty departure, they left behind their Great Dane,
and, the police said, a 9-millimeter pistol used to shoot Trooper Lamonaco eight
times.

'Searched My Mind'


Now, their neighbors know all about this and about Mr. Manning being on the
F.B.I.'s most-wanted list.

''I've searched and searched my mind and there was nothing that would make us
suspect them,'' said a woman who lives across Dodgeville Road from the house
where the Mannings lived.

In Deerfield, about a mile from the house where Mr. Levasseur and his wife,
Patricia Gros, lived, is a tiny post office. A wanted poster with Mr.
Levasseur's photograph and his background hangs on a bulletin board. The few who
ever saw him around town never matched his face with the photograph.

Mr. Levasseur and Miss Gros sent their oldest daughters, aged 6 and 8, to first
and third grade at the Southeast Primary School in Ravenna. The girls' real
names are Carmen and Simone, but they were enrolled as Rachael and Cindy
Peterson. Like the school-age children in the two other families, they were
described as well-adjusted, well- behaved, well-clothed, attentive to their
studies, respectful of authority and, always, alert to their aliases.

'Sweet Little Girls'


''They were sweet little girls,'' said the assistant principal, Robert C.
Oglesbee. ''We're as dumbfounded as everybody else.''

In retrospect now, Mr. Oglesbee said, there were some curious elements.

As with the adult suspects in Cleveland and New Lyme, the parents never came to
parent-teacher conferences. ''And the girls were never here for picture day,''
Mr. Oglesbee said.

In Cleveland, the two older girls of Mr. Laaman's wife, Barbara Curzi, were
enrolled at the Benjamin Franklin School. The real names of the girls, who are
10 and 9 years old, are Lucia and Nina. On school records, they are Chris and
Kim Owens.

'We're Flabbergasted'


The principal, Robert Laheta, said both girls were academically gifted and
enrolled in accelerated courses, including French.

''They were beautiful kids,'' he said. ''We're flabbergasted. They just blended
in.''

To passers-by, the homes of the three families seemed normal, happy places.

The Mannings' home was a celebration of autumn. Three smiling jack-o'- lanterns
were lined up at the doorstep. At each pillar on the front porch stood a stack
of dry corn stalks. Next to one stack was a scarecrow.

The backyard at the Levasseurs' house was for child's play. Next to a pear tree
was a jungle gym set. Under the maple tree was a green, turtle- shaped sandbox
bulging with toys. Out in the shed, next to the cabbage and tomato patch, were
three bicycles, a baby carriage and a red wagon.

At Mr. Laaman's and Miss Curzi's home, the front windows wore the faces of
Halloween - a Frankenstein monster, a skeleton, a werewolf.

But inside each home, beyond the decorations and images of childhood, was
evidence of a radical life.

High-Powered Rifles


According to the F.B.I., searches have turned up caches of high-powered rifles
and semiautomatic pistols; bomb-making manuals; communiques of the United
Freedom Front, a revolutionary group, about bombings of office buildings in and
around New York City; handwritten surveillance notes about two of those
corporate targets, and about $32,000 in cash.

Mr. Levasseur and Miss Gros began renting their farmhouse in July 1983 for $275
a month.

''They were about the best tenants we ever had,'' said Sarah Karas, the wife of
the landlord. ''They hever had any complaint and they always got the rent in by
money order through the mail a week ahead of time.''

All three families used money orders or cashier's checks for their bills.

'Just Very Quiet'


Mrs. Karas and her husband Peter are as amazed as everyone else.

''We haven't been able to come up with anything that would give the slightest
hint,'' she said. ''They were just very quiet.''

The story around was that Mr. Levasseur was a regional sales manager for a
cash-register company and traveled a lot. Mr. Laaman was said to work as a
salesman for a pharmaceuticals company. Mr. Manning told anyone who asked that
he was a long-haul trucker.

On Monday mornings, neighbors said, Mr. Manning left the house in a suit and
tie. In retrospect, some people are asking why a trucker would dress like that.

The job descriptions, the police say, were all fakes.

Each family kept a big dog and posted warning signs at their homes. Mr. Laaman
had a Doberman, Mr. Levasseur had a German shepherd, and the Mannings, the Great
Dane.

''He was just as nice as can be,'' one boy, who was a teammate of the Manning
boy on the New Lyme Dodgers, said of Mr. Manning.

This boy's mother and Mrs. Manning used to take turns driving the boys to games.
The car pooling was arranged not by the mothers but by the boys.

Unsuccessful Raids


Mr. Levasseur's and Mr. Manning's penchant for living in rented, isolated
farmhouses was established before the 1981 murder of Trooper Lamonaco on
Interstate 80 near the Pennsylvania border. Back then, they lived in secluded
Pennsylvania towns, about 30 miles apart. Within a day or two of the murder,
their homes were raided. But the families had gone.

School records show all three families settled in parts of Cleveland in time for
the 1982 academic year. The Mannings and Levasseurs moved to the Ohio
countryside in the summer of 1983.

The New Jersey state police have spent more than $1 million pursuing them in
their biggest manhunt since the kidnapping of Charles A. Lindbergh's baby in
1932.

Vietnam War Veterans


Except for Mr. Laaman, all the adult suspects are New England natives. Mr.
Manning and Mr. Levasseur, both Vietnam War veterans, cemented their friendship
in the mid-1970's in a prison- reform group in Maine called SCAR - for Statewide
Correction Alliance for Reform, the authorities said.

They said that initially the group was genuinely interested in creating better
conditions for prison inmates. But a more militant faction in the group,
including Mr. Manning and Mr. Levasseur, split off and organized a radical group
called the Sam Melville/Jonathan Jackson Unit, the authorities said.

The faction, named for Mr. Melville, a radical killed in the 1971 riot at Attica
state prison in New York, and Mr. Jackson, who was slain while trying to kidnap
a California judge, took responsibility for seven bombings around New England
between 1976 and 1978, according to the authorities.

Bombings in New York Area


The purported bomb-making material found in Ohio has led the authorities to
believe, they say, that the fugitives are now part of the United Freedom Front,
which has taken responsibility for 10 bomb explosions in and around New York
City between December 1982 and last September.

The authorities say they also believe that the men set out on weekdays on the
Interstate highways passing near their homes to rob banks and armored cars
throughout the Northeast and Middle Atlantic states.

But the authorities will not say how they found the fugitives in Ohio.

''All we're saying is that the lead was originally picked up in Connecticut,
expanded through New Jersey and then to the F.B.I.,'' said Col. Clinton L.
Pagano, the Superintendent of the New Jersey state police. ''We were working in
Ohio for six weeks before we got a break.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Ohio (page B4); photo of Thomas Manning (page B4)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTIONS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 91 words


A Washington dispatch on Saturday about an unveiling ceremony at the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial misattributed remarks about the Vietnam War. They were made by
John P. Wheeler, chairman of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, not Jan C.
Scruggs, the fund's president. A statement by Mr. Wheeler was also rendered
incorrectly; he said it was untrue that Vietnam veterans were ''losers'' (not
''loners''). A speaker described as the father of the new statue - for his role
in its construction - was misidentified. He was Gen. Michael S. Davison.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 13, 1984 International

Israeli officials expressed optimism that a formula could be worked out with
Lebanon to allow troop withdrawal talks to resume tomorrow. But there was no
sign from Beirut that the Lebanese would accept anything short of their original
demand - that Israel free a group of Shiite Moslem militia leaders arrested in
south Lebanon. (Page A1, Cols. 4-5.)

Renewal of American-Iraqi ties will be announced Monday, according to Reagan
Administration officials. Baghdad severed relations with Washington in 1967.
(A14:3-4.)

Rajiv Gandhi pledged continuity with the domestic and foreign policies of his
grandfather, Jawaharlal Nehru, and his mother, Indira Gandhi. In his first
address to the nation, the 40- year-old Prime Minister reaffirmed a commitment
to socialism at home and to India's nonalignment in international affairs.
(A10:3-6.) National

Two space-walking astronauts boldly snared a large satellite in orbit and,
overcoming an unexpected and potentially serious obstacle, wrestled the stranded
1,200-pound satellite aboard the cargo bay of the space shuttle Discovery. It
was the first salvage operation in space. (A1:6.)

Deep domestic spending cuts should be sought by President Reagan, according to
his top economic and political advisers. Administration officials cited reports
that projections of the Federal budget deficit have grown because of the
slowdown of the economy in recent months. (A1:3.)

Catholic bishops should follow the lead of their national conference in shaping
efforts to change public policy, according to the head of that group. Bishop
James W. Malone, the president of the National Conference of Roman Catholic
Bishops, made a strong plea for cohesion behind the panel's positions on many
major issues - nuclear arms, abortion, human rights and poverty. (A1:1.)

Advanced medical machines and medicines have prompted a growing number of
hospitals to appoint ethics committees. One doctor, acting against the parents'
wishes, saved a very premature baby, and the case, a typical example of the kind
of dilemma facing patients and their families, went to the hospitals ethics
panel. After five and a half months, the infant weighs 4 pounds 11 ounces, is
still in intensive care, fed automatically and enclosed in a small plastic
world. The family's hospital bill is nearing $400,000. (A18:1-2.)

A sniper opened fire in the University of Oregon's football stadium, killing a
former Olympic sprinter and wounding a college wrestler. Officials said the
19-year-old male sniper, dressed in combat gear, then apparently committed
suicide. (A20:3-4.)

Light can have health benefits far beyond those imagined by science as recently
as four years ago, according to findings described this month to the first
wide-ranging scientific conference on the biological and medical effects of
light. (C1:4-6.)

The science of ceramics has reached a turning point. In the last decade chemists
have learned to blend, beat and bake different kinds of ceramic compounds into
materials that are stronger than steel, as hard as diamonds and tough enough to
withstand the heat of a blast furnace. (C1:1-3.) Metropolitan

No rise in subway and bus fares would be needed next year if New York State
continues its present subsidies, the New York City Transit Authority said in
announcing its 1985 budget. The new $2.74 billion budget, $167 million more than
the current budget, promises wide-ranging improvements in service. (A1:2.)

Three fugitives and their wives and 12 small children lived quietly in Ohio for
more than two years, meticulously shielding their identities. The men, sought in
the murder of a New Jersey state trooper, an attempted murder or bank robberies,
were seen only on weekends. The wives kept to their homes. (A1:1-2.)

Veterans shared the loneliness that greeted the sparse crowds that greeted their
parade down Fifth Avenue. There were scatterings of cheers for the 1,500
veterans, and the greatest reception was accorded the men who marched under the
banner of the Vietnam veterans. (B3:2-6.)

Veterans Day seems to trigger the onset or return of mental problems among a
growing number of Vietnam veterans, according to doctors who have been
monitoring such cases. The veterans' difficulties include nightmares, vivid
flashbacks of painful memories, acute anxiety attacks and a proclivity toward
violent aggressiveness. (C1:3-5.)

Ariel Sharon's libel suit against Time magazine is to go to trial this morning
in Federal Court in Manhattan. The former Israeli Defense Minister has charged
he was libeled last year when a Time article suggested that he condoned, if not
directly encouraged, the 1982 massacre by Christian Phalangists of Palestinians
in refugee camps near Beirut. (B1:3-5.)

A sweeping antipornography bill is expected to be debated and voted on today by
the Suffolk County Legislature. County legislators said the bill, which defines
smut more broadly than state laws or the Supreme Court, has a good chance of
passage, but the County Executive has said he would veto the measure. (B2:1-3.)
Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DESPITE THIN CROWDS, GENERATIONS OF VETERANS MARCH IN PRIDE

BYLINE: By ESTHER B. FEIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 639 words


Patriotism reached across the years yesterday as veterans from the world wars
and the Korean War marched alongside veterans from the Vietnam War and shared
the loneliness of the sparse crowds that greeted their parade down Fifth Avenue.

It was Veterans Day, a time to honor those who fought this country's wars, but
it seemed that few others than those who had served were there to remember.

''The parades used to be bigger; the crowds used to call out to us,'' said Ernie
Ebersfield, a 78-year-old veteran of World War II. ''But since Vietnam, people
don't want to remember. They hurt the boys who fought so hard. They hurt all of
us by not coming.''

For the 1,500 who marched, it was a day to be proud, a day to wear the uniforms
and the medals that had lain packed in closets all year, a day to walk as tall
as aging bodies would allow.

A Day to Offer Thanks


For the few who watched from the sidewalks, from 39th Street south to the
Eternal Light Monument on 24th Street, it was day to say thank-you to the men
and women who were lucky enough to come home from the wars and to those who came
back only in spirit.

''If I was the only one here, I'd stand here and cheer every one of them,'' said
Felicia Osborne, a 58- year-old homemaker from Brooklyn who stood at 27th
Street. ''I can remember most of the wars these men fought in, and if it wasn't
for them, who knows if I'd be here.''

There were smatterings of cheers as the contingents passed, but the warmest
reception was saved for the men who marched behind the bright orange banner of
the Vietnam Veterans of America.

They started as a small group, but as they walked down Fifth Avenue, some
marchers recognized the faces of friends, of men who had fought with them.
Stretching their arms out, they drew them into the parade, urging them to be
proud of their service in Vietnam.

One man riding a bicycle across 32d Street, saw the banner and the familiar
fatigues, and jumped off his bike to join them.

''There are a lot of memories from over there,'' said Richard Allen, a Vietnam
veteran who would not be coaxed into stepping into the line of marchers. ''It's
hard to let go of the memories sometimes. Today I'd rather stand back and think
about it alone.''

Speeches and Wreaths


When they arrived at the monument in Madison Square Park, which commemorates the
American Expeditionary Forces in France during World War I, the marchers
listened to blessings and speeches recalling the wars, they heard Francis Scott
Key, great-great- grandson of the author of ''The Star- Spangled Banner,'' speak
of the history of the national anthem and they heard its words sung.

At 11 o'clock, there was a moment of silent prayer, broken by the firing of the
volley. Hands were raised to brows or crossed over hearts, and many people stood
in salute through the somber playing of taps.

Then wreaths were placed at the foot of the monument - a heart- shaped
arrangement of purple flowers from the New York chapter of the Military Order of
the Purple Heart, red carnations from the U.S.O., and a circle of red, white and
blue flowers from the American Legion.

'A Very Moving Day'


The veterans, and proud mothers and widows, some leaning on canes others on
friends, stepped up to the statue and bedecked it in flowers. Some who had not
prepared wreaths, set down small American flags.

They sang ''America the Beautiful,'' then shook the hands and patted the backs
of friends they see once a year, at the foot of the monument.

''It's a very moving day for anyone who served in any war,'' said Richard
Woodard, a 59-year-old member of the Montford Point Marine Association.

''It's hard to say what it means,'' said Eric Johnson, who served with 101st
Airborne Division in Vietnam. ''It's a day for buddies.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Larue Yessen and Josephine Holmes; Photo of marines

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TRIAL IN SHARON LIBEL SUIT VS. TIME OPENS TODAY

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1694 words


A major American news organization detailed the purported misconduct of a
prominent military leader in a far-off, unpopular war. The official said his
reputation had been blackened by the charge, which he denied. So he filed a
multimillion-dollar libel suit against the media giant in Federal court in
Manhattan.

It all sounds like Gen. William C. Westmoreland's case against CBS. But it
describes another explosive legal battle, scheduled to begin this morning six
floors higher up in the Federal courthouse: the libel suit of the former Israeli
Defense Minister, Ariel Sharon, against Time magazine.

Charges 'Blood Libel'Mr. Sharon, the architect of Israel's war in Lebanon and
now Minister of Industry and Commerce, has charged that he was libeled in 1983
by a Time article suggesting that he condoned, if not directly encouraged, the
September 1982 massacre by Christian Phalangists of Palestinians in the Sabra
and Shatila refugee camps near Beirut.

After the article appeared last year, Mr. Sharon filed a $50 million suit
against Time. He said that not only had he been defamed, but also that to accuse
any Jew of mass murder was a ''blood libel'' against Israel and the Jewish
people.

The piece, he said, had injured his political career and his good name. Shortly
after it appeared, he said, his name, written with a swastika, appeared in
graffiti all over the world.

''I brought it to court because I knew that the day must come and steps must be
taken that you will never dare again to libel,'' he told lawyers for Time during
a deposition. ''Not the Jewish people, not Israel, and not me, not you and not
any other newspaper.''

Time has called the Sharon charges ''an attempt by a foreign politician to
justify his conduct of a war by his state and to enhance his political
reputation,'' as well as to ''punish criticism of Israel's conduct during the
invasion and occupation of Lebanon.''

More than to vindicate his honor, it has said, Mr. Sharon is seeking ''to shed
his responsibility for the massacre of civilians by an armed force acting at his
orders and under his command.''

Technically, the Sharon litigation hinges on two issues of fact. The first issue
is did, as Time reported, a secret appendix to a report prepared by an Israeli
commission investigating the Beirut massacres state that Mr. Sharon discussed
the Phalangists' need for revenge after the assassination of Lebanese
President-elect Bashir Gemayel. The second is, even if the appendix does not so
state, is the charge true nonetheless.

Not surprisingly, however, given the volatility of the issues and personalities
involved in the case, its dimensions have gone well beyond a few discreet legal
and factual issues. If the Westmoreland case has become a courtroom re-enactment
of the Vietnam War, Sharon v. Time promises to do the same for Israel's war in
Lebanon. It is expected to take at least a month to complete.

Five Trips to IsraelTime is represented by Cravath, Swaine & Moore. Cravath is
opposed by another of New York's largest law firms, Shea & Gould, and the case
involves two of the city's best-known corporate litigators: Thomas D. Barr of
Cravath, who successfully defended I.B.M. in its fight against a Federal
antitrust action, and Milton S. Gould. They will argue the case before a jury of
four men and two women, none of whom are Jewish.

Time's legal fees in the case, which is before Judge Abraham D. Sofaer, already
exceed $1 million. Cravath lawyers have made five trips to Israel, where Mr.
Sharon has a similar legal action pending. Time has submitted 6,500 pages of
documents to Mr. Sharon's lawyers, and 13 Time writers and editors have given a
total of 4,000 pages of testimony.

Mr. Sharon has said he sold his house in Tel Aviv to pay for legal expenses,
though Shea & Gould says it is representing him for a ''substantially reduced''
legal fee.

Mr. Sharon arrived in New York last Tuesday, along with his wife and son, and
has spent the past week with his lawyers. He completed his deposition in a
heated session last Friday. At that time Mr. Sharon accused Mr. Barr of
''defending a lie,'' and Mr. Barr promptly threatened to sue Mr. Sharon for
libel if he ever made such a charge in public.

''No doubt, I would have enjoyed traveling in the country, going to the theater,
meeting people, listening to music, but I've been busy preparing for the case,''
Mr. Sharon said yesterday in an interview. ''I came here in order to protect the
truth, and I believe in the American methods of justice.''

Continuing Political Role

In addition to investigating the entire Lebanon operation, Time's lawyers intend
to argue that Mr. Sharon, whom they have referred to as ''a bloodthirsty,
insubordinate militarist,'' had so poor a reputation before ''Operation Peace
for Galilee'' began in 1982 that he suffered no damages at all, and that he
enjoys continuing political prominence.

Mr. Sharon's lawyers, on the other hand, intend in essence to put Time magazine
on trial. They are claiming that David Halevy, Time's correspondent in Israel,
had a documented bias against Mr. Sharon and had previously been disciplined for
poor work. His report was unchallenged, they have said, both because of
ineffective editing and fact-checking and what they have called the magazine's
''vicious anti- Sharon and anti-Israel bias.''

The Israeli Government, citing national security concerns, has refused to permit
the parties to see the secret annex, known as Appendix B, along with other key
documents collected by the Kahan Commission, which investigated the Sabra and
Shatila massacres.

Officers' Testimony Barred

In addition, late last week Israeli Attorney General Yitzhak Zamir barred five
prominent military officials from testifying at the trial.

The Government's action, lawyers for Time have charged, is part of its general
policy of both condoning and partly subsidizing the Sharon case. They claim, for
instance, that the Israeli Government has used both diplomatic immunity and
outright threats to keep people from testifying at the trial. Time has also
charged that Mr. Sharon had hidden behind the same national security cloak
whenever it suited him.

''The plaintiff and the Israeli Government, acting together - if not in concert
- intend to have the case tried on a canvas devoid of the critical evidence,''
Times's laywers have stated in court papers.

Lawyers for Mr. Sharon have called these assertions ''absurd,'' and noted that
they, too, had sought access to the classified documents. They plan to produce
witnesses who have read the 12-page appendix and will testify it contains no
reference to Mr. Sharon's discussions with the Phalangists.

Character Witnesses Expected

To counter Time's insistence that Mr. Sharon is already so sullied that he is
''libel-proof,'' his lawyers plan to call a number of character witnesses,
including Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of
Manhattan, the author Leon Uris and the civil rights leader Bayard Rustin.

Cravath, Swaine & Moore is also representing CBS in the Westmoreland case, and
the two lawsuits have legal as well as factual similarities.

Both cases, Cravath lawyers argue, involve the improper use of a libel action to
vindicate controversial government policies. In addition, they maintain, Time
was neither reckless nor malicious in preparing the article, as would be
required to prove libel under United States Supreme Court standards.

The Time article, ''The Verdict is Guilty,'' was the cover story in the
magazine's Feb. 21, 1983, issue. It stated that Time ''had learned'' that
Appendix B contained details of Mr. Sharon's visit to the home of the Gemayel
family in Bikfaya, Lebanon, notably that ''Sharon reportedly discussed with the
Gemayels the need for the Phalangists to take revenge for the assassination of
Bashir, but the details of the conversation are not known.''

Internal Memo Is Basis

The report was based on an internal memo written by Mr. Halevy, a Time
correspondent in Israel, in December 1982. Mr. Halevy, an Israeli army veteran
wounded in the Yom Kippur war, has been a Time correspondent since 1976.

Time's Jerusalem bureau chief, Harry Kelly, included the material in a dispatch
sent from Jerusalem to Time's offices in New York, where a writer, William E.
Smith, wove it into the article on the Kahan report. The story was reviewed by,
among others, two fact-checkers, a senior editor, and Ray Cave, Time's managing
editor, before publication.

Mr. Sharon's lawyers charge that Mr. Halevy ''fabricated a supposedly exclusive
story from guesswork and speculation which he then dressed up as being based
upon 'a highly reliable source.' ''

''One conclusion is clear: either Time's 'process' for verification is a sham -
a 'process' which starts and ends with the reporter and makes no meaningful
effort to confirm or corroborate his story - or that procedure was entirely
ignored in this instance,'' they have stated. ''Either way, recklessness
abounds.''

Halevy's Record Is Cited

That recklessness is compounded, Mr. Sharon's lawyers claim, by Mr. Halevy's
past record. Mr. Sharon's lawyers, citing documents supplied by Time, maintain
that in 1980, Mr. Halevy was placed on probation after a story he reported on
Prime Minister Menachem Begin's health proved untrue.

Another internal Time memo reveals that Richard Duncan, Time's chief of
correspondents, speculated at the time that Mr. Halevy might have been
''inexcusably shoddy in his reporting.''

In a letter Mr. Halevy wrote to Mr. Duncan earlier this year, he lumped what he
called the ''vindication of Arik Sharon'' in Israel to ''other signs of
mysticism, fascism and radicalism'' in the country, and said he had ceased to be
''part of this country and its people.''

Mr. Duncan wrote back: ''Perhaps you could come to the states and rub elbows
with all the nice liberal, intelligent, devout jews here and pick up a little
much-needed rosy nostalgia for Israel. You know, singing songs together down on
the Kibbutz, that sort of thing.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of lawyers; Photo of Ariel Sharon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


THE BURN. A Novel in Three Books (Late Sixties-Early Seventies). By Vassily
Aksyonov . Translated From the Russian by Michael Glenny. 528 pages.  Random
House (New York) and Houghton Mifflin (Boston). $18.95.

VASSILY AKSYONOV is not the first Russian writer to resort to surrealism in an
effort to convey the realities of life in the Soviet Union. But in ''The Burn,''
a title that I cannot explicate, he has out-surrealized the field.

Mr. Aksyonov, who came to this country in 1980, is the son of Eugenia Ginzburg,
whose books, ''Journey Into the Whirlwind'' and ''Within the Whirlwind,'' are
classics of gulag literature. He was well known in his homeland before he
resigned from the Soviet Writers' Union in protest against the expulsion of two
younger writers who had tried to publish a volume of censored works.

As suggested by its infelicitous subtitle, ''The Burn'' takes place during a
relatively permissive time in the Soviet Union, which Mr. Aksyonov has called
its ''soul period.'' He has described his book - which is not easily described
in a few words - as dealing with five intellectuals, linked by their experiences
of official repression.



A reader may be forgiven for coming away with the notion that the book is about
the adventures of one intellectual, in five incarnations - writer, physician,
physicist, saxophone player and sculptor - particularly since they wind up
together in ''solitary confinement,'' and all bear the patronymic
''Appolinarievich,'' spiritual descendants perhaps of Guillaume Apollinaire, the
French poet who experimented with surrealist techniques around World War I.

The five raffish intellectuals are looked on with suspicion by the authorities
and are beset by informers, provocateurs and Jew-baiters. They associate with
drunkards, delinquents and finaglers, specimens of the famous Soviet category of
''parasite.'' Their tastes are alcoholic, lascivious and scatological.

The Apollinarievichi take turns throughout the book as protagonists and
narrators. Mr. Aksyonov switches frequently from third to first person, and
readers may be hard put to tell one voice from another. He uses lots of
flashbacks or dreams and tosses in some lines of poetry now and then: We defend
the cause, The cause of mighty Lenin.We, the security boys, Will bash the
enemy's head in.

The main flashback has to do with a boy, the primal Appolinarievich, growing up
in a town whose main industry is a prison camp; he's a kind of Penrod in
purgatory. A thread of plot concerns a brutal security officer named Cheptsov
who torments the boy's family, rapes his own daughter (who may not be his
daughter at all) and is brought back from death by the physician, who hates him.
It's highly symbolic and as complicated as it sounds.

''The Burn,'' translated with considerable energy by Michael Glenny, is like one
of the jazz sessions it celebrates, with riff following riff in displays of
virtuosity. Political allusions keep popping up - the Soviet invasion of
Czechoslovakia, the war in Vietnam, the rule of Nikita Khrushchev, here called
Korneponevich, even Spiro Agnew, who makes a brief appearance as a Communist
Party official.

There are passing references to a secret death-dealing weapon and a secret
life-giving drug; there are searches for lost loves; there is a burlesque of a
shootout in Katanga, featuring African revolutionaries, Western mercenaries and
a Soviet medical team. Mr. Aksyonov has an irrepressible imagination.

Most of the episodes are engaging, but 528 pages of them may be more than
strictly required. It's like being served endless platters of blini - very
tasty, but wearing on the digestion. The banquet begins to seem a bit, uh,
Russian. Mr. Aksyonov concedes on page 526, toward the end of a 60-page coda,
that his reader is likely to be exhausted by the effort to keep track of
characters, times and places.



For all its fun, the book's spirit is not lighthearted. It is played out in the
gloom of the prison camps that figure in it so prominently. ''We've got to get
out!'' cries the writer.

At affecting moments, one or another of the main characters (or character)
pauses in the midst of the hustle-bustle for a grim reflection. One stares into
a mirror: ''Looking at me was an obviously unreliable, socially alien, morbidly
sexual, and suspicious type of person, whose sufferings were not worth a bent
penny. I began to stare at him intently and suddenly realized that he was on the
point of crying out, that he was barely restraining himself from breaking into a
horrible, revolting kind of howl.''

The book is a prolonged and over- long howl that often turns into a belly laugh
or a giggle, and the images are intentionally revolting. Here is a description
of the day's opening of the Men's Club at the Pioneer Market, where the
parasites gather daily to drink themselves into insensibility: ''Down goes that
first, insatiable gulp of half a mugful, whirlpools of beer around carious
cliffs, blobs of froth in folds of the mucous membrane, bubbles on harsh
stubble, a delicious shiver throughout the body, and, finally, the warm flush of
euphoria, the sign of relief - life's worth living again.'' Mr. Aksyonov wants
us to know that it takes a lot of Russian beer to keep it that way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Vassily Aksyonov

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 13, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM VETERANS TURN TO THERAPY

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1964 words


THE arrival of Veterans Day seems to trigger the onset or return of mental
problems among a growing number of Vietnam veterans, the legacy of unresolved
emotional difficulties that stem from hostilities that ended more than a dozen
years ago, according to doctors who have been monitoring such cases.

Nightmares, vivid flashbacks of painful memories, acute panic attacks, chronic
startle reactions and a proclivity toward violent aggressiveness are some of the
difficulties reported by thousands of veterans each month.

And in the view of several experts, rather than diminishing with time as might
be expected, cases serious enough to warrant professional help have yet to peak,
and can be expected to rise for another year or two. They say this is because
the veterans, who averaged 19.2 years of age when they served, are now reaching
the age when other midlife pressures exacerbate their troubling war memories.

Although comparative figures on mental stress from past wars are not available,
the severity of the fighting in Vietnam, the youth of the combatants and the
failure to acknowledge and deal with the possibility that many soldiers were
vulnerable to mental stress combined to intensify the problem, the experts said.

Dr. Arthur S. Blank Jr., the director of Vietnam Veteran Counseling Centers that
are run by the Veterans Administration, said the occurrence of what is known as
''post traumatic stress disorder,'' or P.T.S.D., among Vietnam veterans is
enormous.

On Veterans Day yesterday, for example, many of those attending the memorial
services in Washington said they felt an acute sense of pain over their
experiences, ''but the depth of their distress seemed less than in the past two
Veterans Days,'' Dr. Blank said. This Dr. Blank attributed to the creation of
support groups to help those veterans in distress.

''This time of the year, as in the past, we are finding another wave of vets
coming into our outreach centers,'' Dr. Blank said. ''Veterans Day seems to
bring up a reoccurrence that is related to their past experiences.''

He said the numbers had already been increasing, ''We're getting about 6,300 new
cases a month of Vietnam era veterans coming to Vet centers for services, 500 a
month more than 1983, but a number that appears to be starting to level off,''
he said, adding that of this group about half have psychological problems, an
estimated 750 of them severe.



400,000 May Be Affected

Since 1969 about 150,000 Vietnam veterans have sought government help for
P.T.S.D., and the Veterans Administration estimates that 350,000 to 400,000 have
some form of the disorder, whether mild, moderate or severe. About an equal
number of the 3.7 million veterans who served in the Vietnam theater have
experienced readjustment problems without demonstrable P.T.S.D.

Dr. John P. Wilson, a professor of psychology at Cleveland State University in
Ohio and a national authority on P.T.S.D., explained how the age of the veterans
now and the age at which they entered service figures prominently in the
development of the disorder.

''The average age of American soldiers in World War II was 26,'' he said, ''but
for people sent to Vietnam it was 19.2 years, that is, late adolescence, the
time of life when people put their identities together, their occupation, their
sex role, their commitments, the normal developmental process that leads to a
human identity.''

''So if you take a 19-year-old soldier and subject him to tremendous war stress
for a year,'' he continued, ''you end up with people who in their own words say,
'I'm a different person,' 'I'm changed.' 'I don't fit in.' 'I'm 20 and I feel
like I came back 50.' This diffusion of identity is a universal feeling among
people suffering from P.T.S.D.,'' he went on.

After the veterans came home, he said, many tried to block out their experiences
and go on with their lives, but as middle age approaches many may experience
problems.

''If one plots the ages of the men who served in Vietnam it can be seen that the
stresses of the mid 30's and early 40's will afflict the largest number of
veterans about next year, 1985,'' he added.



Recognized as Specific Disorder

Some members of Congress who have been concerned with veterans affairs refused
for years to believe the stress disorder existed. And it was not until four
years ago that the American Psychiatric Association recognized it as a specific
psychiatric disorder with an agreed upon definitions and limits.

As defined by the association, a diagnosed case must meet criteria that, in
general, add up to the re-experiencing of a traumatic event in the veteran's
past, the subsequent numbing of his responsiveness to those around him, and the
displaying of several symptoms such as sleeplessness, hyperalertness and
impaired memory.

The number of cases diagnosed by Veterans Administration doctors since the
disorder was officially recognized has increased from 751 in 1981, to 1,683 in
1982, to 2,468 in 1983, the latest year for which figures are available.

''The condition has been discussed since the wars of the Greeks, but only
recently have attempts been made to define it systematically,'' Dr. Blank said.
Over the years, what has been essentially the same disorder has been described
as shell shock, survivor's syndrome and combat fatigue. Symptoms may take months
or years to express themselves after the incident or incidents that cause them
end.

As psychiatrists and psychologists have come to understand the disorder, they
report that they are increasingly identifying such cases, including those
stemming from traumas unrelated to Vietnam. For instance, experts say some
marines who survived the bombing in Beirut last year may have the disorder.

Other cases have been diagnosed as having stemmed from the Three Mile Island
nuclear accident in 1979, the explosion of Mount St. Helens in 1980 and the
skywalk collapse at the Kansas City Hyatt Regency Hotel in 1981.

Yet there had been widespread speculation dating to World War I that wars and
catastrophes left deep traumatic imprints on some people.

Dr. Thomas W. Salmon, in his 1918 book ''War Neuroses'' wrote: ''A very striking
feature of the war neurosis is the relatively large proportion of men of
apparently normal makeup . . . who have not had previous neuropathic
manifestations who develop them under the stress of war.''

After World War II there was also widespread research into the psychiatric
legacy of concentration camp inmates, Jews who survived the Holocaust and
residents of Hiroshima, but an agreement on what the syndrome was remained
elusive.



Against Current Thought

Dr. Harvey J. Schwartz, an assistant professor of psychiatry at Jefferson
Medical College in Philadelphia who is a consultant to the Veterans
Administration, offered a theory on why many American psychiatrists refused for
so long to believe P.T.S.D. existed.

''It ran against the currents of major psychiatric thought because it had
nothing to do with childhood,'' he said. ''But now the pendulum has swung too
far the other way in that some psychiatrists studying P.T.S.D. would have us
believe that the patient was born the day he got to Vietnam.''

Dr. Schwartz, the editor of and contributor to a new anthology, ''Psychotherapy
of the Combat Veteran,'' stressed that ''every patient is different.'' The most
common methods of treatment include individual psychiatric therapy, group
therapy and drugs, either antidressants or tranquilizers.

''The disorder is not the result of any one simple thing, nor is it only the
result of service in Vietnam,'' he said. ''It is the result of many variables
that affect the life of an individual, and many persons working in the field of
mental health do not understand this.''

Dr. Schwartz and other authors of books on psychological problems of veterans,
have emphasized that no one treatment method or combination is generally better
than another.

Dr. Wilson, the Cleveland professor, noted that the Vietnam veterans'
''homecoming occurred under the worst possible conditions, rotation out of the
jungle with no counseling while society expected the veterans to pick up the
pieces of their lives and start all over again as if nothing had happened.''

''During the next stage in the natural process of personal development, the
veteran would need a prolonged period of time to define who he is as an adult,
have love affairs, go back to school, start a career, and the next major step
came when he had to face up to intimacy versus isolation,'' Dr. Wilson
continued.

''The veterans tended to block out their war experiences, they had to go on with
their lives, thus producing a delaying effect when the residual effects of war
stress would return in their mid-30's when the veterans would have to deal with
the issue of getting close to others, their wives and children,'' he went on.



'Cadre of Attack Dogs'

In the training of Vietnam servicemen, Dr. Sheldon D. Zigelbaum, a psychiatrist
in Boston who is an expert on P.T.S.D., said, ''The Government created a superb
cadre of attack dogs by changing all their values and response systems to life,
but you can't take them off the leash without deprogramming and expect them to
be good citizens.''

''Many veterans with P.T.S.D. were young men who had not done well in high
school, they were said to have 'not worked up to their potential' and they may
have had mild learning defects,'' Dr. Zigelbaum said.

He said many of them ''went through their early adolescence with a poor image''
of themselves.

''Then they went into the service where hands-on experience counts more than
intellectualism and many of these people exploited their natural resources and
became superstars as killers,'' Dr. Zigelbaum said. ''Physical contact was
expressed with gun, knife and hands, and almost to a man their Army record was
excellent, indeed for many it was the best time in their lives, but after 12
months they're back home and they can't integrate. Is it any wonder?''

He said psychotherapy might be ineffective, indeed that some patients ''may well
be very dangerous and may require nontraditional maximum security facilities''
that are neither prison nor hospital.

Fred Gusman, a clinical social worker who runs a P.T.S.D. program at the Menlo
Park Veterans Administration Hospital in California, stressed that too often
psychiatrists fail to realize veterans ''are caught in a maze of problems that
are social, political and financial, as well as medical.'' ''It doesn't do the
veteran much good to be 'cured' if he is then put on the street without a job or
some system of social support,'' he added.

Robert O. Muller, president of Vietnam Veterans of America, which has been
lobbying for more help for P.T.S.D. victims agreed.

''The increase in the number of outreach centers gives more points of contact
for help, but every step along the way we've hand to fight for money and
attention, and there isn't enough of each,'' Mr. Muller said.

Publicity about the disorder has led more veterans of Vietnam and of other wars
to seek help, further straining treatment facilities, said John Russell Smith,
director of the newly opened National Veterans Administration Stress Center in
Cleveland.

''The publicity surrounding the Vietnam Memorial in Washington and the
Westmoreland trial shows the national atmosphere is more favorable to those
veterans having problems, plus the fact that the Veterans Administration is in a
new posture, and its constitutency is more trusting,'' Mr. Smith added.

''Additionally, Vietnam veterans are less likely to be seen as crazy, out-
of-control time bombs, and this enhances the probability that veterans will seek
treatment, and benefit from it,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 14, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Japan Scrambles 32 Jets To Meet Soviet Bombers

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 134 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Nov. 13


The Japan Defense Agency said today that it scrambled 32 jet fighters when 7
Soviet bombers flew south in international airspace between South Korea and
Japan.

Forty Japanese fighters were scrambled on Monday when a TU-16, one of nine
Soviet bombers flying south past the strait, violated Japanese airspace above
the island of Okinoshima for two minutes despite repeated warnings.

A military spokesman, Masafuji Sato, said no violation of Japanese airspace took
place today when five TU- 16's and two TU-95's flew south over the Tsushima
Strait.

He said two of the bombers kept flying southward, apparently to Vietnam, and the
five others turned back.

In the last five years, Soviet military aircraft have flown close to Japanese
airspace an average of 315 times a year, the spokesman said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 14, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS PEOPLE;
Viking Drug Issue

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 177 words


Les Steckel, the coach of the Minnesota Vikings, says that the club has been
conducting regular but surprise drug tests on several players who, he says, have
agreed to them. Such tests, according to

Dick Berthelsen, counsel for the National Football League Players Association,
violate the union's collective-bargaining agreement with the league, and
Berthelsen has Article 31, Section 7 of the agreement to back him up. The
provision says that a club's physician, ''upon reasonable cause,'' may direct
that a player undergo tests at the Hazelden Clinic in Center City, Minn., but it
adds, ''There will not be any spot-checking for chemical abuse or dependency by
the club or club physician.'' It was not clear yesterday whether the union would
seek to halt the tests, and in the meantime Steckel, who served as a Marine
officer in Vietnam, said he didn't need help in determining which players ought
to be subjected to them. ''I guess I've been around it so much in the
military,'' he said. ''You see guys messed up. It doesn't take an expert.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 14, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-C.I.A. AIDE DISPUTES CBS FILM AT LIBEL TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words


The former head of Vietnamese affairs for the Central Intelligence Agency
startled the Westmoreland- CBS libel trial yesterday by shouting from the
witness stand that CBS lied in its 1982 documentary charging a military cover-up
of enemy strength in South Vietnam in 1967.

The flare-up occurred near the end of direct examination, when George A. Carver
Jr., the former official, was asked about a statement on the broadcast by Mike
Wallace that ''instead of being told of an enemy army of more than half a
million, the President, the Congress and the American public were told there
were only 248,000 Vietcong left; that the enemy was running out of men.''

''That statement is a lie!'' boomed the normally placid Mr. Carver, who was
testifying in Federal Court in Manhattan as the 13th witness for Gen. William C.
Westmoreland in his $120 million libel suit stemming from the CBS Reports
documentary - ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

Remark Stricken From Record


As Mr. Carver stared at the jury, which seemed as stunned by his sudden
forcefulness as the spectators, Judge Pierre N. Leval struck the remark from the
record and called the lawyers from both sides to the bench. After a brief
conference, Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, rephrased his question
for Mr. Carver.

Q. Did you have any information in 1967 that there was an enemy army in Vietnam
of more than a half-million men?

A. No, there never was.

Q. I have no further questions.

Minutes later, on cross-examination, an attorney for CBS suggested that Mr.
Carver and his colleagues in the C.I.A. had ''capitulated'' in 1967 to lower
enemy strength figures imposed on them by military intelligence officers under
General Westmoreland, commander of American forces in Vietnam from 1964-68.

Under questioning by David Boies, CBS's lawyer, Mr. Carver said the enemy's
military strength in 1967 was on the order of 240,000 to 250,000 - approximately
the figures contained in the official military listing known as the order of
battle.

''They never had an army in the field of a half million - or even half that,''
he said. Their total force, he added, including political cadre and other
support, was over 400,000.

C.I.A. Memo Quoted


But Mr. Boies dogged Mr. Carver with an internal C.I.A. memorandum he had
written on Jan. 11, 1967 - a memo that Mr. Carver accused Mr. Boies of taking
''out of context.''

The memo began: ''We believe the MACV (General Westmoreland's command) order of
battle of Communist ground forces in South Vietnam, which on 3 January carried
the number of confirmed Vietcong, including North Vietnamese, at 277,150, is far
too low and should be raised, perhaps doubled.''

''Did you make that statement in 1967?'' Mr. Boies demanded.

Qualifying his answer, Mr. Carver conceded that he believed the order of battle
in South Vietnam was ''too restrictive'' and should have shown a total
''manpower pool'' in the half-million range. But the exact figure for enemy
military strength depended on ''how you define'' the enemy, he said, noting that
the memo went on to question whether political cadre, for example, ''belong in a
military OB at all.''

Revised Order of Battle


The CBS documentary, like the testimony yesterday, focused on the events
surrounding the preparation in 1967 of a revised order of battle and of a
related intelligence estimate on enemy strength in Vietnam for President
Johnson. In the broadcast, CBS contended that by minimizing the scope and nature
of enemy forces, General Westmoreland's command had left the President, the
Joint Chiefs of Staff and American troops unprepared for the magnitude of the
Communists' Tet offensive in January 1968.

Before an agreement on figures was reached in Saigon in September 1967 - an
accord that Mr. Carver has called a ''compromise'' and CBS an unjustified
concession to the military - the C.I.A. favored reporting a relatively high
enemy strength total and including in the final order of battle figure a
counting of Vietcong self-defense forces. General Westmoreland's command
insisted that the self-defense forces, newly estimated in a range of 117,000 to
125,000, lacked offensive military capability and should be dropped from the
order of battle. The C.I.A. went along with a verbal description, rather than a
number, for the self-defense units.

Yesterday, Mr. Boies showed Mr. Carver a series of cables he wrote to his
superiors in 1967 and 1968 in which he said the military had ''whacked up'' some
of its figures during the debate over enemy strength and that, after the Tet
offensive, the C.I.A. realized it had compromised too much.

Mr. Carver admitted that, following the Tet assault, the C.I.A. believed the new
order of battle total - 223,000 to 248,000, plus 80,000 to 90,000 political
cadre - had been short, and that the self-defense forces had taken part in
''much of the recent urban excitement.'' But he said that, in some of the
cables, he had exercised ''a degree of poetic license.''

Mr. Carver, whose testimony began last Thursday and will continue today, was
Special Assistant for Vietnamese Affairs to the Director of Central Intelligence
from 1966 to 1973. During 1967, the director was Richard Helms, who is expected
to testify later in the trial.

Mr. Carver did not appear on the CBS documentary, which was aired on January 23,
1982. But 11 days before the broadcast - a week after the program was finished -
he was interviewed for an hour, off camera, in Washington by George Crile, the
producer of the broadcast.

Mr. Crile - like Mr. Wallace and Samuel A. Adams, a former C.I.A. analyst who
worked for Mr. Carver and later became a paid consultant to CBS on its
documentary - is a defendant in this case.

Producer's Notes Introduced


Yesterday Mr. Burt introduced Mr. Crile's notes of his interview with Mr.
Carver, marking the first time that the producer's notes had been used at the
trial.

Mr. Carver, under questioning by Mr. Burt, disavowed many of the remarks Mr.
Crile attributed to him, some connected to witnesses who are scheduled to appear
later in the trial.

For example, a major witness for CBS is expected to be Gains Hawkins, an
intelligence colonel in Vietnam in 1967, who said on the documentary that he had
''gotten the message'' that his superiors, including General Westmoreland,
''didn't want higher numbers'' on enemy strength.

According to Mr. Crile's notes, Mr. Carver said that ''he had as much respect
for Hawkins as he had for any one he knew in intelligence in 25 years.''

Q. Did you say that to Mr. Crile in words or substance?

A. No. I said I respected Gains Hawkins. The rest is Mr. Crile's invention.

Mr. Carver also denied telling Mr. Crile that he ''always thought White House
and military were guilty of manipulating the statistics.'' Mr. Carver said he
told the producer that the White House, under President Johnson, was ''guilty of
manipulating statistics but not the statistics'' about which Mr. Crile was
asking.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 14, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTIONS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 69 words


Because of an editing error, a Washington dispatch on Monday, about the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, misattributed the comment that ''instead of Vietnam veterans
building a memorial to give the Government, maybe the Government should have
built a memorial to Vietnam veterans.'' The speaker was Jan C. Scruggs,
president of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, not Secretary of the Interior
William P. Clark.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Reports Clash

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 14


Vietnamese border guards killed 15 Chinese soldiers and captured two others
after the group penetrated 800 yards inside Vietnam on Friday, Radio Hanoi said
today in a broadcast monitored in Bangkok. China and Vietnam have fought
sporadically along the border and have exchanged artillery fire since their
brief war in 1979.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI LINKED TO CAMBODIAN TORTURE

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 14


A visiting American civil rights group says that Vietnamese Government officials
are widely involved in the arrest and torture of Cambodian citizens.

The three-member group, representing the Lawyers Committee for International
Human Rights of New York, interviewed former inmates of Cambodian prisons,
former Cambodian Government officials now in exile, and international experts.

The team, which conducted most of its interviews in rebel-held areas of Cambodia
along the Thai border, was not allowed to visit the rest of Cambodia, which is
under the control of the pro-Vietnamese Government installed in Phnom Penh in
late 1978 and under virtual Vietnamese occupation.

''In Cambodia, there simply does not exist the recognition of civil liberties or
human rights on a basis recognized by the world community,'' said Floyd Abrams,
the constitutional expert and First Amendment lawyer, who is a member of the
American team.



Absence of the Rule of Law


Mr. Abrams, who arrived Friday, spent the weekend in the border area. The two
other members of the group arrived a week earlier and conducted other
interviews. They are Diane Orentlicher, deputy director of the Lawyers
Committee, and Stephen Heder, an expert on Cambodia. Their preliminary report is
to be made public in New York in about two weeks.

''When you put together a society,'' Mr. Abrams said in an interview on Tuesday,
''in which people are arrested without charges being made and jailed without
being convicted, in which confessions are forced and torture seems to be
commonplace, you simply are not talking about a society that seriously
recognizes the rule of law.''

Since the recent history of Cambodia has been dominated by the atrocities
committed by the Khmer Rouge of Pol Pot, the Communist Government that ruled
from 1975 until its overthrow by Vietnam in 1978, world opinion has focused on
that era, Mr. Abrams said. Almost no attention has been given to Cambodia under
Vietnamese domination, he added.

''It has seemed for some time to me that the story inside Cambodia was off
limits, certainly to the human rights groups,'' Mr. Abrams said.

The Americans decided not to try any comparisons with the Khmer Rouge period,
during which it appears that millions died, either in executions or through
starvation and disease.

''The problem with making comparisons,'' Mr. Abrams said, ''is that you wind up
passing no judgment at all on what is occurring now in Cambodia.''

On the basis of the interviews the Americans found that Vietnamese are playing
an extensive role in the security apparatus of the Phnom Penh Government.
Vietnamese were reported present or actively taking part in every interrogation
and torture related to the American visitors.

Former Khmer Rouge officials were said to hold internal security jobs in Phnom
Penh, among them Sin Song, the Deputy Minister for Security Affairs in the
Interior Ministry.

''A disproportionate number of people in the police and security apparatus are
ex-Khmer Rouge,'' Mr. Heder said.



Vietnamese Initial for Prisons


Cambodian prisons mentioned by former inmates bear the Vietnamese designations
T-1 through T-5, with the T standing for ''tu,'' a Vietnamese word for prison.
''When we asked Cambodians what T meant,'' Mr. Heder said, ''none of them
knew.''

Vietnamese security people, including a special unit known by the number 7708,
appear to be in charge of some interrogation centers around Phnom Penh. In one
case, a former prisoner said his Vietnamese torturer had sent all Cambodians out
of the room.

Torture methods, according to former prisoners, included electric shock, being
trussed up and suspended from the ceiling while being beaten, being shackled by
the legs to stirrups above the floor to force the body into a painful
off-balance position and having a plastic bag pulled over the head and closed
around the neck until the prisoner fainted. Some prisoners reportedly died of
beatings, other from malnutrition and disease.

While the Cambodian authorities evidently distinguish between political crimes
and common crimes, former prisoners said they had been more often than not
charged with political offenses in an effort to stamp out dissent. They said
they were forbidden to say that they acted simply out of anti-Vietnamese
sentiments, an explanation offered by many Cambodians for their activities.

Among former prisoners are many people of middle-class background or civil
servant status who have apparently fallen out with the Vietnamese who now
pervade more and more aspects of Cambodian life.

Mr. Abrams and Miss Orentlicher were the first rights advocates to be invited
into the closely guarded civilian headquarters of the Khmer Rouge rebels, at
Phum Thmey, 10 miles from the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet.

Mr. Heder was barred from the settlement. He has become a critic of the Khmer
Rouge after having been a sympathizer in the early days when it was still
supported by Vietnam.

Miss Orentlicher and Mr. Abrams spent two days at Phum Thmey and in nearby
villages. They met for four hours with Ieng Sary, a Khmer Rouge leader, who is a
member of the three- party rebel coalition government formed by Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the former King; a non-Communist group known as the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front, and the Communist Khmer Rouge.



Coalition a Member of U.N.






This coalition, with Prince Sihanouk as president and Son Sann, a non-Communist,
as prime minister, is a member of the United Nations. The United States does not
recognize either the rebel coalition or the Vietnamese-supported Cambodian
Government in Phnom Penh.

The Americans also visited settlements under the control of the non- Communist
rebels of Son Sann, but for reasons of time and logistics, they did not go to
camps under the authority of Prince Sihanouk.

As they spoke with people of varied backgrounds and beliefs, the Americans said,
they became aware of what years of war and persecution had done to the concept
of a civil society.

''What was striking about this trip more than any other I have made,'' Miss
Orentlicher said, ''is the extent to which the standard indices of respect for
human rights had no relevance.''

She said that, during the interviews, the Cambodians considered it
''nonsensical'' to be asked standard questions like ''Did you have a trial?''
''Were you represented by a lawyer?'' ''Were you told what you were charged
with?''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SETTLEMENT REACHED IN 1975 CRASH OF ORPHANS' JET

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 741 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 14


Lawyers for 78 of the Vietnamese orphans who survived a crash near Saigon of an
Air Force transport plane in April 1975 today announced a settlement under which
the Government and the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation would pay more than $17.8
million.

If approved, as expected, by Federal Judge Louis F. Oberdorfer, the settlement
would bring to a close nearly a decade of litigation in behalf of about 150
Vietnamese orphans who survived the crash, in the closing days of the North
Vietnamese takeover of South Vietnam.

The settlement, involving children adopted by families in Canada and Europe, was
disclosed by lawyers for the orphans, Lockheed and the United States in a
hearing before the judge today.

The orphans' adoptive parents and lawyers say the children suffered brain damage
because of Lockheed's negligence when doors flew off a Lockheed-built military
transport plane.

Part of Ford's Effort

The flight was part of a widely publicized effort sponsored by President Ford to
bring Vietnamese orphans to the United States, Canada and Europe for adoption.

Its crash on a dike on the Saigon River killed 135 of the 327 persons aboard,
including about 78 of the orphans. The exact numbers injured and killed are
unclear, according to lawyers working on the case.

More than 50 cases involving surviving orphans who were adopted by Americans
were settled for an average of $325,000 per child in 1982. Litigation brought by
adoptive parents and other relatives of some of the orphans who were killed in
the crash continues.

Charles R. Work, a Washington lawyer who is the orphans' court-appointed
guardian for purposes of seeking compensation, said in an interview that Lockeed
and the Government would be paying a total of $19.7 million. The proportion to
be paid by each will be determined according to a secret agreement between them.


No Admission of Negligence

Carroll E. Dubuc, a Washington lawyer who represents Lockheed, said ''what we
did today'' was agree that Lockheed and the Government would pay $17.8 million,
in addition to amounts already paid by Lockheed for diagnostic examinations of
the orphans and other costs in the complex litigation.

Under the settlement, there is no admission by Lockheed or the United States
that any injury to the orphans was caused by the plane crash.

Mr. Work said ''I would expect that between 40 and 50 percent'' of the money
will be allocated to expenses and lawyers' fees. That would leave an average of
well over $100,000 per orphan, with individuals receiving more or less according
to the severity of their injuries.

Mr. Work had sued Lockheed, asserting that the cargo door had been designed
negligently. Lockheed brought the United States into the case, saying that if
anyone had been negligent it had been the Air Force, which was flying the plane.


Agreement in 1979

The Justice Department and Lockheed had agreed in 1979 not to contest that they
were liable in the crash, without conceding negligence.

But they have vigorously disputed the plaintiffs' contentions about the extent
of their injuries, about whether the crash caused them and about what should be
paid.

''The children all, we allege, are suffering from minimal brain dysfunction,''
Mr. Work said today, ''with a variety of symptoms, the most common of which are
speech problems, gross and fine motor problems like writing, and learning
disabilities.

''We believe it was caused by the explosive decompression which occured inside
the plane when the door on this gigantic cargo plane flew off when the plane was
leaving Saigon.''

An Air Force investigation concluded that the crash occurred after a lock system
failed and doors flew off at 23,000 feet. The pilot lost control and brought the
plane to a crash landing on the dike.

Terms of Settlement

Judge Oberdorfer has repeatedly complained of delays in the litigation and has
pushed for a settlement.

Mr. Work said today: ''The judge showed patience and wisdom during this long and
difficult litigation and played a key role in the settlement process.''

Under the terms of the settlement announced today, most of the money paid by
Lockheed and the Government that is left over after payment of litigation costs
and attorneys' fees will be used for cash distributions to the plaintiffs, with
some going to a trust fund for the sickest of the orphans and for diagnostic
examinations.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

'68 MEMO BY C.I.A. AIDE READ AT CBS LIBEL TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 943 words


Thirteen years before he became a paid consultant to CBS-TV on its 1982
documentary on Vietnam, a C.I.A. analyst told his superiors that Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's command had engaged in a ''monument of deceit'' regarding
estimates of enemy strength in the Vietnam War.

The assessment by the analyst, Samuel A. Adams, was contained in an internal
Central Intelligence Agency memorandum that was read to the jury yesterday in
the libel case brought against CBS by General Westmoreland, who is expected to
take the stand today.

In the memo, Mr. Adams accused General Westmoreland's command of ''half-truths,
distortions and sometimes outright falsehoods'' regarding the size and nature of
enemy forces in South Vietnam in 1967. It was, basically, these same charges
that were leveled on the 1982 ''CBS Reports'' documentary, ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

Mr. Adams is also a defendant in General Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit,
which stems from the broadcast and is being tried in Federal Court in Manhattan.


Memo Introduced in Court


The memo - dated Jan. 31, 1968, the day after the start of the Tet offensive -
was written to George A. Carver Jr., then chief of Vietnamese affairs for the
C.I.A. and Mr. Adams's immediate superior. It was introduced by David Boies, the
lawyer for CBS, during his cross-examination of Mr. Carver.

In September 1967, Mr. Carver led a delegation of intelligence officials to a
conference with military leaders in Saigon, where an agreement was struck on
size of the North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces in South Vietnam to be included
in a report for President Johnson. Initially, the C.I.A. argued for
significantly higher estimates of enemy strength than did General Westmoreland's
command.

In the memo of Jan. 31, 1968, Mr. Adams notified Mr. Carver that he was leaving
his staff to take a job with the agency's office of economic research, where he
said he could pursue his interest in Vietcong organization and manpower.

But the ''fundamental'' reason for his departure, Mr. Adams said, related to
what he called a compromise on enemy strength that been forged in Saigon the
previous September.

Criticized C.I.A.


Mr. Adams said the C.I.A., and particularly Mr. Carver's staff, had made a
''mistake'' in agreeing to lower figures on the estimate of enemy strength in
South Vietnam and had thereby ''basically misinformed policymakers of the
strength of the enemy.''

The C.I.A., Mr. Adams said in the two-page memo, had not been ''sufficiently
diligent in bringing to the attention of the intelligence community the
numerical and organizational strength of our adversaries in Vietnam.''

Mr. Adams said in the memo that he realized the ''pressures'' on the C.I.A. -
originating, he said, from General Westmoreland's command - ''have been
enormous.

''We have occasionally protested,'' he said, ''but neither loud enough, nor long
enough.''

Analyst Present at Meeting


On direct examination at the trial, Mr. Carver testified that Mr. Adams was
present in Saigon when the the C.I.A. developed its alternative offer to the
military and had not dissented from it. Mr. Carver said, however, that Mr. Adams
had expressed his feelings about the final enemy troop estimates before writing
the memo. He described Mr. Adams, 51 years old, as someone who is ''often in
error, seldom in doubt.''

Yesterday, Mr. Carver told Mr. Boies that he respected Mr. Adams's ability and
had recommended him for the ''promotion'' to the office of economic research.
But he said he had reservations about Mr. Adams's judgment and about his
readiness to accept the fact that, in government, ''you have many arguments''
and while ''you win some, you lose some.''

The CBS documentary focused on the events surrounding the preparation in 1967 of
a revised order of battle and of a new intelligence estimate on enemy strength
in Vietnam for President Johnson. An order of battle is the official military
listing of enemy forces.

Besides serving as a consultant for the documentary, Mr. Adams also appeared on
the 90-minute broadcast. Like Mr. Adams, CBS contended in the documentary that,
by minimizing the size of the enemy in 1967, General Westmoreland's command had
left the President, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and American troops unprepared for
the magnitude of the Tet offensive in January 1968.

New Order of Battle

The accord reached in Saigon in September 1967 listed a total enemy military
force of 223,000 to 248,000, plus a separate category for 80,000 to 90,000
political cadre. The figure of 248,000 represented a decline of 51,000 from the
existing order of battle, which, unlike the new listing, included the political
cadre. The existing order of battle also included 70,000 Vietcong self-defense
forces, which were now dropped from the listing in favor of a ''verbal
description'' of them. C.I.A. and military estimates of the self-defense forces
in 1967 put their number at about 120,000.

Yesterday, Mr. Boies introduced another memo to show that, even after these
figures were settled on, C.I.A. officials - including Mr. Carver - were
uncertain of their validity.

In a Nov. 3, 1967, memo to Richard Helms, the Director of Central Intelligence,
Mr. Carver wrote that ''evidence has come to light which suggests the VC may be
further blurring the distinction'' between armed guerrillas and the self-defense
forces.

Mr. Carver told Mr. Helms that ''we will need to do a lot more concentrated
research in this area'' if the kind of agreement made in Saigon was not to prove
''more misleading than helpful.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 15, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK;
AN ISRAELI GENERAL ON A STRANGE BATTLEFIELD

BYLINE: By William E. Geist

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 928 words


Ariel Sharon sat stolidly in a Manhattan courtroom yesterday with his stocky
arms folded across his chest and his eyes straight ahead as hour after hour a
lawyer went through a cavalcade of portrayals of Mr. Sharon as ''a murderer,''
''a monster'' and ''Israel's Minister of Death.''

It is an uncomfortable posture for Mr. Sharon, the general, sitting back
passively as he is bombarded. By mid-afternoon he began to fidget, shifting this
way and that in his seat and tapping his foot, eager to take the witness stand,
to jump into the fray.

He had gone to the Federal District Court to retaliate once more in what he
would describe later as a lifetime of retaliation against enemies of Israel. He
was here to press his $50 million libel suit against Time magazine, which
suggested that he had played a part in the September 1982 massacre by Christian
Phalangists of Palestinians in two refugee camps near Beirut. He charges that it
is a libel on him and another attack on Israel.



The trial was one of the hottest tickets in town. The standing-room-only crowd
in the courtroom and the long lines in the hallway were waiting to see the often
combative Mr. Sharon come out swinging. In the courtroom, reporters argued in
English and Hebrew over who had rights to the limited seats - so vehemently that
a United States marshal was called in to settle the dispute.

People waiting in the marble hallway for seats to open up, argued their strong
views of Mr. Sharon. ''Wednesday is my regular theater day,'' said Rebecca
Rolland, a spectator, ''and this is the best theater in the city right now.''

Once they got in, they found that even in the most titillating of trials, the
wheels of justice can turn slowly and monotonously. As Time's attorney, Thomas
D. Barr, droned through an opening presentation, Judge Abraham D. Sofaer was
observed licking an envelope, Mr. Sharon's aunt allowed her head to plop on the
shoulder of a man sitting next to her in the front row and jurors yawned.



Many in the audience expressed sympathy for the six jurors, four men and two
women who were gradually buried in a torrent of references to fedeyeens,
Chamounists, the Christians of Damour, Hobeika followers and the like.

There were those in attendance who believed that the verdict would change
history. ''If Mr. Sharon wins here,'' said one spectator, Leonard Fried, ''it
will be a vindication, and he may well become Prime Minister.''

Mr. Barr has charged that, indeed, Mr. Sharon is simply a politician who wants
to use the witness stand as a pulpit to further his career.

The former Israeli Defense Minister was finally called to the stand as the
courtroom windows darkened at dusk. He leaped from his seat, which was front row
center alongside his wife, his son and other relatives and advisers. He seemed
like a freshman quarterback whose coach had finally called his name.

In his dark, rumpled suit, he squeezed impatiently through the conglobation of
lawyers, charts and a movie screen at the front of the courtroom to take the
stand.

Still, this was not the time or the place to launch a stinging counterattack.
This was a strange battlefield for Mr. Sharon, who has spent a lifetime on
battlefields: a solemn chamber with all the trappings of justice, where simply
raising the voice can shatter the decorum and make the speaker appear as
something of a madman. Outcomes of battles here turn on such things as
smoothness of tongue and the image of the communicator.



Milton S. Gould, his attorney, who has a casual, country-lawyer style - insofar
as that is possible in Manhattan - repeatedly reined in his client, as when Mr.
Sharon's voice began to rise and he jabbed a finger as he digressed from telling
of his humble childhood to speak of his parents teaching him to defend truth. He
said he had come 6,000 miles to do just that.

Some of those who said they knew Mr. Sharon well, contended there were two side
to him: one the jovial nature that he displayed during recesses yesterday, the
other a tough, combative side, which he did not display.

Indeed, were the rotund Mr. Sharon sitting in Macy's yesterday rather than on a
witness stand, little children might have crawled up on his knee. He was jolly.
He smiled and even chuckled as he told tales of his childhood.

He told on the stand of his career in the military, some episodes of which were
criticized by Mr. Barr. The career began when he was 17 years old, he said, and
it included service in one war after another from 1948 through 1973, when he led
what some military historians believe was one of the greatest victories in
modern history. He crossed the Suez Canal with his tanks - the lead vehicles
bearing the chalked inscriptions: ''Arik (his nickname), King of the Jews'' -
and he split two Egyptian armies and encircled one.



There were those in the hallway during recesses yesterday who referred to him as
''Israel's savior,'' as well as those who said he had brought shame to the
country in what they referred to as ''Israel's Vietnam.'' It was lost on no one
that down on the third floor of the same building, another general, William
Westmoreland, may make an appearance this week in the trial of his libel suit
against CBS.

''Sharon is a man of history,'' said Samuel Epstein, a spectator. ''If Americans
see him as a bull in a china shop, perhaps they don't understand that Israel
fights not for principles but for survivial.''

''He is Israel's Eisenhower,'' said Mr. Epstein.

''Patton,'' remarked a second man.

''Worse,'' said a third.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND REBUTS CBS PROGRAM AT LIBEL TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1704 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland testified at his libel trial against CBS yesterday
that he informed his civilian and military superiors of higher enemy troop
estimates in South Vietnam within days of learning of the figures in May 1967.

The 70-year-old retired general took the stand in Federal Court in Manhattan as
the 14th witness in his $120 million suit against the network.

He quickly contradicted the thesis of a 1982 CBS Reports documentary that said
his command had engaged in a ''conspiracy'' to ''suppress and alter critical
intelligence on the enemy'' in the year before the Tet offensive of January
1968.



Commanded U.S. Forces


Moreover, General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam
between 1964 and 1968, repeatedly insisted that the Vietcong units on which CBS
focused - self-defense and secret self-defense forces and political cadre - were
not ''a significant military threat.'' They were not, he said, the armed North
Vietnamese or Vietcong ''fighters who could damage us, who we had to destroy.''

The documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' stated that by
such actions as dropping the Vietcong's self-defense units from the official
listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle, General Westmoreland had
deceived President Johnson, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and American troops of the
true size of the enemy force in South Vietnam.

Neatly attired in a starched white shirt, dark striped tie and gray suit whose
lapel bore a small, rectangular, white- and red-striped Vietnam service ribbon,
the general told the jury in a strong voice that he had regularly spent three or
four days of each week in Vietnam ''in the field,'' talking to United States
field commanders and soldiers and Vietnamese at all levels.''I don't recall the
words self-defense or secret self-defense ever coming forward on those
briefings,'' he said.

The silver-haired general spoke in an accent reminiscent of his South Carolina
origins, sometimes sipping from a plastic cup of water in an overheated
courtroom where all seats were filled and spectators lined the walls.

He said American troops had ''little contact'' with the civilian members of the
Vietcong's self-defense forces, or ''home guard,'' whom he described as old men,
women and young boys who dug fortifications, planted pungi sticks and carried
rice.

''Vietnam was a big piece of real estate,'' the general said, ''600 miles north
to south; 120 miles, east to west - and I was all over the place. And my field
commanders were hardly aware that there was such an element (as self- defense
forces) because they were of no military consequence.''

In four hours of testimony, General Westmoreland recalled for the jury his
36-year military career, including disciplinary penalties he had incurred as a
young lieutenant for speeding over a 20-miles-per-hour limit on an Army base in
Hawaii before Pearl Harbor, action he had seen at the Battle of the Bulge and
elsewhere in Europe as a colonel, and meetings he had with President Johnson at
the White House about the course of the Vietnam War.

Though he leaned forward in the witness chair, the general seemed unable at
times to hear the questions posed by his lawyer, Dan M. Burt, who paced between
a document-strewn lectern and the jury box. At one point, Mr. Burt offered to
speak louder.

''I guess,'' the lawyer lamented, ''I don't have a command voice.''

Lawyer Cuts Him Off


Throughout, Mr. Burt was deferential to the witness, who said he was one of 20
full generals or admirals of similar rank before his retirement in 1972, when he
was Chief of Staff of the Army. But once, when General Westmoreland asked if he
could ''elaborate'' on an answer, Mr. Burt cut him off.

''No, not really,'' he said.

According to the broadcast, General Westmoreland's command was intent upon
minimizing the size of the enemy strength to make it appear that America was
winning the war, and by doing so left American political leaders, as well as the
public and American troops, unprepared for the magnitude of the Tet offensive.

On the 90-minute documentary, the narrator, Mike Wallace, said that a ''tactic''
of General Westmoreland was to drop the self-defense and secret self- defense
forces from the order of battle. Mr. Wallace also said that General Westmoreland
had concealed a report by his intelligence chief, Maj. Gen. Joseph A.
McChristian, which said that the size of these units was nearly 50,000 higher
than the 70,000 estimate contained in the order of battle at the time.

''Shortly after Westmoreland suppressed his intelligence chief's report,'' Mr.
Wallace said on the broadcast, ''General Joseph McChristian was transferred out
of Vietnam. It was at this point, we believe that MACV (General Westmoreland's
command) began to suppress, and then to alter, critical intelligence reports on
the strength of the enemy.''

Mr. Wallace, who was not in court yesterday, is also a defendant in this case.
Other defendants are George Crile, the producer of the documentary, and Samuel
A. Adams, a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst who served as a paid
consultant to CBS and appeared on the program.

Since 1968, Mr. Adams has accused General Westmoreland's command in Saigon of
''half-truths, distortions and outright falsehoods'' regarding its estimates of
enemy strength in South Vietnam.

Disputed CBS Account


Yesterday, General Westmoreland disputed virtually all of CBS's account of the
McChristian affair.

General Westmoreland said that by early 1967, General McChristian's two- year
tour of duty in Vietnam was ending and the intelligence chief wanted a field
command. But General McChristian was an armored officer, General Westmoreland
testified, and there were no armored divisions in Vietnam. So, General
Westmoreland said, he asked the Pentagon to find an armored unit for General
McChristian to lead, and he was assigned to Fort Hood, Tex.

General Westmoreland said he believed that the transfer was arranged by March
1967, two months before General McChristian reported to him that, according to a
new study by the latter's order of battle specialists, the size of the
self-defense and secret self-defense forces, as well as the size of the
guerrillas and political cadre, had been underestimated.

The witness recalled that, one evening in May 1967, General McChristian walked
into his office without an appointment and showed him a one- page draft cable
that contained the new figures.

As General McChristian recalled the meeting on the CBS broadcast, General
Westmoreland was ''quite disturbed'' by ''the large increase in figures that we
had developed.''

''And by the time I left his office,'' the intelligence chief told CBS, ''I had
the definite impression that he felt that if he sent these figures back to
Washington at that time, it would create a political bombshell.''

Briefed on Home Guards


Yesterday, General Westmoreland said he had just come in from a field trip when
General McChristian appeared with the cable. After looking at the figures for
the self-defense and secret self-defense forces, General Westmoreland testified,
he said in effect:

''Joe, we're not fighting these people. They're civilians. They don't belong in
any numerical strength of the enemy.''

General Westmoreland said this was the first time he had been briefed on the
strength of the ''home guard'' units. The order of battle, he said, was a
document with ''historical,'' rather than up- to-date, data about the enemy and
he had never had occasion to refer to the summaries of it that came into his
office.

Only once during his four years in Vietnam, General Westmoreland said, did he
visit the office where the order of battle was prepared. Rather, he testified,
his focus was on ''current intelligence'' about the movements and capabilities
of North Vietnamese and Vietcong regular troops.

General Westmoreland said he told General McChristian that he wanted to
''reflect'' on the cable and that his intelligence chief should prepare a
further explanation of the figures.

''I was not about to send a cable without a briefing,'' General Westmoreland
testified. ''Such a cable, with its numbers, would be terribly misleading and
could be misconstrued by people not familiar with this category.''

Q. Did General McChristian express any disagreement?

General Westmoreland edged toward the microphone on the witness stand, his bushy
eyebrows raised.

A. I don't see how he could. After all, I was the commander.

General Westmoreland said that, on May 20, the new figures were explained at the
regular weekly intelligence meeting of his senior staff. A visitor to that
session, he said, was Adm. Ulysses S. Grant Sharp, commander in chief of Pacific
forces, based in Honolulu.

General Westmoreland said that Admiral Sharp was the superior to whom he
reported, according to the military chain of command, and that Ellsworth Bunker,
then the United States Ambassador in Saigon, was the civilian to whom he was
required to report.

The general said he was ''very impressed'' with the detail of the briefing, but
suggested that ''the fighters'' in the enemy order of battle be listed
separately from the ''non-fighters'' - a suggestion he said his staff was
''responsive to.''

He said he also ordered that the new figures be explained to the Mission
Council, a body of senior American officials in Vietnam, headed by Ambassador
Bunker and including C.I.A. representatives. General Westmoreland said that such
a briefing was given to the Mission Council, as well as to United States
Information Agency officials who had ''to interface with the press.''

Notes by General Westmoreland in 1967, which he said he had kept for
''historical'' purposes at the suggestion of former President Dwight D.
Eisenhower, were introduced into evidence yesterday by Mr. Burt. They confirmed
Admiral Sharp's presence at an intelligence briefing in Saigon on May 19, 1967.
Other contemporary documents introduced by Mr. Burt corroborated General
Westmoreland's statement that he ordered the new figures on enemy strength given
to the Mission Council.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. William C. Westmoreland

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
COMMANDER OF AN AMERICAN DEFEAT

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1062 words


After one of the most promising early careers in American military annals,
William Childs Westmoreland became the commander who presided in Vietnam over
one of the worst defeats in United States history. In the view of those who know
him well he has never fully recovered from the experience.

The now retired four-star, or full, general took the witness stand yesterday in
a Manhattan court in his $120 million libel suit against CBS. He contends that
the television network defamed him in saying he conspired to conceal from his
superiors estimates of high enemy strength in Vietnam in 1967.

Now 70 years old, General Westmoreland retains some of the soldierly bearing of
two decades ago, although his hair is now totally white and he is noticeably
older. Until testifying yesterday, he sat quietly, day after day, in a
third-floor Federal courtroom in New York, displaying no emotion as lengthy
testimony droned on.

Since retiring from the Army in 1972, he has spent some of his time giving
speeches to a variety of academic and social-service groups. As the years
passed, some of these speeches tended more and more to suggest that the Vietnam
War was not lost militarily, but in a political sense. On the other hand, he has
seldom, if ever, been shrill or emotional and is courteous to those who disagree
with his views.

More and more, he has devoted his retirement years to an attempt to vindicate
his conduct of the war from 1965 to to 1968. Unlike many senior officers, he has
appeared at public gatherings of Vietnam veterans in recent years, and has been
warmly received.

Tet Offensive

From 1964 until 1968, General Westmoreland acted as the chief of the Military
Assistance Command in Vietnam, the American establishment formed to help South
Vietnam in its battle against Communist forces. In that year, a large Communist
force fell upon South Vietnamese and upon American troops under General
Westmoreland's command during the Vietnamese lunar new year known as Tet. Though
the Communists suffered major casualties, the offensive had the effect in the
United States of seeming to undermine both public and official will to pursue
the war.

On the whole, General Westmoreland pursued a conservative course militarily
during his four years of command in Vietnam, where he spent most of his time -
in starched green fatigues - in the MACV headquarters in Saigon, known as
Pentagon East. After United States combat units began to arrive in 1965, at his
urging, he is said by fellow officers to have preferred to employ these units
and to relegate Vietnamese Army forces to secondary roles in maintaining local
security.

General Westmoreland's strategy was one of a ''war of attrition,'' in which he
sought to kill infiltrated and indigenous Vietnamese Communist soldiers more
rapidly than they could be replaced.

Military Strategy


The general followed a plan of ''search and destroy'' missions in which
well-trained and armed American units would try to find and bloody so-called
main-force Communist forces. However, General Westmoreland was under constant
pressure from Washington to avoid the kind of disaster that befell the French
Army during the 55-day siege at Dien Bien Phu in 1954 that ended the French
effort in Indochina.

For this reason, he normally forbade any military operations by units smaller
than a battalion of about 750 men. He also developed a somewhat unusual method
of operation in which artillery guns were airlifted into fire bases and troops
were, for the most part, forbidden to proceed past the 11,000- to 20,000-yard
''fan'' of the artillery.

However, several objections were raised to this plan. One was that Communist
units could avoid the artillery fan and continue to fight. Another was that the
war of attrition did not work and that North Vietnam was able to infiltrate
Communist soldiers faster than General Westmoreland's soldiers could kill them.
Gen. Creighton Abrams, the notable World War II tank commander who replaced
General Westmoreland, but who has since died of lung cancer, overturned his
policy.

General Abrams encouraged company-sized operations involving 150 men or fewer
and pulled United States troops back, closer to cities and inhabited areas, to
enforce what he called ''population control.''

By that time, General Westmoreland was in a new position as Army Chief of Staff,
in which he played only a minor role in the prosecution of the Vietnam War.
General Westmoreland complained that President Johnson bullied him into
enlisting public support for the war. The General gave several news conferences
at the instigation of the President and one address to a joint meeting of
Congress.

Standout at West Point


General Westmoreland was born March 26, 1914, in Spartanburg County, S.C., into
the family of a prosperous textile manufacturer.

At West Point, where he was a member of the class of 1936, he ranked very high
in leadership and other achievements, becoming both captain of cadets and winner
of a Pershing Award for leadership.

He began his career as an artilleryman and during World War II served in North
Africa and Sicily as a battalion commander of artillery. He subsequently became
a staff officer in the Ninth Division and served in that capacity after the
invasion of France. He subsequently became parachute- qualified and commanded an
airborne brigade for part of the Korean War. He later commanded the 101st
Airborne Division and the 18th Airborne Corps.



Youngest Major General


At the age of 42, he became what was then the youngest major general in the
Army. At 46, he became the second-youngest superintendent of the Military
Academy at West Point, older than only Gen. Douglas MacArthur. General MacArthur
once warned General Westmoreland that his new post in Southeast Asia was full of
promise, but also of peril.

General Westmoreland married Katherine Van Deusen, the daughter of an Army
officer, and they had two daughters and a son.

General Westmoreland, who retired from the Army in 1972 and has served on the
boards of a number of corporations, ran unsuccessfully in 1974 for the
Republican nomination for governor of South Carolina, where he had built a home
in the historic old section of Charleston.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sketch of scene at trial yesterday

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY ;
Help for Veterans

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 297 words


They were not looking for the fantasy that is Studio 54's stock in trade. The
veterans who gathered there yesterday were looking for much more - for jobs, for
schools, for homes. Or just for someone who would listen to their troubles.

''This is one-stop shopping for veterans,'' said Lawrence Halpern, chairman of
the annual Veterans Information Day, ''to show them how to use the system. They
don't have to run around town.''

Instead, the veterans could go from table to table on the dance floor, where
private groups and government agencies were dispensing what help they could.

One program being pushed was the Emergency Job Training Act for the veterans of
America's latest wars, which government forms call the ''Korean Conflict'' and
the ''Vietnam Era.''

A small knot of veterans complained in unison about the training program. ''You
have to have experience already,'' said Devonish Cameron. ''If I had the
experience, why would I need the training? If I don't have the experience, I
can't get the training.''

Mr. Cameron did make one discovery: the Black Veterans for Social Justice in
Brooklyn. ''They said: 'Come on down, we'll discuss anything with you. School,
work, housing.' Housing, mind you. I wonder how many of us don't even have a
place to live.''

Clutching an armful of pamphlets, he said, ''If I didn't get a job today, at
least I got something to read.''

In that, he was luckier than another man, who left without anything. ''I was
proud to serve my country,'' he said, stepping through a rainbow of glitter and
under slender strands of purple neon. ''I lost an eye for my country. But I'm
going down to the Bowery right now. What else can I do? Commit a crime? What
else can I do?''

''Don't be bitter, man,'' another veteran shouted out.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 849 words


FRIDAY, NOVEMBER 16 1984 International

Thousands of Chilean men were herded into a soccer stadium in Santiago and
questioned by army and air force troops and plainclothesmen. At dawn, the
Government forces raided a poor Santiago neighborhood that has witnessed many
clashes and demonstrations against the military Government. The Government
forces occupied the slum for seven hours, searching house to house, and then
bused or trucked virtually all males over 16 years old to the stadium. (Page A1,
Column 1.)

A desire to move promptly into talks with Moscow on ways of resuming arm control
negotiations was repeated by the Reagan Administration. It said it was eager to
''flesh out'' its plan for so-called umbrella talks with the Soviet Union. At
the same time, officials said that negotiations on a new agreement for cultural
exchanges were snagged over the issue of possible defections by Soviet
participants. (A1:3-4.)

Lebanon, resuming talks with Israel, proposed that the Lebanese Army take
control of all of southern Lebanon after Israeli troops leave and demanded that
Israel pay $8 billion to $10 billion in war reparations. Israeli officers
involved in the negotiations called the Lebanese proposal a ''nonstarter,''
according to the Israeli radio. (A1:2.)

Iran's rulers appear firmly in control despite some lingering problems six years
after the Islamic revolution that toppled Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi. The
Government ''gets more and more solid,'' according to a Western diplomat in
Teheran. (A1:4-6.) National

Strong action on two major banks, the Bank of America and the First National
Bank of Chicago, has been taken by the Federal Government. It required the
directors of both banks to sign formal pledges to make specific changes in their
operations to strengthen their credit policies and financial stability. If the
banks do not comply with the agreements, the Government can take the signed
pledges to court to obtain removal of the banks' senior officers. (A1:6.)

Special curbs on welfare grants could be imposed by state and local governments
under new rules proposed by the Reagan Administration to insure that poor people
pay their rent. The main purpose of such restrictions, the Administration said,
is to prevent the eviction of tenants receiving welfare payments. Officials of
New York and other cities, who have been seeking this change for six years,
applauded the proposal. (A1:5.)

''No tax increase and cut spending'' were the orders issued by President Reagan
to Cabinet members at a two- and-a-half-hour meeting, according to Larry
Speakes, the White House spokesman. (A25:1-3.)

With two new satellites delivered to orbit and two old ones salvaged, the
Discovery's astronauts prepared to return to earth. The space shuttle was
scheduled to land at the Kennedy Space Center in Florida at 7 A.M. today, just
after sunrise. (A23:1-4.)

Baby Fae's condition was unchanged as new information came to light about the
decision to give her a baboon heart 20 days ago. But the new reports added new
contradictions about the experiment. (A14:1-2.)

One-third of the nation's smokers tried to quit for a day, according to the
American Cancer Society, which sponsored the eighth annual ''Great American
Smokeout.'' A spokesman for the society said the estimate of participants was
based on a telephone survey of 2,096 households. (A19:1-2.) Metropolitan

William C. Westmoreland testified at his libel trial against CBS that he
informed his civilian and military superiors of higher enemy troop estimates in
South Vietnam within days of learning of the figures in May 1967. Taking the
stand as the 14th witness in the Manhattan trial, the 70-year- old retired
general quickly contradicted the thesis of a 1982 CBS Reports documentary that
said his command had engaged in a ''conspiracy'' to ''suppress and alter
critical intelligence'' in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968.
(A1:1-3.)

Ariel Sharon testified that ''high moral values'' had guided his long career as
one of Israel's most celebrated military leaders. Testifying at his libel trial
against Time magazine in Manhattan, the former Defense Minister said that for
Israel's efforts to avoid civilian casualties ''we paid with blood, our blood.''
(B4:1-3.)

The current wave of libel suits and huge awards against news organizations has
begun to daunt some editors and reporters and represents a danger not only to
the press but to a nation that values the truth, Henry A. Grunwald, the editor
in chief of Time Inc., said in an address at New York University. (B4:4-5.)

11,000 new housing units have been built in New York City since 1981. At the
same time, the city gained 78,000 more people. As a result, it is no easier to
find an apartment. (B3:1-4.)

A ban on bias in the hiring of homosexuals imposed by the New York City Board of
Estimate on social- service agencies that do business with the city was upheld
by a State Supreme Court justice. (B3:1-2.)


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND DENIES CBS REPORT ON 'CEILING'

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1360 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland repeatedly asserted at his libel trial against CBS
yesterday that he had never imposed a ceiling on estimates of enemy strength in
South Vietnam nor had he ordered those figures to be suppressed or altered.

The 70-year-old retired general - whose $120 million suit was prompted by a 1982
CBS Reports documentary titled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' -
testified that his concern in 1967 with how the press would interpret enemy
troop estimates stemmed, not from an attempt to mislead, but from an effort to
have the figures understood.

''Certainly we were sensitive to press reaction, and it was logical that we
be,'' he told the jury in Federal Court in Manhattan in a long, impassioned
answer to a question concerning a cable that was sent on Aug. 20, 1967, to Gen.
Earle G. Wheeler, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The cable expressed a fear that the press would draw ''erroneous and gloomy
conclusions'' if ''inflated figures'' showing a 120,000 to 130,000 ''increase''
in enemy size were released. It was written by General Westmoreland's deputy,
Gen. Creighton W. Abrams, and endorsed by General Westmoreland, who was
commander of American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

The increase was partly the result of a previous underestimate of the size of
the Vietcong's self-defense forces - ''people who,'' General Westmoreland argued
yesterday, ''were not fighters.''

The general said that, had the higher numbers for the self-defense forces been
included in the military listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle,
''distorting the quantity of people dangerous to us,'' it ''would have been
terribly detrimental to the morale of my troops.''

'First War Without Censorship'

''This was the first war without censorship,'' he continued, a ''war against an
unorthodox enemy halfway around the world'' but a war in which American forces,
in 1967, were making ''real progress under difficult circumstances. My troops
did a wonderful job. A commander could have had, or expected, no more.'

The CBS documentary said that some intelligence officers under General
Westmoreland told the network that the general had insisted on an ''arbitrary''
300,000 limit on estimates of enemy forces in 1967, and that they ''felt very
uncomfortable carrying'' out the order.

But, yesterday, General Westmoreland went beyond denying that he had given such
an order, to say that none of his intelligence officers had expressed such
feelings to him.

Suddenly, he plucked from the inside pocket of his suit jacket a small card
bearing the orange and yellow emblem of his command in Vietnam, a card that he
said was given on his instructions to every officer in Vietnam, from
headquarters down to platoon.

''I would like to read this to the jury,'' the general said, as his lawyer, Dan
M. Burt, quickly moved for its admission as evidence. ''There are 15 points on
it, but let me just read three.

''The first says, 'Make the welfare of your men your prime concern, with special
attention on mail, mess and medical care.' The second says, 'Give priority
emphasis to matters of intelligence, counterintelligence and accurate
reporting.' And the 13th says, 'Maintain an open-door policy on complaints and a
sensitivity to the detection and correction of malpractices.' ''

Only last weekend, General Westmoreland said, he was in Washington to attend
ceremonies at which the Vietnam War Veterans Memorial was turned over to the
Government, and three former servicemen approached him to say that ''they had
written me complaints'' in Vietnam and had ''received attention.''

C.I.A. Meeting

On the CBS broadcast, a former intelligence colonel, Gains Hawkins, said he
believed that the enemy strength figures advanced by General Westmoreland's
command ''were lower than they should be'' and that he had said so to Central
Intelligence Agency analysts at a meeting at C.I.A. headquarters in Langley,
Va., in late August 1967.

Yesterday, Mr. Burt asked General Westmoreland whether Colonel Hawkins had ever
complained to him.

A. He never did.

Q. Did anyone ever tell you that Gains Hawkins had complained to them?

A. No.

Q. Did any intelligence officer complain that they had been ordered to reduce,
or alter, or suppress, intelligence figures?

A. No

The C.I.A. meeting attended by Colonel Hawkins as a representative of General
Westmoreland's command was one in a series in mid-1967 that focused on the
preparation of a revised order of battle and of a related intelligence estimate
of enemy strength for President Johnson.

Before those meetings, also attended by delegates from other intelligence
agencies, Colonel Hawkins had concluded, on the basis of new studies, that the
size of the self-defense units was in the neighborhood of 120,000, not the
70,000 then included in the order of battle. That view was shared by Maj. Gen.
Joseph A. McChristian, General Westmoreland's chief of intelligence until June
1, l967.

In late May 1967, General McChristian wrote a report on the subject and General
Westmoreland was briefed on it. But, according to the CBS documentary, the
report was ''suppressed'' by the commander.

Yesterday, as on Thursday, General Westmoreland said he provided the higher
figures to his military and civilian superiors - Adm. Ulysses S. Grant Sharp,
commander in chief of Pacific forces, and Ellsworth Bunker, the American
Ambassador in South Vietnam. And, yesterday, he denied telling General
McChristian - as the former intelligence chief had told CBS - that if the
figures in the report were released they would be a ''political bombshell.''

''I'm confident I didn't use those words - bombshell is not a part of my
lexicon,'' the general testified. Instead, he recalled saying to his
intelligence chief that, if the figures ''went out'' without explanation, they
would ''create a public relations problem.''

Q. Did you tell General McChristian to reduce the estimates?

A. I did not.

Mr. Burt introduced several June 1967 cables between General Westmoreland and
Admiral Sharp, who was based in Honolulu, that discussed revised estimates for
the self-defense forces and the need for ''exploration and analysis'' of the
figures that would avoid ''possible embarrassment.''

Mr. Burt asked General Westmoreland what he meant then by his use of the word
''embarrassment.''

The witness said the cable had been drafted by General McChristian's successor,
Maj. Gen. Phillip B. Davidson Jr., although he had approved it. General
Davidson, he said, ''was very sensitive'' to the need for ''having all his ducks
in a row so he could defend his estimate'' to other intelligence agencies when
the time came.

But General Westmoreland said that, by August 1967, he had decided that an exact
figure for the ''home guard'' self- defense forces should be eliminated from the
order of battle in favor of a verbal description of the units and what they
contributed to enemy capabilities.

''I wanted to purify the so-called order of battle,'' he testified, ''so that it
would be an order of battle in fact. I felt it was important that we sort out
the enemy organization so that there would be no ambiguity in who we were
fighting, with cognizance of the fact that there were other elements in South
Vietnam associated with the Communist cause.''

The CBS documentary called the exclusion of a number for the self-defense forces
a ''tactic'' by General Westmoreland to help keep down the total enemy strength
estimate.

General Westmoreland said new figures settled upon for other categories of enemy
strength, such as regular North Vietnamese troops or Vietcong guerrillas, were
proposed to him by General Davidson, days before they were taken to the C.I.A.
meeting by Colonel Hawkins and others. The figures totaled about 213,000,
excluding a separate category of 75,000 to 85,000 political cadre.

''They were General Davidson's best estimates, and I accepted his advice,'' said
General Westmoreland, who denied telling General Davidson or other intelligence
officers that they had to stay below a specific total.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Sketch of courtroom scene

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SCREEN: NORRIS IN 'MISSING IN ACTION'

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 426 words


It's possible to watch a Chuck Norris film like ''Missing in Action,'' which
opened yesterday at the United Artists Twin, and come away with the
misimpression that Mr. Norris has not said a word. He does talk, of course, but
his real eloquence is exclusively physical. There's not quite enough of it to
explain why someone of Mr. Norris's taciturn manner and unprepossessing blond
looks has managed to become an international B-movie star. But there

is enough to carry a simple, bullet-riddled, crowd- pleasing action movie like
this one.

Mr. Norris plays an American Army colonel who, after years as a prisoner of war
in Vietnam, returns to that country to try to rescue other prisoners. His
celebrated martial- arts skills don't figure very prominently in this exploit,
although there is one memorable moment when he casually knocks an ax off its
handle. Instead, Mr. Norris relies mostly on machine guns and grenades this
time. In one slow-motion sequence, he rises up out of a river, looking suitably
ferocious in green fatigues and matching headband, and shoots holes in three
Vietnamese soldiers who have made the mistake of laughing at him.



Actually, Mr. Norris is a much less bloodthirsty figure here than the sorts
Charles Bronson usually plays. And he approaches each fight with the faint
sheepishness that is part of his charm. The fact that he wins every battle is
another part, as is his way of driving a hard bargain. In negotiating to buy a
raft equipped with a machine gun, for instance, he simply turns the gun to face
the man who is offering the thing for sale. This helps reduce the price by half,
and very quickly.

In addition to liking Mr. Norris, the Rivoli audience also showed enthusiasm for
the film's attitude toward Vietnamese soldiers and officials, who are depicted
as no less unequivocally shifty, villainous and deceitful as their stereotyped
Japanese counterparts were in B-movies about World War II.


The Cast

MISSING IN ACTION, directed by Joseph Zito; screenplay by James Bruner, story by
John Crowther and Lance Hool, based on characters created by Arthur Silver,
Larry Levinson and Steve Bing; director of photography, Joao Fernandes; edited
by Joel Goodman and Daniel Loewenthal; music by Jay Chattaway; produced by
Menahem Golan and Yoram Globus. Running time: 94 minutes. This film is rated R.
BraddockChuck Norris TuckM. Emmet Walsh Senator PorterDavid Tress AnnLeonore
Kasdorf General TranJames Hong VinhErnie Ortega JacquesPierrino Mascarino
MasucciE. Erich Anderson


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE MISJUDGMENT THAT LOST IN SAIGON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 282 words


To the Editor:


A Nov. 2 news article cited Lieut. Gen. Daniel O. Graham, intelligence director
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 1974-75, as telling the libel trial of Gen.
William C. Westmoreland against CBS that South Vietnam would have prevailed if
the United States had not ''slashed'' military aid to it in 1974.

Yet, the former Central Intelligence Agency analyst Frank Snepp stated in 1977
(''Decent Interval,'' page 161) that the South Vietnamese received ''roughly
twice the amount of military assistance (in dollar terms) that had gone to
Hanoi'' in the year preceding the fall of Saigon on April 30, 1975.

Another source (Indochina Issues, August 1983, page 11) goes so far as to state
that ''the value of military supplies Saigon lost'' in 1975 ''was greater than
the total amount of military aid sent to Hanoi by the Soviet Union and China
combined throughout the whole course of the war.''

Disputes between the intelligence services may have continued after the war, but
they should not obscure the true reasons for the Communist victory of 1975 in
Vietnam. Those reasons have far less to do with Washington's reduction in aid to
Saigon - from $2.27 billion in 1973 to $1.01 billion in 1974 and to $700 million
in 1975 - than with the contrast between the effectiveness of the Communists'
organization and the ineffectiveness of their enemies. And that contrast goes
back at least to 1945, when Ho Chi Minh first came to power in Vietnam, and to
all the events that followed.

JAMES P. HARRISON New York, Nov. 7, 1984

The writer, professor of history at Hunter College, is author of ''The Endless
War: Vietnam's Struggle for Independence'' (1982).


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW YORK MEMORIAL FOR WHOSE VIETNAM WAR?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 175 words


To the Editor: We applaud James Reston Jr.'s proposal to honor the ''moral as
well as the physical courage'' of the Vietnam generation in the Viet

nam Veterans Memorial planned for New York City.  The Washington Vietnam
Veterans Memorial is not quite so ambiguous in the statement it makes as he
would have us believe. Implicit in that magnificent achievement is a silent,
reproachful question: ''Why?'' Rather than attempt to ''go beyond'' it with the
kind of Crackerjacks box of 1960's mementos that Mr. Reston suggests, New York
City - and the nation - should address that question.  This is the way to honor
the ''different'' Vietnam generation, including those who patriotically opposed
the war and who cried out: ''No. Stop. This is wrong.''

NANCY ZAROULIS GERALD SULLIVAN Chestnut Hill, Mass., Nov. 7, 1984

The writers are the authors of ''Who Spoke Up?: American Protest Against the War
in Vietnam, 1963-75.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW YORK MEMORIAL FOR WHOSE VIETNAM WAR?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


To the Editor: James Reston Jr. suggests that the New York memorial include
''the sentiments of the resister and the exile and the perpetual graduate stu

dent.'' That would be like giving gold medals in the next Olympics not only to
the winning participants, but also to the viewers and to countries that boycott
the games.

Public television recently provided an excellent series reminding us of the full
panorama of that period. A war memorial should not serve the same purpose,
focusing on Zippo lighters and marijuana pipes, and other images of those days.

The memorial serves to honor people who made a sacrifice for their country in
spite of second thoughts about the wisdom of the conflict by some journalists or
politicians. Regardless of the lack of popular support for the war, compared
with earlier wars, the servicemen served the public. The resisters and
conscientious objectors serve only themselves. It would be foolish to include in
the memorial the feelings and motivations of those members of our generation who
made the decision to serve themselves rather than their country.

JACK STILLWAGGON Darien, Conn., Nov. 7, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW YORK MEMORIAL FOR WHOSE VIETNAM WAR?

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 368 words


To the Editor:


After reading James Reston Jr.'s ''A Wall Honoring Not Only Vietnam Veterans''
(Op-Ed, Nov. 6), we, the designers of the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial,
were upset and dismayed at its assumptions and implications.

We feel that the Memorial Commission's specification for a design that
''expresses the contradictory yet universally shared experiences of war and
peace, of danger and relief, of weakness and strength, of isolation and
comradeship'' will be fulfilled through our design - a wall of glass upon which
will be etched the voices of the Vietnam era.

This literary montage, drawn from letters written home by soldiers, letters from
family and friends, public documents and news dispatches (all signed and dated
to provide a personal and historical context), will express the multiplicity of
emotions, thoughts and images that embody the collective, yet contradictory,
experiences of the era. Visitors for years to come - the children of the Vietnam
generation and their children - will share the words spoken from many points of
view.

Alongside the words on the wall will be a mantle, a granite shelf, which runs
the length of the memorial and serves as a repository for everyone's
participation. As mourners bring stones to a graveside or light candles in
memory of their loved ones, so visitors may leave their thoughts on this mantle
for others to reflect upon.

To question the politics of the Vietnam era is understood, but to question the
need or importance of such a memorial makes evident the tragedy that persists
even 10 years after the last troops returned home. We do not wish, as Mr. Reston
suggests, to imply that the soldier's sacrifice was ''more poignant or
pointless, more romantic or tragic, more noble or brutalizing than the loss of
his brother.'' The letters and poems we have received indicate that for vet and
nonvet alike, the sacrifice was poignant and pointless, romantic and tragic,
noble and brutalizing. This paradox is the heart of the Vietnam experience.  It
is a memorial for all of us, to learn from its voices and to honor the dead.

PETER WORMSER WILLIAM FELLOWS JOSEPH FERRANDINO New York, Nov. 9, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FORMER BOAT PEOPLE LAND THE GOOD LIFE IN CHINA

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words

DATELINE: BEIHAI, China


When the workday begins, this small Chinese port on the Gulf of Tonkin takes on
a distinctly Vietnamese air.

Women in their conical Vietnamese- style straw hats unload the catch of shrimp
and fish from trawlers at the dock. At an adjoining wharf, boat builders fashion
Southeast Asian teakwood into traditional Vietnamese fishing craft.

These Beihai fishermen and their families were Vietnamese boat people five or
six years ago. Today, they are prosperous business people with a 706- boat
fleet, an up-to-date packing plant and export contracts in Hong Kong.

By next year, they may be in the tourist business, too. Beihai has been declared
an open area for foreign investment. The Chinese Government is building a hotel
nearby on the wide, unspoiled gulf beach and is seeking foreign developers for
more resort construction. An airport is being planned to make it easier for
tourists to reach remote Beihai.

In a part of the world where many Indochinese still live more often than not in
squalid camps or prisons, what is happening at the Beihai fishing cooperative is
one small success story, United Nations refugee officials say.

Color TV's and Washing Machines


In the village of shops, a hospital and apartments built for them by the Chinese
Government and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, the resettled
boat people have color television sets and washing machines, a beauty parlor and
free-enterprise markets, with meats, fresh fruits and vegetables.

The approximately 13,000 people here, some of them among China's highest wage
earners, are living better than they did in Vietnam, several said in interviews.

Chinese farmers from the neighboring fields, who supply market produce under
China's new guidelines encouraging private enterprise, are also cashing in on
Beihai's success. A row of new homes built by Chinese families is growing along
the perimeter of the fishing compound.

Six years ago, when boat people started arriving along this coast where the new
fishing port stands - about four miles from the town of Beihai proper - there
were nothing but white beaches and farmers' fields stretching to the water's
edge.

In 1978 and 1979, however, about a quarter of a million refugees fleeing Vietnam
reached China, sometimes at the rate of 10,000 or more a day. Among those who
arrived by sea - many others came overland - there were fishing families who
brought their own boats from the area around Haiphong, Vietnam's major northern
port. They were to form the nucleus of the Beihai cooperative.

276,000 Refugees in China


Like most of the 276,000 Indochinese refugees who have settled in China in the
last six years, these fishermen are ethnic Chinese who say they were singled out
for harassment by Hanoi.

''We heard they were coming to take the engine from our boat,'' said Wu Ya Wu, a
63-year-old woman who fled with a son and son-in-law and their families. ''They
didn't want us to make a living.''

Others told of slashed rations, a loss of educational opportunities for their
children and warnings that they would be moved to one of Vietnam's new economic
zones, areas of special development that the refugees said often became work
camps.

Chinese authorities, who call Vietnam's anti-Chinese policy ''genocide,'' say
they were first preoccupied with the task of providing emergency relief. But by
1980, they had begun to realize that they would have to find more permanent
homes and jobs for the refugees.

In general, many rich and educated exiles did not come to - or did not stay in -
China, according to Chinese authorities, who say they have never blocked the
movement of any refugees out of China who could find another country willing to
take them.

'China Is Not a Rich Country'


Those who arrived in this country were mostly farm workers, peddlers, miners,
potters - and fisherman. Many were undernourished or ill, the Chinese say.

''China is not a rich country, and we were caught unprepared,'' said Ji Hua,
deputy director of China's Office for the Reception and Settlement of
Indochinese Refugees. The resettlement programs have so far cost China nearly
half a billion dollars, officials say.

Many Vietnamese were eventually scattered around more than 560 state farms and
communes in southern China, often where returning overseas Chinese from nations
like Malaysia or Indonesia had settled.

Reporters visiting several of these farming communities in Guangdong Province
and Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region heard many complaints. Refugees said they
were unsuited to vocations like tea planting or tree farming.

Many are homesick for the urban pleasures and temptations of Hanoi or Haiphong.
Life in the Chinese countryside is spartan, and migration to the overcrowded
cities is severely restricted for both the refugees and the Chinese.

Many Want to Live in West


A large number of refugees interviewed said they wanted to live in the West,
particularly the United States, although they are aware their chances are small.

But in Beihai, a settlement where traditional lifestyles can be carried on, the
attitude was markedly different. Mrs. Wu has a four-room, ground-floor apartment
with its own kitchen and bathroom. The brightly decorated ''front parlor'' had
an electric grandfather clock, a large Japanese television set and a
well-supplied beer cupboard.

Mrs. Wu, who shares her home with two grandchildren, said she had lived for most
of her life on the family's small fishing boat off Haiphong. Her son, son-in-law
and their wives now spend most of their time on the larger trawler that they had
built here last year for about $8,000. The family income is around $4,000 a
year, she said, considerably higher than that of the average Chinese family.

''I am happy to be here because I don't have to go out to sea any more,'' Mrs.
Wu said through an interpreter. ''I want to live here forever.''

On the dock, Li Yu, a fisherman in his 50's who fled Vietnam with his family in
1978, said he earned enough money and was ''satisfied with life.''

Asked if any of the fishermen of Beihai had tried to sail away to Hong Kong and
then to the West, the goal of many Vietnamese in China, he laughed.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of China; photo of Lin Yaxiang and family; photo of workers

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 17, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EX-REP. CHARLES MOSHER OF OHIO

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 391 words


Charles Adams Mosher, an eight- term Congressman from Ohio who was one of the
earliest and most persistent Republican Congressional critics of American
involvement in the Vietnam War, died of congestive heart failure yesterday at
Allen Memorial Hospital in Oberlin, his hometown. He was 78 years old.

As a state senator and publisher of The Oberlin News-Tribune, Mr. Mosher led a
successful fight against film censorship and was first elected to the House in
1960 amid a Republican comeback in Ohio.

He soon became known as an active promoter within his party of civil rights. He
also was the rare Republican Congressman who listed himself as a member of both
the American Civil Liberties Union and the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People.

But it was his stand on the issue of Vietnam that brought him to national
attention. By 1966, Mr. Mosher reported that the voters in his district south
and west of Cleveland had registered the conviction that it was a bad mistake
for the United States to get so deeply mired in the war.

Plea for Troop Pullout

With slowly growing support from other Republicans, Mr. Mosher went on to vote
against further funds for the war and to demand that the bombing of North
Vietnam be scaled down. In 1971, he signed a letter to his House colleagues
proposing that the United States had more than fulfilled its obligations and
should pull all American troops out of Vietnam by year's end.

In 1976, at the age of 69, he anounced his retirement from the House. ''Mosher's
law states that it's better to retire too soon than too late,'' he said at the
time. ''I am convinced from observing the sad examples of others that it usually
is a mistake for anyone in public office to seek re-election after age 70.''

Last year Mr. Mosher, a 1928 Oberlin College graduate, earned a master's degree
in government. It made him the oldest person ever to receive a degree from
Oberlin and the only one ever to get both an earned and an honorary degree, in
law, at the same commencement ceremony at Oberlin.

Mr. Mosher is survived by his wife, the former Harriet Johnson; a son, Frederic
A. Mosher of New York City; a daughter, Jane Frederickson of Broomfield, Colo.;
two brothers, Edward Mosher of Sun City, Ariz., and Dr. Henry A. Mosher of
Boston, and six grandchildren.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DEADLY FAMINE IN MOZAMBIQUE CALLED INEVITABLE

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1033 words

DATELINE: MAPUTO, Mozambique, Nov. 14


United Nations relief officials here said today that famine as severe as that
which killed at least 100,000 people in Mozambique less than a year ago was now
virtually unavoidable in the months to come.

The major reason for a desperate shortage of food relief, according to the
officials, is that the intense international focus on the famine in Ethiopia has
diverted attention and dramatically diminished the shipments of emergency food
relief to this drought- stricken, rebellion-ridden and bankrupt country of 14
million people.

A United Nations official said that in the second half of this year less than
one-half of the amount of international relief grain had been committed to
Mozambique than in the second half of last year. This is the more dramatic, he
added, because the need between now and next April or May will be even greater
than in the same calamitous period of 1983-84.

After three years of drought, most Mozambiquans are now living on relief food,
of which reserves are lower than last year at this time. No new harvests of corn
or millet, the staple grains, can be expected before next April, and then only
if sufficient rains this coming season break the drought and relief seeds reach
the population in time for planting.

Little Seed Set Aside


Few Mozambiquans have set aside seed from the last harvest; either the harvest
failed or they have had to eat the seed.

The United Nations officials asked not to be identified because they said the
Mozambiquan ministry responsible for food distribution reserves for itself the
right to disclose such information. The Internal Trade Minister and his
assistants were not available for interviews.

Even in this capital, which is the best-supplied place in Mozambique, the
population is rationed to 15.4 pounds of staple cornmeal and rice a month, with
bread occasionally available. The rations arrive later every month than the
month before. Maputo is a city of many tired and listless people and silent,
patient food lines.

Meat is almost nonexistent and fish rare, except in the shops for foreigners and
high officials of the Government and Frelino, the single party. Some legumes and
vegetables shelter the people of Maputo against the misery of much of the
countryside.

Hunger is already widespread in three provinces - Tete, Sofala and Manica - as
well as in regions that are difficult to reach in this elongated country that is
twice the area of California. Food shortages are acute almost everywhere else.
Local information is hard to obtain in the absence of an efficient
communications system and a countrywide insurgency that limits travel to a
national airline that is short of planes, fuel and spare parts.

Impending Disaster Is Seen


But a trip last week to the northwestern province of Tete, 1,000 miles from
here, provided confirmation of an impending disaster. Villages had either run
out of food grains or were near the end of their supplies. None were available
in the Government shops.

The population was supplementing sharply reduced meals with wild leaves and
fruit eaten only in times of distress and feared to be more harmful than
nourishing, particularly for the very young.

The provincial administration had 1,300 tons of relief grain in stock for a
population of 831,000, of which more than half are seriously affected by
drought. They had only seven trucks and about 1,000 gallons of fuel with which
to deliver this food as well as seeds along the ragged dirt tracks that are the
only roads. The donation of 23 trucks by the United States, which was due in
Tete last Monday, failed to arrive from Zimbabwe because of a missing letter of
credit.

The crisis resulting from minimal harvests, dwindling reserves and diminished
aid has been made much more acute than last year by the intensification of the
rebellion against the Marxist regime of President Samora M. Machel. No road or
rail line beyond the limits of Mozambique's cities and towns is safe from mining
and ambushes; no Government installation in the countryside - school, clinic,
shop or administrative building - is immune to hit-and-run raids. The rebels are
thought to number 15,000, roughly the number of combat soldiers in Mozambique's
army.

Rebel attacks have not only heightened the difficulty of distributing relief
food, they have also driven many farmers from their productive lands and raised
havoc with the normal commercial distribution circuits in areas that escaped the
drought. Farmers in the north and west are taking their surpluses across the
border to Malawi, Zambia and Zimbabwe because access is safer and because of the
availability of primary consumer goods that do not exist in Mozambique.

Mozambique itself is virtually without means. The lack of foreign exchange and
the foreign debt of $1.8 billion precludes almost all commercial imports of
foods, fuel, textiles and other necessities and puts the country at the mercy of
the international community.

Request From U.S. Embassy


In view of the emergency, the United States Embassy is hastening a request to
Washington for the acceleration of aid shipments. By the end of August, 30,863
tons of American corn and wheat had been received here, with 10,000 more tons
committed. The European Common Market has contributed 39,000 tons so far this
year, and the United Nations World Food Program 28,212 tons. Internal Trade
Ministry statistics show no grain donations from other Communist countries,
although East Germany, China and Vietnam were listed as having pledged small
amounts.

Furthermore, the Government, with the help of CARE in managing relief logistics,
is drawing up a comprehensive appeal for an emergency program.

''We can say there is not enough food for the future,'' said Amos Mahanjane,
director of the Department for the Prevention and Control of Natural Calamities.
''We have not enough seed. We have some transport but not enough for our needs.
We have no money to import enough for our needs.

''We have pledges for 13,000 tons of food, but we need at least 70,000 until
April.'' he said. ''We need 45,000 tons of seed by January. We have no good
perspective for the future.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND AND SHARON: 2 VERY DIFFERENT STYLES

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 45, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words


On the third floor of the United States Court House in lower Manhattan, a
retired American general is testifying in a $120 million libel suit against CBS.
On the ninth floor, a former Israeli general is pressing his own libel suit for
$50 million against Time magazine.

The two men are separated by more than the six floors. Striking differences in
military and national cultures divide William C. Westmoreland, who commanded
Allied forces in Vietnam for more than four years, and Ariel Sharon, who
commanded an Israeli division in decisive battles of the 1967 and 1973 Middle
East wars and who initiated the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon.

Some of the differences are merely physical. During active service, General
Westmoreland was highly ''starched;'' his uniform had knife- edge creases, his
shoes were glossy and his belly flat.

Even as a 36-year-old brigadier general in the 1967 war, ''Arik'' Sharon, as he
was called, was heavy and seemingly indifferent to military grooming. By 1973,
he had a noticeable paunch and shaved barechested in the presence of troops
outside his division commander's trailer. He was very unstarched in his combat
fatigues. He was unstarched, also, about military protocol.

Reflecting the largely civilian-soldier reservist character of Israel's wartime
armies, General Sharon remarked in 1967, ''How can you care if a soldier salutes
if you have been dancing with his wife the week before the war?''

Other differences may be more fundamental. General Westmoreland served in three
wars, but much of the time in staff jobs rather than in direct command of
troops. He attended an advanced management course at the Harvard Business
School, and in testimony last week referred to himself as an ''executive''
during his Vietnam command.

His lawsuit charges that a CBS documentary libeled him by stating that he had
deceived American leaders and the public on the size of enemy forces in Vietnam.


A Fighting General

Although Mr. Sharon became Israel's Defense Minister and is now Minister of
Industry and Commerce, he does not seem to have a managerial personality. He
spent his military career in troop commands, almost always far forward.

After his historic crossing of the Suez canal in 1973, a move that split the
Egyptian Army and surrounded much of it, General Sharon said in an interview:
''I believe that to control a battle you must be with the forward units. One
minute you are a general and another minute a soldier shooting a machine gun,
throwing grenades and climbing on bulldozers to convince men they can work under
shellfire.''

In the 1973 war, General Sharon controlled his division from a command group of
about six armored personnel carriers that shot down nine Egyptian jets, three of
them in two minutes.

During the Vietnam War, General Westmoreland was required to oversee a vast and
complex military, but also political, project. In one sense, he was concerned
primarily with broad strategy, although he took a close interest in tactics.

General Sharon was, at least until the Lebanon invasion, almost entirely a
tactician, and an innovative one. His victories, including the canal crossing
and the destruction of the Abu Agweila strongpoint in 1967, were night
operations, posing difficult problems of troop control.

General Westmoreland's reputation and style was marked by prudence and, in some
ways, military caution. General Sharon was always prone to gamble, and he
complained after the 1973 war that Israel had taken too few risks.

General Westmoreland was a model of military and social etiquette, gracious to
others and reportedly reluctant to interfere with or to criticize other
commanders. He also was respectful of higher military and civilian authority.

General Sharon seemed to be much loved by the troops under his command, but some
Israeli authorities regarded him as insubordinate. He bitterly criticized fellow
officers after the 1973 war, and on an open military radio circuit suggested
that one of them had been emasculated.

Caviar and Cognac

General Westmoreland was not humorless, but he seemed concerned about preserving
his dignity as a high- ranking officer. He generated few legends or even
anecdotes.

General Sharon was both irreverent and iconoclastic. He rode into battle in 1973
with caviar, a non-kosher food, and cognac in his armored car. In the cold night
of a Sinai desert camp, he offered a reporter some smoked oysters but joked that
if the chief rabbi of the Army showed up, they would have to be hidden ''or
he'll want some too.''

In his lawsuit, General Sharon contends that Time defamed him by suggesting he
encouraged the Lebanese Phalangists to massacre Moslems in two Beirut refugee
camps. An Israeli commission that investigated the massacres reported in early
1983 that Mr. Sharon bore ''personal responsibility'' for allowing the Christian
militiamen into the camps. Time contended that a secret appendix to the
commission report stated that Mr. Sharon had discussed with Phalangists the need
for revenge for the assassination of Lebanese President-elect Bashir Gemayel.

A Believer in Retaliation

There is no question, however, that Mr. Sharon early in his career led
retaliatory raids against Arab settlements and strongly believed in a doctrine
of retaliation in response to anti- Israeli terrorism. Mr. Sharon had a portrait
of Zionist pioneer Theodore Herzl in his general's trailer and clearly put the
preservation of the Jewish state as his highest goal.

Although some doubted its effectiveness, General Westmoreland initiated studies
in 1965 on how to make American bombing and shellfire in Vietnam more
''discriminating'' to reduce civilian casualties. He issued wallet-sized cards
instructing all troops to obey the laws of land warfare.

Both Generals turned eventually to politics. Mr. Westmoreland lost his only
election, a run for the Republican gubernatorial nomination in South Carolina.
Mr. Sharon helped found the Likud coalition and won all of his parliamentary
elections but became perhaps the most controversial figure in Israeli public
life.

Both men had notable mililtary success, but also serious disappointments. In
1977 Mr. Westmoreland complained that Vietnam had been a war ''we weren't
allowed to win.'' In his bitter denunciation of fellow generals for being too
slow and timid in exploiting his canal crossing of 1973, Mr. Sharon said, ''We
ended up with an unfinished, undecided war.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOMECOMING AT STONY BROOK: A SIGN OF A CHANGED CAMPUS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 53, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 439 words

DATELINE: STONY BROOK, L.I., Nov. 16


At the urging of its alumni association, the State University at Stony Brook
this year for the first time has a homecoming king and queen.

For students, the formalities of homecoming are a sign that life on the campus
is changing. And for many alumni, the changes are being viewed as a sign that
their school is finally shedding its radical image of the 60's. Those changes,
however, are not welcomed by all alumni.

The director of the alumni association, Denise Colman, said the group thought
that a traditional homecoming, which was held last month, would draw the alumni
back to Stony Brook.

When she attended school here in 1969, she said, protests, drug arrests and
sit-ins were the only traditions. ''Now there are no ties between the alumni and
the place they spent four years of their life,'' she said.

A New Political Climate

Since the late 60's, the political climate at Stony Brook has changed
considerably, according to students and alumni.

''I think students have found a new way of dealing with important issues of the
day,'' Miss Colman said. ''Instead of protesting, they work from within the
organization. Nuclear war is just as important as the Vietnam War, but today's
students use a different approach.''

Rather than demonstrating, students are meeting with administrators to discuss
their concerns.

The school's first homecoming queen is Jackie Delaney, a junior. ''I wanted to
help start a tradition and spur school spirit,'' Miss Delaney said.

Disappointed Alumnus

Leonard Steinbeck, who graduated in 1975, said he found changes in the attitudes
of the student body when he returned to campus recently. But what he saw, he
said, disappointed him.

''It seems students aren't confronting the issues,'' he said. ''Classes
shouldn't take more than 60 percent of a student's time. The other 40 percent
should be devoted to taking a stand on issues.''

Miss Colman said she has heard from other alumni as well who are bothered by the
more conservative attitudes on campus.

Picking a King and Queen

Candidates for king and queen were nominated by dormitories and the finalists
were selected by a committee of alumni, faculty members and administrators.

The homecoming king, Eric Levine, a sophomore, said he wanted to be the king to
be a part of the changing campus image. ''A student should have pride in his
school,'' he said. ''This is the first step.''

Miss Delaney agreed. In the past, she said, Stony Brook had ''the reputation of
being the Berkeley of the East.''

A homecoming, she said, ''is a steppingstone to showing people it's changed.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HMONG IN U.S. FIND LITTLE PROFIT IN AN ANCIENT ART

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 50, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS, Nov. 17


When Pai Yi Vu was a young girl living on a farm in Laos, she learned the
ancient needlework patterns of the Hmong people by watching her mother and
sister decorate the family's clothes.

Working by hand and from memory, they would sew designs of snails, spiders,
worms and other intricate patterns into brightly colored work clothes and dressy
outfits for special occasions.

These days Mrs. Vu, who is now 35 years old, spends her time sitting at an
electric sewing machine in the back room of a Minneapolis boutique, surrounded
by bolts of fabric and cartons of grosgrain ribbon. She makes cocktail dresses,
caftans, quilted vests and other clothing decorated with Hmong handwork for
American customers.

Popularity Has Surged


In the past few years the popularity of Hmong needlework, known as pa ndau, has
surged here. The needlework is sold at church bazaars, art fairs and shopping
malls and the snail, worm and spider designs are used to decorate everything
from wall hangings and bedspreads to bookmarks and Christmas tree ornaments.

The Hmong, the Laotian mountain people who provided help to American forces in
the Vietnam War, began making the needlework for sale when they were living in
refugee camps in Thailand after fleeing the Communists. When they came to the
United States, many of them illiterate and lacking the skills to find jobs in an
industrialized society, the Hmong women found Americans eager to buy pa ndau.

About 9,000 of the Hmong have settled in Minnesota, making the Twin Cities home
to one of the largest Hmong communities in the country. Like refugees elsewhere
in the United States, the Hmong here have faced economic hardship and
discrimination.

But they have also received substantial resettlement aid from private and
government agencies and foundations and churches have offered help to the
fledgling pa ndau industry.

Two Stores Are Operating


Volunteers opened two stores in the Twin Cities to sell Hmong needlework. The
Hmong Folk Art Shop here, where Mrs. Vu works, has generated nearly $250,000 in
consignment fees and staff salaries for about 600 Hmong refugees in its first
two years of operation. The Hmong Handwork Store of St. Paul has sold an average
of about $70,000 of merchandise in each of its three years.

But the Hmong foray into the American marketplace has given the mountain people
a crash course in such basic economic principles as the law of supply and demand
and the effect of inexpensive imports on American-made products.

A 12-inch square of pa ndau typically takes a week of painstaking work, while a
large wall hanging may require a year or longer. To earn minimum wages for their
work, the women would have to charge prices too steep for middle-class
customers. So the Hmong make as little as 30 cents an hour for their labor.

The result is that a 12-inch square of pa ndau can sell for $10 to $15 while a
large wall hanging can sell for more than $1,000. Dresses with the needlework
sell for about $150.

Problem of Distribution


Then there is the problem of distribution. Pa ndau is unavailable in most cities
while Minneapolis and St. Paul and a few other areas with large Hmong
populations are flooded with the needlework.

The local glut is attributable in part to imports from Thailand. Hmong refugees
in Thai camps send needlework to their relatives in the United States and ask
them to sell it. ''They need to make ends meet for their children,'' explained
Youa L. Her, director of the Refugee Women Education Fund, who said the Hmong in
Thailand were often willing to accept lower prices than their American
relatives.

As a result, many Hmong women living in the Twin Cities have stopped making the
needlework to sell. Those who can find other work do so. Few people believe that
this cottage industry will survive in the next, American-born generation of
Hmong.

Mrs. Vu is typical of the American Hmong. In the Thai refugee camp where she
lived for two years, she worked on pa ndau every day and sold it at a little
market in the camp. But when she emigrated to the United States in 1977, she
found more lucrative work peeling vegetables at a restaurant, and later, working
in a doll- making factory.

She Bought Ceremonial Clothes


Today she earns $4.25 an hour sewing clothes that are decorated with the Hmong
needlework. Mrs. Vu no longer has time to make pa ndau herself. This year she
bought, rather than made, ceremonial clothes to wear at the Hmong New Year's
celebration in the Twin Cities.

The only Hmong in America who still make the needlework for sale, she said, are
''women that are old, they don't know how to speak English,'' or ''maybe a
mother, she didn't know how to speak English, she stay home, take care of the
children and make pa ndau when the children sleep.''

Many Hmong women seem resigned to seeing the pa ndau business diminish in the
next generation. Young girls are training for more profitable careers such as
clerical work or commercial sewing.

Dao Xiong, a Vista volunteer at the Hmong Community Agency in St. Paul, said
that Hmong girls tell her: ''I don't want to do Hmong thing. I want to do
homework and go to school.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Pai Yi Vu sewing at art shop; Photo of Hmong pattern on jacket

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS AND TRENDS ;
Westmoreland's View

BYLINE: By Richard Levine and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 152 words


Meanwhile, six floors down in the Federal Courthouse, General Westmoreland was
the 14th witness in his month-old trial against CBS. He disputed statements in a
1982 documentary that his command had engaged in a ''conspiracy'' to ''suppress
and alter'' information on enemy troop strength in South Vietnam in the months
before the Tet offensive of 1968. The 70-year-old retired general said CBS
emphasized ''self-defense units'' in its program, forces that he said he
concluded ''were of no military consequence'' in the fall of 1967 and thus were
no longer given a number in the official military listing.

Earlier, CBS lawyers read a memo written in 1968 by Samuel A. Adams, then a
C.I.A. analyst who was a consultant for the CBS documentary. In the memo, Mr.
Adams accused General Westmoreland's command of ''half-truths, distortions and
sometimes outright falsehoods'' in those reports on the enemy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS AND TRENDS ;
Two Soldiers Seek Redress In Libel Suits

BYLINE: By Richard Levine and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 305 words


History is being relived, and made, in Federal District Court in Manhattan. In
their respective libel suits against CBS and Time magazine, two former generals,
William C. Westmoreland and former Israeli Defense Minister Ariel Sharon, have
in effect put themselves on trial and reopened wounds of wars past. Lawyers for
CBS and Time contend that the suits involve the improper use of libel actions to
try to vindicate controversial acts of government. Under United States Supreme
Court standards, the generals must prove that CBS and Time acted recklessly or
maliciously, even if what was said or written about them is false.

Mr. Sharon, whose case opened last week, contends that Time falsely accused him
of condoning the 1982 massacre by Christian Phalangists of Palestinians in the
Sabra and Shatila refugee camps near Beirut. In a January 1983 article on an
Israeli commission's account of the killings, the magazine wrote that Mr.
Sharon, the architect of Israel's war in Lebanon, had discussed the Phalangists'
need for revenge after the assassination of their leader, Bashir Gemayel, and
had allowed their militia to enter the camps. That discussion, Time said it had
learned, was noted in a secret appendix to the commission's report. Mr. Sharon,
who was forced to resign after the commission censured him, says such a
discussion never took place and was not mentioned in the appendix.

Mr. Sharon, now the Minister of Industry and Commerce, says national honor is
also at stake. To accuse any Jew of mass murder, he contends, is a ''blood
libel'' against Israel. He listened last week as Time's lawyers described him as
''a monster'' and ''Israel's minister of death.'' Then he took the stand,
telling the court that a desire to defend the truth had ''brought me here, 6,000
miles away, to this American court.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONTROVERSIAL ARCHBISHOP O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section 6; Page 174, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 220 words


According to Archbishop O'Connor, abortion is an act of violence. His reasoning,
as stated in the article, is that ''violence never corrects violence.''

In his analysis of anti-Vietnam protesters and their slogans, he claims their
position assumed that the Johnson Administration actually wanted war. In his
self-confessed revulsion for antiwar chanting and in his support of United
States policy, he said no such assumption was valid and that ''I am convinced
that the Administration has opted to accept the tragedy of war as the only
available road to meaningful peace.'' He described the conflict as a

just war

 on

moral grounds

.

What we have in the Archbishop is a clear-cut case of serious contradiction: a
man who believes violence never corrects violence, yet he accepts and supports
violence when

he

 declares it morally just. If his reasoning on war is morally correct, then why
doesn't he apply it to abortion? If the Archbishop was consistent in his beliefs
and ''moral'' teachings, his stand on abortion should read something like: ''I
am convinced that the

woman

 has opted to accept the tragedy of

abortion

 as the only available road to a meaningful and peaceful life.'' Is this not a
''just act'' on moral grounds? JAMES CARUSO

Gardiner, N.Y.  Our Town, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOT COLLEGES AND HOW THEY GET THAT WAY

BYLINE: By Michael Winerip; Michael Winerip is a reporter on the metropolitan
staff of The New York Times.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 69, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5547 words


LAURA COOK, A BRIGHT HIGH SCHOOL SENIOR AT TAFT PREP IN Watertown, Conn., would
like to go to Vanderbilt University.  She's heard the atmosphere at the
Nashville college is relaxed and the sororities filled with good living. But she
may never get there.  ''Everybody's really pushing U-VA, and Duke,'' she says.
Everybody?  ''Well, my father, he's not the type to push, but . . . .''

But he's heard that the University of Virginia and Duke University are ''hot.''
And ''hot'' seems to be getting more important all the time when it comes to
picking a college. It is much on the minds of bright high school seniors and
their parents these days, with decisions from top colleges on early admissions
only a month away.

In an unsure economy, they see a ''hot'' college as a good investment. Hot
colleges lead to hot professional schools, which lead to hot careers and,
presumably, hot lives.

This whole business of applying to college has grown highly pressurized. The
application process has been speeded up, the number of college guidebooks to
choose from has piled up and high school seniors have grown more preoccupied
with their chances at a ''hot'' college. Educators say they haven't seen so much
pressure in years, and no one is exactly sure why.

Pablo Silva, a senior at Newton North High School in suburban Boston, is
applying to Stanford University - a very hot college, by all accounts - although
he does not want to go there. However, he has three younger friends in the
junior class at Newton North who do want to go, who have grades and college
entrance-exam scores similar to his and who are paying him to fill out a
Stanford application. They figure, if Pablo is accepted, then they will have a
good chance next year when they are seniors, and if Pablo doesn't, they better
start looking somewhere else right now.

Just what everyone means by a ''hot college'' is hard to say precisely. Brown,
the University of Virginia and Stanford - three schools frequently scoring high
with students and with insiders' guides - combine a top academic reputation with
a ''special'' campus atmosphere. At Stanford, it is the weather; at Virginia, it
is the tradition and the architecture of Jefferson; at Brown, it is flexible
curriculum.

But it is not that simple. The atmosphere at the United States Military Academy
at West Point is anything but relaxed, and it is thriving, because of
patriotism, conservatism - and the education is free. Northwestern University
officials think their school may be hot because of its career-oriented programs.
Terry Sanford, president of Duke, believes his school's popularity comes from an
emphasis on liberal arts.

Into all this must be factored the fickleness of youth.

Missy Neubert, a senior at Darien High in Connecticut, thought she might like
Middlebury College, so she visited the Vermont school and took a tour. ''I said,
'Get me out of here,' '' she recalls. The tour guide was a loser. ''If the tour
guide doesn't care, it can't be much,'' Missy said.

And would she have felt differently about Middlebury if the tour guide had been,
say, ''neat?''

''Sure,'' she replied.

Although some insiders' guidebooks purport to have a secret formula to identify
the very hottest colleges, it quickly becomes apparent when talking to high
school seniors and guidance counselors that there is no such thing as a
consensus of which one or two or three colleges are hot. No magic formula
exists, no definitive list has been uncovered.

Still, if what makes for a hot college is elusive, what is clear, and
increasingly troublesome to educators, is the growing pressure students feel in
the pursuit of one.

They start earlier. One-third of the new freshmen at Brown, West Point and Yale
applied under the Nov. 1 early-admissions program last year. Just a few years
ago, West Point didn't even have early admissions.

Parents, who for a while may have felt they should step aside and let the
students decide, are getting sucked back into the swirl - that is, when they're
not jumping in head first. Sara Danziger, a college adviser in the career center
at Newton North, got a call not along ago from the mother of an eighth-grader
asking what courses her child should be taking now to get into a selective
college in four years. ''She wanted to come in and look at college catalogues,
to make sure the boy was on the right track,'' says Mrs. Danziger. The counselor
suggested the mother wait until the boy was actually in high school.

Oddly, the pressure is building in a period when the demographics indicate it
should be a good time to be a high school senior: The number of 18 year olds in
the country peaked in 1979 at 4.3 million, and is now down to 3.8 million and
falling. Yet last spring, six colleges in the always highly sought- after Ivy
League - Columbia, Cornell, Dartmouth, Princeton, the University of Pennsylvania
and Yale - set all-time records for numbers of applicants. Since 1979,
applications at Georgetown University have increased 31 percent; at Stanford, 32
percent; Duke, 33 percent; Northwestern, 44 percent, and West Point, 45 percent.

As the competition to be among the very hot gets stiffer, high school seniors
seem more eager to please and less willing to take risks. Nina Glickson Crowell,
associate director of admissions at Yale, notices that essays written by
applicants are growing safer and duller. Two years ago, Yale officials were so
concerned that the main admission essay was eliciting bland responses that they
replaced it with a new approach they hoped would stimulate more-creative
writing. It does not seem to have made much difference, Mrs. Crowell says.

Increasingly, educators worry about what the pursuit of ''hot'' says about our
society, about its effect on young people who learn to think that one college is
the place to be, that one company is the place to work, and that places and
people who are less than ''hot'' are somehow lacking in worth.

''The pressure aspect bothers me a great deal,'' says Howard R.  Lamar, dean of
Yale College. ''The competition in high school and prep school creates a
mythically difficult college that scares them to death and they continue to
scare each other. The whole rhetoric of doing your best and stretching yourself
adds to that. Everyone is in the business of sounding gung ho.''

STUDENTS HAVE THROWN THEMSELVES INTO THE APPLICAtion process with a fury that
is, well, ''awesome.'' George Marshman, a Darien High senior, had heard it said
that an on-campus interview does not count much, but this did not sway him.
Everything counted, very much, in George's mind. ''When I was getting dressed
for the Yale interview,'' he said, ''that morning I was convincing myself of my
worthiness, just saying, 'I've done a lot; I have a lot to be proud of.' No
reason I shouldn't be able to get that across.

''It was a nice day, that made me feel good. Dress sharp, have clothes that fit.
It's very important your pants aren't falling down, believe me. My interview was
10:30. I pulled into New Haven at 10:15 and started to look for a place to park.
I was beginning to panic, there was only eight minutes to spare. I saw a space,
I shoved money into the meter.

''The woman who did the interview really couldn't have been nicer, very
enthusiastic. No tricky questions. She asked what books I've read lately -
'Brave New World,' '1984,' 'A Moveable Feast.' Next she went into American
history, and I could see how a lot of people might get stuck. She didn't just
want American history.  She wanted to know why I was so interested in history.
Another one, was, 'What did you do last summer?' I kind of sunk my teeth into
that one. I was a peer tutor for a junior high student in math; it's a Xerox
program. She thought that was pretty great.''

But students in pursuit of hot colleges is only half the story.

Colleges are working harder than ever to make themselves hot. This high school
generation's ambition is being fueled by marketing types who have taken over
college admissions offices in the last decade and who saw the demographic
writing on the wall years ago. They have geared themselves up as never before.
The high school senior who is ''pumped up'' for his largely meaningless campus
interview comes face to face with a college interviewer who is equally pumped
up, as this excerpt from the Brown admission officer's manual indicates:

''Yes, folks, the on-campus interview is crucial to the selection process for
only 2 percent of all our applicants. . . . Why have them at all? The answer is
that our public-at- large has constructed its own notion of what an interview
is. This mythology . . . is unlikely to dissipate. Interviews can be viewed
(internally), in fact, as a public relations gesture toward our consitituency.
It is crucial that each interview you conduct hide this cold reality from the
candidate. . . . Enthusiasm, firm handshakes, smiles and appropriate laughter
may come with difficulty midway through the session, but they are expected and
should be delivered.''

AFTER ALL THE ''APPROPRIATE LAUGHTER'' HAS SUBSIDed, which colleges are
considered ''hot'' by this generation of bright high school students?  That is a
trick question. The answer can vary from high school to high school. A striking
example: At Darien High, which serves a wealthy, primarily white Protestant
suburban Connecticut community, the Dartmouth College representative attracted
more seniors this fall than any other Ivy visitor. Ten miles away, at Staples
High in Westport, an equally wealthy area, with a substantial Jewish and
Catholic population, Dartmouth was one of the least popular Ivies.

Last year, 33 seniors from Greenwich High applied to Duke, making it one of the
hottest colleges in that wealthy suburb. At Boston Latin School, an equally
high-powered school populated primarily by poor and minority students, only
three applied to Duke. The Boston kids, who often are the first generation in
their families applying to college, tend to shoot for the more obvious choices.
They either go for the most competitive Ivies or the less-expensive state
schools. Boston Latin students submitted 82 applications to Harvard and Yale
last year; Greenwich High submitted 62.

Still, there are obvious forces at work - conservatism, professionalism,
materialism - that are affecting what looks hot to students.

An unlikely comparison makes the point. In 1970, during the Vietnam era,
Hampshire College, an experimental, liberal arts school in western
Massachusetts, had 2,782 freshmen applicants, accepted 288 and 285 attended.
Last year, Hampshire, which is almost as expensive as an Ivy League school, had
only 1,120 applicants, accepted 695 and only about half attended. ''We still
want the kid with a social conscience,'' says Robert de Veer, director of
admissions.

In contrast, the 1970's were bad years for West Point, while the 1980's have
been a bonanza. In 1979, the number of applications to West Point was about the
same as it had been in 1970, even though there were nearly 20 percent more 18
year olds nationwide in 1979 and even though the academy had gone coeducational
during the mid-1970's. The Vietnam War and a major cheating scandal seriously
damaged West Point's image.

But since 1979, applications to the Military Academy have jumped from 9,180 to
13,400 last year. In this year's freshman, or plebe, class, Chris Garvey, a New
Yorker, had turned down Harvard for West Point; Nancy Nakahara, a Californian,
rejected Stanford University; James Kennard, of Ohio, Dartmouth; Stuart Evered,
of Connecticut, the University of Pennsylvania.

By every measure, recent classes entering West Point have stronger credentials.
This plebe class includes 180 high school valedictorians and salutorians, nearly
double the number during the Vietnam years.

Chris Garvey, from Huntington, L.I., chose West Point instead of Harvard mainly
for economic reasons. Harvard's total annual cost is $15,000; education at the
Military Academy is free. Moreover, students are paid a $500 monthly salary to
attend. In return, they commit themselves to five years of military service
after graduation. Stuart Evered views that commitment positively: ''It may not
pay as much as the job you might get when you get out of an Ivy League school,
but there's no guarantee you'll get any job at all when you get out of the
Ivies.''

The forces so obvious at West Point are at play elsewhere. Publicity brochures
point out that Northwestern is the seventh leading university nationwide for
turning out executives and directors at Fortune 500 companies.

The University of Virginia bills itself as offering a quality education for
almost half the cost of an Ivy League school. So many parents and high school
students visited the Charlottesville campus this summer that admissions had to
move its twice-daily tour orientations from the West Oval room to the large
Rotunda area.

As of early November, Georgetown University had received 38,000 requests for
applications, 14,000 more than in 1983 - which itself was a record-breaking
year. ''Kids in the '70's wanted nothing to do with Washington, there was an
antiestablishment bias,'' says Mary Beth Marchiony, regional director of
admissions at Georgetown, but ''Washington is definitely a hot place to be
now.''

Once perceptions take hold, they gather a momentum of their own. ''There is a
hot line that runs from the college students to their high school buddies,''
says Terry Sanford, Duke's president. When Owen Mahoney was a ninth grader at
Taft, there was a senior named Ed Levin whom he greatly respected. ''He was this
amazing guy, and he was going to Georgetown. Until then, I never heard of
Georgetown.'' This year, Owen plans to apply there.

Beyond such basic economic and societal trends, all kinds of forces can come
into play - such as Ralph Sampson. A few years ago, as a University of Virginia
basketball star, Sampson announced he was getting such a good education he was
going to finish school instead of signing a multimillion-dollar pro contract.
During his four years, the university's applications rose by nearly 2,000.

Bad news also travels fast. Brown, generally considered the longtime hottest
Eastern college, experienced a temporary dip in the 1970's when the university
was going through a shaky financial period. On top of this, a campus protest was
staged by black students right after acceptance letters were mailed out in April
1975. The yield - the percentage of students accepted who actually matriculate -
immediately dropped.

From 50 percent in 1974, Brown's yield fell to 46 percent in 1975 and 44 in
1976, before heading up again to 51 percent this year.

''There's a two-year memory on these things,'' says James Rogers, Brown's
director of admission. ''As high school seniors are going through the process,
the juniors are listening.''

Insider's guides have an impact. Georgetown got a big boost, says Mary Beth
Marchiony, when in 1981, Barron's ''Profiles of American Colleges'' moved it up
from the ''highly competitive'' category to the top - the ''most competitive''
category. The Barron's selectivity ranking is based primarily on the SAT scores
and the high school grade average of each college's incoming freshman class.

The guides also taketh away. Most women's colleges have had problems attracting
applicants since men's schools started going coeducational 15 years ago. For
example, the number of applications to Wellesley is about the same as it was 20
years ago, while during the same period applications to Brown, Yale, Amherst,
Williams, Duke and West Point have doubled and applications to the University of
Virginia have tripled.

Reflecting this trend, Barron's dropped Mt. Holyoke and Smith from its ''most
competitive'' category in 1981 and Wellesley this year. ''If Barron's moves
Smith and Mt. Holyoke, you bet the students notice it,'' say Marie Catania,
Greenwich High coordinating senior counselor.

Colleges notice, too. When Wellesley was dropped a notch recently, Maxine K.
Reed, a Barron's editor, says she got a call from the school's admissions
office. ''We went back and forth over it,'' she says. ''I really can't comment
any more than that.'' There was, however, no upgrading of Wellesley's rating.

SOME HAVE LOOKED AT THE declining demographics, posited that there is a
shrinking number of bright kids for the best colleges, theorized that these
colleges will grow increasingly desperate to attract students and concluded that
for bright seniors, this is a buyer's market.

If the scenario were true, or that simple, you would expect to walk into good
high schools and find top students more relaxed and confident about getting into
the college of their choice.

And yet, just the opposite is true. At school after school, counselors talk
about growing pressure. ''We find kids coming in much earlier worried about
where they should apply,'' says Robert Hanf, guidance director at Staples High.
''There is incredible pressure.''

''Pressure? Well, yes, there's no doubt kids have experienced an increase in
pressure about college over the last 8 or 10 years,'' says William G. Morris,
director of college counseling at Taft prep. ''Many kids in this class have
visited 10 or 12 colleges already.''

The pressure is more pronounced in suburban public schools and prep schools,
among the middle and upper class, educators say. And yet even at Boston Latin
School, which lost much of its middle-class population during the city's busing
controversy 15 years ago, the pressure has intensified, says the veteran
counselor David Miller, primarily because of the economic strain on kids.

The pressure, says Worth David, Yale's dean of undergraduate admissions,
''probably started to pick up in the mid-1970's. This year, by Sept. 1, we were
booked for all fall interviews.''

A couple of forces have been at work. First came the general democratization of
private colleges during the late 1960's and early 1970's, when more colleges
opened up to Jews, blacks, Hispanics, Asian-Americans and women.

Then the uncertain economy began to have an impact in the mid-1970's, when jobs
grew scarcer and colleges more expensive. Parents got scared and their children
felt the anxiety. ''I've had students come to me asking me for help with their
parents,'' says William Morris of Taft. ''They don't come out and say it, but
you can see them leading up to it, and finally I say to them, 'Would you like me
to call your parents?' And they say,'' - and here Mr. Morris leans forward and
bugs his eyes - ''Would you please?''



Lance R. Odden, headmaster at Taft, sees these high school students as ''the
first generation in this country that fears the world they're going out into
might not be as good as the world had been before. That means the extra edge is
important. In a meritocracy, the credential is more important than ever.''

If anyone in America can apply to any college, why not try for the best? Why not
hunt for the best aid package?

''I'm going to give it the old across- the-board shot at the Ivies,'' says Paul
Ferrarese, a Greenwich High senior.

''At $35 a shot?'' asks Anna Napolitano, his classmate.

''Are you kidding?'' Paul says. ''You're talking about the rest of your life
here.''

Last year at Greenwich High, a student set a school record: 22 applications.

Owen Mahoney of Taft is going through the application blitz for his second time.
In the eighth grade, he consulted his junior high's prep school counselor, read
the insider's guides to prep schools and chose Taft because ''it was one of the
hot prep schools when I was applying. When you're applying to the top 5 to 10
prep schools, you have to be pretty organized.''

Now he has his sights set on Stanford. ''They say it's the Harvard of the
West,'' he says. ''Stanford's in the heart of the Silicon Valley; I want to
position myself in that area.''

Last year, Stanford had a record 15,623 applicants - including 2,368 with 4.0
averages - vying for a freshman class of 1,610.

''I'm only ranked in the middle of my class,'' says Owen, ''but a lot of things
come into play beside that stuff. I taught myself accounting, I worked in
systems analysis. Last summer, I started a computer consulting company and
grossed $3,500. There's no doubt that positions me very well. The trick is to
set yourself apart, like it's written in red ink.''

With his Stanford application, Owen says he will send along a clipping about his
computer business from a hometown newspaper, the San Mateo (Calif.) Boutique and
Villager. He will also send a recommendation from one of his business clients.
''It basically says, Owen Mahoney did a great job for us.''

''The 4.0 student will always have a lot of clout on any desk. I try not to
think about it, but it's there. College - that's all I'm thinking about, that's
all my friends are thinking about.'' IN RESPONSE, HIGH SCHOOLS

keep adding information and programs.

Ten years ago, Newton North started a spring college night for parents of
juniors. Five years ago, it added two more college nights during the fall of
senior year. Last year, it added morning seminars for college-bound seniors and
their parents.

Newton North brags it has more college catalogues than the Boston Public
Library. ''A lot of kids come in, saying I want a place where I can go and then
make a lot of money,'' says Roberta Black, a counselor.

Students can check computer printouts to see how many kids from Newton North got
into each top college last year. ''I heard some girl talking about the percent
of students accepted at Harvard early and it sounded strange to hear someone my
age talking like that,'' says Jeremy Shapiro, a Newton North senior. ''And then
I said, 'I know all that stuff, too. I sound like that. Oh, my God. You name a
college, I know what it looks like, I know what the people who go there are
like.' ''

Students also know the college board scores they need. When asked about his
boards Scott Wilkov, a Staples senior, said he would prefer not revealing his
scores: ''My SAT is going to go up. It has to go up. I'm not a good SAT test-
taker, but I'm working on it.''

Daniel Schiebe, a Taft senior, can't believe how his classmates work on the
representatives from visiting colleges. ''Last year we had one guy from Wesleyan
and one guy from Brown, just to give a general outlook about those schools, and
still the students went up afterward, shaking their hands and saying how
interested they were. It bothers me. It seems like unneccessary brown-nosing.''

But last year, when Stuart Evered applied, he shook any hand that he thought
might help: ''You go to a college fair, you meet someone from admissions, you
shake their hand, you tell them your name. Then when you set up an interview
with the school, you ask for Mr. X. You get there for your interview, you say,
'Remember me?' They say, 'This guy is really interested.' That's the way you get
in.''

Growing numbers of high schools provide free SAT prep courses to meet the
demands of students and parents. Teachers help students with their college
essays. Pablo Silva's English teacher at Newton North turned the college essay
into an English assignment. ''It won't really be graded,'' says Pablo. ''They
make suggestions, have us rewrite it, probably three times. We'll come out with
something we can be proud of.''

More and more well-to-do parents are turning to college consultants. ''I see
them popping up all over,'' says Nina Glickson Crowell of Yale. A recent story
in a Fairfield County (Connecticut) newspaper asked, ''Can one survive without a
consultant?''

Howard R. Greene, a former Princeton admissions officer and now a college
consultant based in Westport, has 600 clients a year, and ''could have more, if
I wanted.'' He charges $250 for the first session and $1,000 for an unlimited
number of sessions after that. ''Parents want to know, 'Are we missing
something?' '' he says.

Greene helps with essays and makes sure kids have capitalized on all activities.
One boy happened to mention he had auditioned for a Stanley Kubrick film. ''I
said, 'Send it, it's very valuable,' '' Greene recalls.

As an admissions officer at Yale, Mrs. Crowell closely reads about 2,000
applications a year. Once in a while she sees an essay so natural, and so
clearly from the heart, so naive and so unsophisticated, it stops her and makes
her examine the file more carefully. ''It makes you smile,'' she says. ''It's
charming in a way.'' Maybe five a year make her smile that way.

TODAY, COLLEGES WORK harder than ever at getting hot, and if they are already
hot, they work at staying that way, even the ones with laid-back reputations.

Take Brown, until the late 1960's considered the doormat of the Ivies. At first,
it wasn't strong administrative leadership or marketing that increased Brown's
popularity, says the admissions director James Rogers. Rather, it was a power
vacuum at the university's top. At the time, said Rogers, Brown had a weak
president and a disinterested alumni. It was a place ripe for grass-roots
change, a place where young professors and students had lots of say.

That change came in 1969, when the university adopted what is today still called
''the new curriculum,'' a program that has no rigid distribution requirements
and gives students the option of being graded on a ''satisfactory/no credit''
basis.

While students were doing battle with the administration at more strongly ruled
Ivy colleges, with richer, more forceful alumni, Brown passed through the
Vietnam era quietly.

And then the marketing men took over. For the first time, Brown had a marketable
image - ''the Ivy with the new curriculum.''

Because Brown has a reputation as a place that is small enough to care about
people, James Rogers personally signs every acceptance and rejection letter -
all 13,000 of them. The chore usually takes three days.

It is often said that Brown goes so far as to admit ''Brown types.''

''Brown has been careful to select kids who are outgoing, confident and
positive,'' says Lance Odden, Taft headmaster. ''It is careful not to attract,
well, I guess you'd say 'nerds.' I can't prove this, but I'll bet Brown has a
policy to eliminate grinds and nerds.''

While Rogers insists that Brown does, indeed, have its share of nerds and
grinds, he acknowledges that given two students with similar academic
credentials, Brown will take the worldbeater.

Being hot has been important to Brown financially. The university had a $158
million goal for its last five- year fund-raiser and finished with $182 million.
''Fund raising is obviously related to Brown's popularity,'' says the school's
president, Howard R. Swearer. ''The alumni was clearly proud of the place.''

A savvy politician knows there's no substitute for showing up in every ward, and
an admissions director knows a visit to a high school can do wonders to keep
your college hot.

That kind of personal contact made a difference to Bill Yelverton, a Darien
senior. ''Until last night, Brown was my first choice,'' he said recently. ''But
now it's Brown and Dartmouth. Last night Dartmouth had a slide presentation. The
pictures are so beautiful. They have their own ski slope.''

The former principal at Greenwich High was a Lafayette College graduate, and
actively encouraged his students to apply. After he retired, applications from
Greenwich to Lafayette dipped from 35 to 15.

Yale alumni were concerned that not enough talented seniors were applying from
Greenwich High. So last year, to change that, they met with the principal. In
1980, 19 Greenwich seniors applied to Yale, and seven were accepted; last year,
38 applied and 10 were accepted.

If the college can't go to the high school, it can bring the high school to the
college. The Ohio college consortium provides an all-expenses paid trip to its
campuses for high school counselors. Darien High counselors who first took the
trip in the late 1970's were particularly impressed with Wittenberg University.
Darien applications to Wittenberg climbed from 1 to 16 last year.

Computers are hot and colleges capitalize on them. There are three terminals in
the Brown admissions office for students to play with. Tour guides tell parents
and students that by 1986 all dorm rooms at the college will have hookups to a
central information bank.

Admissions officers know how important the tour guide is, and through the years,
more and more have made it a paid student job. At Yale, for example, it is
considered extremely desirable, and there are always more applicants than
positions.

A guide leading a recent Yale tour made life at the college sound more positive
than dying and going to heaven. A parent asked the guide if she found any
evidence of sexism at Yale. ''I found all the faculty completely open-minded
about all women,'' the guide answered.

Do undergraduates have contact with the big-name professors? a student asked.

''It's kind of amazing,'' the guide answered. ''I have a professor who teaches
this course and he's written one of the books. I mean, I couldn't believe it.''

''Thank you very much,'' one of the students said.

''You're welcome very much,'' said the guide. ''Where are you from?''

''Arlington,'' the high school senior answered.

''Wow, that's great,'' said the guide. THE SAVVY GUIDANCE counselor is helpful
in pointing seniors to a hot college where they might have the best shot.

''The prep schools went through a bad time, but now a lot of the top colleges
are coming back to the private schools,'' says Monie T. Hardwick, until recently
a Taft counselor. ''Colleges are looking for full-paying, well- grounded kids.''

Even Brown now says it can no longer guarantee aid-blind admissions if
scholarship funds run out. Twice in recent years, when Brown has come down to
filling the last 3 percent of its class and has had to choose between two
equally qualified students academically - one of whom can afford to pay and one
who can't - Brown chose the paying applicant, says Jim Rogers.

For seniors at Taft prep, which costs $10,000 a year and serves a primarily
upper-middle-class clientele, that is good news.

Students know it is also good news these days to have a parent who was an
alumnus at a hot college. In the early 1960's, about a quarter of the entering
Yale class had a parent who was a Yale University alumnus. During the
liberalization of the Vietnam era, that dropped to 13 percent. In the last
several years, it has climbed back to between 20 and 24 percent.

''Sometimes you get discouraged,'' says Mike Labson, a Darien senior. ''It seems
every year someone is getting in because of that.''

''Especially at the big endowment schools,'' says George Marshman, Mike's
classmate. ''They figure, take a kid like that, he'll make a lot of money.'' OF
COURSE, NOT ALL KIDS get caught up in the hot-college madness. At Staples, Beth
Keating, a senior, says her brother tried everything to get into Harvard -
including SAT courses and getting to know the coaches - but these are things she
will not do. ''Maybe not going to a school with a name like Harvard, maybe at
another school, the special qualities will be brought out in people,'' she says.

Albert Choy, a senior at Boston Latin interested in studying classics, says
quietly: ''I heard the system is fickle. I just hope it works out.''

It is true, too, that every generation has its go-getters, its opportunists and
climbers. They want what society considers to be the best. They feel it will
give them entree to centers of power. They must be among the beautiful people or
the cool people or the hot people - or whatever that group is being called.

And yet more and more, students and counselors say, the vast middle ground of
this generation feels it must push harder just to stay even in the hot-college
rush.

''Pretty soon, that's all you talk about,'' says Louise Palmer, a Staples
senior. ''I'm so sick of it. I hate it because I get caught up in it and I don't
realize it, and then I hate it more.''

When David Sobul thinks back to his days as a senior at a suburban Seattle high
school last year, he is embarrassed. He applied to several selective colleges,
including Dartmouth, Rice, Vassar and West Point, and was accepted at all of
them. ''I wasn't sure what I wanted,'' he says. ''I wasn't very scientific about
it. I think I blew everything out of proportion. I started thinking my entire
future depended on the right college. If I didn't take advantage of my best
opportunity, I'd be haunted the rest of my life. It was a lot of wasted worry. I
don't think it makes that much difference where you go, but I had the entire
Barron's guide color- coded according to my choices. I had so much stuff from
colleges, after a while it became an obsession. I was afraid to throw any of it
away. I had big piles of this stuff.''

After he made his decision, he gathered together every last pamphlet, brochure
and catologue. ''I burned it all in our fireplace,'' he says. ''It took three
hours. A lot of these brochures are glossy and fancy, they burn slow. My mom
came in. She watched me a little while; she thought I was strange. But then she
got into it, too.''

In the final analysis, he chose West Point over Vassar.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of top colleges

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW & NOTEWORTHY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 54, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1071 words


WORKING: People Talk About What They Do All Day and How They Feel About What
They Do, by Studs Terkel. (Pantheon, $7.95.) Our reviewer, Marshall Berman, said
in 1974 that in recording the comments of more than one hundred men and women in
''Working,'' Studs Terkel ''uses the discussion of work to get at so much of
what is deepest and most intimate in so many people's lives, to understand work
as Freud understood it, as the individual's firmest connection with reality.''
Mr. Berman concluded that ''Working'' ''should be a best seller'' - and, in
fact, it became one.

PATRIOTIC GORE: Studies in the Literature of the American Civil War, by Edmund
Wilson. (Northeastern University, $12.50.) A chronicle of the lives and writings
of 27 men and women of the Civil War era - from Harriet Beecher Stowe and Mary
Chesnut to Ambrose Bierce and Abraham Lincoln. Our reviewer, Henry Steele
Commager, called Edmund Wilson's 1962 work ''a series of reflections on that
literature and on the men and women, and the societies, that produced it. It is
original, skeptical, allusive, penetrating. It is discursive, ranging widely
from North to South, and even more widely in time.''

AND THEN WE HEARD THE THUNDER, by John Oliver Killens. (Howard University,
$6.95.) John Oliver Killens's hero is Solly Saunders, a soldier in a black
amphibious regiment going from Fort Dix, N.J., to the South Pacific in World War
II. In The Book Review, Martin Levin noted that ''And Then We Heard the
Thunder,'' published in 1963, is ''an angry, uneven, but often stirring book.
Pungent characterizations and a core of honest indignation make this an
affecting novel.'' Another novel on black men at war is

COMING HOME by George Davis (Howard University, $6.95.). Published in 1971, this
first novel is about three American airmen - two black, one white - fighting in
Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War. Peter Rand observed in these pages that
Mr. Davis's ''flight descriptions are superb. He writes with complete assurance.
The geometry of his novel is cinematic - so is the writing.  . . . His people
speak from completely plausible states of mind, briefly, without extravagance.''


BEING A MAN: The Paradox of Masculinity, by Donald H. Bell. (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $5.95.) This slender 1982 volume was described in these pages by
Phillip Lopate as ''an intelligent, useful guide for those perplexed men who
recognize the justice of the women's movement but still have trouble aligning
their traditional notions of masculinity with its demands.''

MR. BEDFORD AND THE MUSES, by Gail Godwin. (Avon, $3.95.) ''Mr. Bedford and the
Muses'' consists of a short novel and five short stories. Judith Gies remarked
here last year that the novella, ''Mr. Bedford,'' is ''a memorable portrait of
people who might have known Scott Fitzgerald during their 'better days.' '' The
''most successful'' story is ''A Cultural Exchange,'' about an American in
combat with her autocratic landlord in Copenhagen - ''Gail Godwin at her best.''


STEPPIN' OUT: New York Nightlife and the Transfor

mation of American Culture, 1890-1930, by Lewis A. Erenberg. (University of
Chicago, $9.95.) Lewis A. Erenberg describes the coming of respectability to
cabarets and nightclubs as well as the growth of Broadway theaters and ''lobster
palaces'' - lavish restaurants favored by the likes of Diamond Jim Brady. Our
reviewer, Frances Taliaferro, said of ''Steppin' Out'' in 1981, ''The general
reader will find much of interest in its lively material and workable thesis.
Full footnotes and bibliography make this a useful reference work.''

FROM THE TERRACE, by John O'Hara. (Carroll & Graf, $4.95.) This 981-page story,
scheduled to be a television miniseries, relates the life of Raymond Alfred
Eaton, a familiar John O'Hara upper-class hero. In 1958, Arthur Mizener remarked
in The Book Review that ''John O'Hara's social awareness is acute as ever.''
''From the Terrace'' is ''a history of American society in the 20th century in
which the hero is a thoroughly nice, rich guy, not brainy, of course, but
attractive, successful in business and fundamentally a man of integrity and
ideals.''

MR. HODGE AND MR. HAZARD, by Elinor Wylie. (Academy Chicago, $7.95.) This
55-year-old novel by Elinor Wylie, the American poet and novelist, is the story
of a humanist poet, Mr. Hazard, who goes to the English countryside to
recuperate from influenza. Most people treat him well, but Mr. Hodge appears and
shatters the idyll. Our reviewer, Percy Hutchinson, wrote that ''Mr. Hodge and
Mr. Hazard'' ''is a fresh and rare blending in prose of delicate comedy with
gentle irony.'' An earlier Wylie novel, from 1925, is

THE VENETIAN

GLASS NEPHEW (Academy Chicago, $6.95). In it, a cardinal who wishes for a nephew
receives one who is conjured up and made of Venetian glass. The nephew falls in
love and complications ensue. H. L. Stuart said here, ''A theme so brittle and
so tenuous called for a very sure and expert hand if it were not to be shattered
into ridiculous fragments. The best tribute one can pay to Miss Wylie's unique
genius is to say that she never gives us a moment's anxiety. The little, sad
moral lurks, as it should, unuttered or half-whispered.''

FILM MAKERS SPEAK: Voices of Film Experience.

 Edited by Jay Leyda. (Da Capo, $13.95.) Jay Leyda put together 600 interviews
with men and women in film making - directors, writers, actors, cameramen,
stuntmen, designers and composers. In 1977, Janet Maslin wrote here that in
''Film Makers Speak'' the ''interviews have been collected from every possible
source, conducted by interviewers who asked anything from perfectly good
questions to 'Could you tell me the best piece of advice you could give?' ''

AN AFTERNOON TO KILL, by Shelley Smith. (Academy Chicago, $4.95.) In an exotic
Oriental setting, a young man discovers an English woman in luxurious
accommodations. The author, Shelley Smith, then unwraps a mysterious Gothic tale
of conniving, family intrigue and murder in Victorian England. When ''An
Afternoon to Kill'' was published in 1954, Anthony Boucher said, ''It is, as one
expects of Smith, admirably written, rather like a subtler and more economic
Joseph Shearing in its fine sense of crime-in-period.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Reveiw

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS Nov. 18, 1984Fiction*1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 54, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 779 words


CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  *2

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  *3

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  *4

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) A human
detective investigates the murder of a robot. *5

SINNERS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) Sex and scandal in Hollywood.  *6

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.  *7

DINOSAUR PLANET SURVIVORS, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) In a
sequel to ''Dinosaur Planet,'' two natives awaken after 40 years to find a new
generation of inhabitants.  *8*

BLOOD AND ORCHIDS, by Norman Katkov.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four Hawaiian youths
are accused of raping a Navy officer's wife.  *9*

THE FRANCHISE, by Peter Gent. (Ballantine, $3.95.) Behind the scenes of
professional football.  10

CHEROKEE, by Donald Clayton Porter. (Bantam, $3.95.) The ''White Indian'' series
continues with a story of hostilities between the Senecas and the Cherokees.  11


MORETA: Dragonlady of Pern, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.)
Humans and dragons fight a spore invasion.  12

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL, by John le Carre.  (Bantam, $4.50.) A young
Englishwoman caught between Israeli and P.L.O. agents.  13*

FIRST LOVE, WILD LOVE, by Janelle Taylor.  (Zebra, $3.75.) An innocent beauty
finds rapture in the arms of a Texas cattle baron.  14

A WOMAN OF SUBSTANCE, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Avon, $3.95.) The tale of a
self-made woman tycoon versus her children; basis of a television miniseries.
15*

DARKFALL, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $3.95.) Ratlike creatures escape from
hell to leave a trail of disfigured corpses in this tale of horror.  The
listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.  *An
asterisk before a book's title indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the
bookselling industry nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the
book above.



 Nonfiction

General *1

MOTHERHOOD, THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION, by Erma Bombeck. (Dell, $3.95.) Humor
by the syndicated columnist.  *2

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) Americans flee an
Iranian prison.  *3

CORONER, by Thomas T. Noguchi with Joseph DiMona. (Pocket, $3.50.) Accounts of
celebrity deaths by the former Los Angeles County coroner.  *4

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  *5

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy League
graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  *6

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  *7

THE PETER PAN SYNDROME, by Dan Kiley.  (Avon, $3.95.) Men who won't grow up.
*8*

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.  *9

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.  10

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) A helicopter pilot's life in
Vietnam.



Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous *1

NO MORE SECRETS FOR ME, by Oralee Wachter.  (Little, Brown, $4.95.) How children
can defend themselves against sexual abuse.  *2

GARFIELD LOSES HIS FEET, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.  *3

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  *4

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
For 1984.  *5

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson.  (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate Callendar

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words


Two first novels by Americans feature private eyes. J. F. Healy, in

BLUNT DARTS (Walker, $12.95), introduces John Francis Cuddy, a Bostonian who is
the more interesting of the two.

At first Cuddy would seem to fall into the usual mold. He has lost his wife and
is lonely. He has lost his job as an insurance investigator because of his
principles and is not exactly rolling in money. He despises phonies and lets his
contempt show. He can be rough and tough, as befits a Vietnam veteran. He has a
tendency to be a smart aleck, which does not make him very popular. He will not
be pushed around.

Sound familiar, all this? Many of these characteristics also belong to Robert B.
Parker's Spenser, another private eye from Boston, and Mr. Healy knows that
series. He has Cuddy reading one of the Spenser books at one point in the
action.

Yet Mr. Healy, a Boston attorney, writes so well that he tends to transcend the
cliches. Indeed, if the ensuing Cuddy books turn out as successfully as this
(the author has promised to continue the series), the popular Spenser is going
to have some real competition. Cuddy, like Spenser, is a man's man, an archetype
with whom all males will secretly identify. Honest but realistic, fearless,
ethical in personal as well as sexual matters, intelligent, sensitive, he is
quite a package.

In ''Blunt Darts,'' he is hired to find a very bright boy who has run away from
home. The boy's father is a judge, and he is uncooperative, to say the least.
Eventually Cuddy and the boy come together, and there is a slam-bang sequence
with a chilling conclusion. The plotting is impeccable, and everything comes
together to make ''Blunt Darts'' one of the outstanding first mysteries of 1984.



William J. Reynolds, in

THE

NEBRASKA QUOTIENT (St. Martin's. $13.95), introduces an investigator known
merely as Nebraska, which is where he and his forebears came from. Nebraska
shares many of the standard traits of Cuddy and other private eyes of
contemporary fiction. He too is poor, smart, cynical, wise-cracking and
energetic.

In ''The Nebraska Quotient,'' his ex-partner dies on his doorstep, but not
before giving him photographs of the daughter of the United States Senator from
Nebraska that show her in compromising situations. At the same time, he is hired
to find a missing person. To nobody's surprise, the missing person ultimately
has a connection with the Senator. The trail leads Nebraska into the porno
world, organized crime and dirty politics and politicians.

The trouble with ''The Nebraska Quotient'' is not so much that it shows very
little originality. It is that it is written so poorly. Mr. Reynolds has adopted
all the mannerisms of the tough-guy school without being able to bring them to
life. The result is almost a parody of the Black Mask style.

Nebraska, bluffing his way out of a ticklish situation, is talking to a crazy
mobster killer: ''And I can keep on playing games with you all night, because
you can't touch me. You don't know what I know. You can't kill me - you can't
lay a finger on me - because you don't know who else might know what I do, or
who else might find out if I as much stub a toe walking out of here. Get it,
Al?'' The plotting is equally conventional.



Another first novel,

OUTBID

 by David Hume (Heinemann/ David & Charles, $14.25), comes from England. It is
about finance - takeovers, taxes, the stock market - all covered in stultifying
detail. There even is murder, somewhere along the way.

Accountants and corporation lawyers may be enchanted with this book. Others will
have to struggle through such passages as ''To start with, you are a relatively
small company with only 5 million shares in issue. For most of last year they
were trading on the over-the-counter market at between $5 and $7 - typical penny
stocks. Clever financial promotion of your deal with Blenders had admittedly
pushed the price up to $25 a share. But if you take over Blenders, the combined
company loses the currency advantage of that deal.''

The dialogue is as exhilarating as the financial talk: ''Nothing we can do will
bring him back. But I promise you as I love you that I will do everything to
find the killer. Now you must sleep. We are both exhausted and there will be a
lot to do tomorrow.''



The second Amos McGuffin mystery is

FADE OUT by Robert Upton (Viking, $13.95). It has been a long time between
drinks; the first McGuffin came out in 1977. McGuffin is a private eye of the
old school from San Francisco. He is perpetually broke, he drinks heavily, he is
tough, and he is smart.

In ''Fade Out,'' he is working on a case in Los Angeles. A film producer has
disappeared, leaving a suicide note. Or could the disappearance have been a
publicity stunt? Such things have happened in Los Angeles.

McGuffin soon finds a drug connection and gets mixed up with a rich Arab and his
goons. A giant cop who may or may not be crooked also becomes part of the
action. At the end, in time-honored fashion, McGuffin and all the suspects face
one another.

There is nothing new in this book. But the writing is breezy and irreverent.
''Judy Sloan . . . then smiled sweetly, like the mechanical shark in 'Jaws.' ''
A bartender is discussing a notably endowed film star: ''A broad that big, she
shoulda been declared a national recreation area.'' The writing can also be
careless, sometimes amusingly so. '' 'He's right, Mark,' she whispered in a
cheery singsong voice.'' Nice trick, that.



The second in the Rebecca Schwartz series by Julie Smith is

THE SOURDOUGH WARS

 (Walker, $12.95). The first, ''Death Turns a Trick,'' appeared last year.
Rebecca is a San Francisco lawyer. Here she learns a great deal about one of the
glories of San Francisco - sourdough bread.

Did you know sourdough bread needs a starter? That is a mixture of flour, yeast
and water, the contents of which give the bread its flavor and vary from baker
to baker. The point is that you have to have sourdough to make sourdough, and
the original starter lives eternally. The formulas are jealously guarded. Who
says detective stories aren't educational?

Anyway, the starter of a bakery that went out of business is auctioned off by
Rebecca and her partner. But all four bidders are warned off by anonymous
messages, and the owner of the sourdough starter is murdered. Rebecca and her
journalist boyfriend set to work and catch the killer.

It's all fluffy and lighthearted - attractive light reading. The author, by the
way, is a musical name-dropper. She has Rebecca playing Vivaldi on the piano.
What Vivaldi? He was one of the few important composers who apparently wrote no
solo clavier music at all.



Michael Underwood's DEATH

IN CAMERA (St. Martin's, $11.95) is not one of his better efforts. This British
author is a specialist in courtroom drama. In this book, an unpopular judge is
murdered. The trial scenes are authoritative enough. Otherwise the writing limps
along in dull, sleep-inducing Basic English. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

ACTIVIST CLERGY DEFINES ITS ROLE

BYLINE: By TESSA MELVIN

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 1, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1671 words


''MY avocation,'' Rabbi Michael A.  Robinson said last week, ''is hiking. I'll
march for any cause.'' Rabbi Robinson, who heads Croton's Temple Israel of
Northern Westchester is one of several religious leaders in the county as
comfortable on a picket line as in a pulpit.

Last week's call by a national committee of Catholic bishops for sweeping
changes to help the poor was no surprise to Westchester's activist clergy, who
make continuous statements about a variety of social concerns. Some have
demonstrated at the General Foods Corporation Headquarters in Harrison
protesting the buying of coffee from El Salvador and Guatemala. Others have been
thrown off the battleship Iowa while protesting the ''homeport'' basing of
missiles in New York Harbor. Still others have flown to Nicaragua to participate
in a ''Witness for Peace'' vigil on that country's borders.

Concern over Nicaragua stepped up last week when a number of Westchester's
clergy and laymen convened at the Maryknoll Fathers campus in Ossining to
consider an ''Action for Peace'' plan for the county in the event of a United
States invasion of Nicaragua. Among other preparations, the group announced that
two dozen religious sites in the county had agreed to serve as locations for
people to gather at to conduct vigils and to pray.

The efforts of the county's activist clergy have led to death threats, arrest
and jail terms. Amid sometimes loud sighs from their congregations, the activist
clergy continue to insist ''there is more to life than what we see in
Westchester,'' as Ann Loretan, coordinator of the County Chapter of Clergy and
Laity Concerned said last week. ''While these clergy are prophetic,'' Mrs.
Loretan, a former Maryknoll sister, said, ''they do have the support of their
congregations. At least, they haven't been fired.''

Clergy and Laity Concerned, a national organization with a local membership of
350, tries to focus the attention of religious leaders on social issues. While
the national organization was started in the 1960's by Martin Luther King Jr.,
in order to join the civil rights movement with antiwar efforts, the Westchester
chapter languished after the Vietnam War ended.

Heading the recently revived Clergy and Laity Concerned is Bill Coop, the
associate executive of the Hudson River Presbytery the governing body for the
seven-county association of 104 Presbyterian churches. Mr. Coop, who is charged
with the direction of the presbytery's education and public-issues section, said
he believes social concern is increasing among both the lay public and its
ministers in this area, following a retrenchment in the 1970's.

''Activism came to a screeching halt after Nixonstopped the Vietnamese War,''
Mr. Coop said, adding that it was ''part of a perception that if we can't tie
into something we can feel and touch, it's not real.'' Mr. Coop, concerned about
the issues of a nuclear freeze, Indian Point, Central America and domestic
economic problems, helped revive the Westchester Clergy and Laity Concerned
three years ago in the belief that ''church people will respond when they
understand.''

Several task forces have been formed by the group to study social issues. The
religious group today functions primarily to support a number of activist
organizations in the county, its coordinator, Mrs. Loretan said. Despite steady
support among the county's activist clergy, other ministers ''are so overwhelmed
over local needs,'' according to Mrs. Loretan, ''it seems they must make a
choice between being a warm fuzzy or a prophet.''

For Rabbi Robinson, there is no choice to be made. ''Someone told me once the
function of religion is to comfort the disturbed and to disturb the
comfortable,'' he said, adding, ''Some think I spend too much time on the
latter, but I have survived because I also comfort the disturbed.''

Rabbi Robinson has been associated with nearly every social concern that has
come his way, from sit-ins to protest the hydrogen bomb a month after he assumed
leadership of his congregation 25 years ago, to the recent unsuccessful effort
to prevent the execution of a convicted murderer in South Carolina.

His salary was garnisheed by the Federal Government during the Vietnam era
because he was a war-tax resister and recently the Internal Revenue Service
seized the rabbi's assets, because Mr. Robinson has withheld 40 percent of his
income tax, the portion he said ''that goes to death and destruction.''

The temple congregation, while ''sometimes disturbed and upset,'' he said,
''support my right to express my beliefs through action.'' And he added, ''They
know in their hearts that the prophesy part of Judaism must be expressed.''

Sister Maria Jose Tresch is a leader of the so-called sanctuary movement in the
metropolitan region. Although extremely reluctant to give details of her work,
Sister Tresch, a member of the School Sisters of Notre Dame, and now working at
the Center for Mission Studies at Maryknoll, defines the sanctuary movement as
''a grass-roots response to our Government's response to the number of refugees
coming from Central America.''

While the Government is trying to deport people it considers illegal aliens, the
sanctuary movement offers protection for what Sister Tresch described as
''undocumented refugees.'' The Government, the sister added, has defined these
people as refugees who left their countries for economic reasons and who ought
to be deported. ''Most of these people are traumatized by fear,'' Sister Tresch
said. ''Their farms have been bombed and relatives killed. They don't know what
kind of refugees they are.'' Helping these people, Sister Tresch said, is a
religious act.

Although Sister Tresch said she did not know the number of refugees in the
county, she estimated there could be as many as 500.

''When you talk about politics, you're talking about life,'' Sister Tresch said
of her work, whose primary aim is to call attention to the problem of these
refugees. ''As a religious woman, I believe we are all created for salvation,
but the way we gain it is through our lives on this earth.'' She added that
anyone interested in the movement could contact Pat Taran at Church World
Services at (212) 870-3153.

For some activist clergy, ''prophetic mission'' has a distinctly local focus.
While Mount Vernon's Rev. Vernon A. Shannon has spoken at peace rallies, he
said, ''I have to be concerned with housing. Otherwise I lose my congregation.
People who are homeless and without jobs don't care about foreign policy. They
care about survival.''

Fifteen years ago, Mr. Shannon helped his congregation at St. Catherine's
African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church sponsor the construction of 110 units of
housing in Mount Vernon. Last week, the St. Catherine's congregation presided at
the opening in Mount Vernon of their second project - an 89-unit apartment
project for the elderly. ''It all has to do with how you perceive your
mission,'' Mr. Shannon said. ''I can't talk to people about faith unless I'm
doing something to satisfy their needs. Then I'll work on their spirituality.''

After participating in a number of civil rights and antiwar demonstrations, the
senior rabbi of the White Plains Jewish Community Center, Maurice Davis,
received a call about 12 years ago from two parents seeking help to ''rescue
their children from the Moonies,'' and Rabbi Davis recalled, ''I didn't know
what they meant.'' Since that time, the rabbi has persuaded 185 young people
from around the world to leave different cults. He has received ''hundreds of
threats,'' and watched a news conference staged in his temple accusing him of
being responsible for the Son of Sam murders.

While the rabbi's congregation has, over the years, been ''understandably
concerned,'' the rabbi said they are also proud: ''I think saving a kid's life
is a religious act. When someone says to me 'Why don't you stick to religion,' I
reply, 'That's what I do. If not, we're all in grave trouble.' ''

When Dobbs Ferry's South Presbyterian Church minister, the Rev. Joseph Gilmore,
was arrested last winter for conducting a church service on the steps of City
Hall in New York City to call attention to the homeless, he recalled, ''I
created a lot of work for myself explaining my position to the congregation, but
it was necessary.'' Those who serve congregations, Mr. Gilmore said, ''must
realize that prophetic ministries rest on the affection of our congregations.
You take prophetic stands because you have no choice, but at the same time, you
cannot ignore the needs of your congregation.''

It is difficult to widen the circle of activist clergy in the county, Mr.
Gilmore said, adding, ''There's an appetite in Westchester for religion in the
abstract because it speaks to endless private issues. Many people come to
church, they tell me, looking for one place where they can find peace of mind,
be told they're O.K. and be told that their children will grow up flawlessly.
That's why Jerry Falwell and the Moral Majority are so effective.'' Mr. Gilmore
said he was perplexed: ''How can you act with integrity without driving people
away?''

There are lots of clergy in the country who are concerned, John Collins,
national co-director of the Clergy and Laity Concerned said last week, ''but
they have a dilemma.''

''How can they bring their congregations along?'' he asked. ''They don't want to
take an action that will alienate their congregants, but it's an increasingly
difficult choice. There are an increasing number of Government decisions in
conflict with our basic religious values.''

In Croton, Rabbi Robinson was busy developing a new strategy to thwart the
Federal Government. ''The world is so horrifying,'' the rabbi said. ''I, too,
would like a refuge. But religion is not it. Because Government is no longer
responsive to the people, voters are more apathetic. We must take to the streets
and make clear where we stand. We must keep our energy flowing. I plan to be one
of those who does.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
In an article last Sunday concerning activist clergymen, the location of the
Rev. Vernon A. Shannon's St. Catherine's African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church
was incorrectly reported. It is in New Rochelle.

GRAPHIC: photo of Rabbi Michael A. Robinson; phot of Sister Maria Jose Tresch;
photo of the Rev. Vernon A. Shannnon ; photo of Bill Coop

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STUDENTS LEANING TO THE RIGHT

BYLINE: By CONRAD WESSELHOEFT

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 22, Column 4; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


IN HIS freshman year at Princeton University, Peter Heinecke

joined a campus organization so

low key that hardly anyone knew it existed. It was the Princeton University
College Republicans.

''It was pretty much a dead thing,'' Mr. Heinecke recalled. So much so, in fact,
that nobody even bothered to renew the club's registration with the Dean's
Office.

That was last year.

This year, in the flush of President Reagan's re-election victory, the College
Republicans is very much alive. Membership has grown from a mere handful of
students a year ago to 200, with double that on the mailing list.

As unusual as the conservative trend might seem at Princeton - a traditionally
liberal school - it is hardly an isolated example. On campuses across the
nation, students are increasingly becoming aligned with the Republican Party.

Student Democrats view the alignment as an indication, among other things, that
political issues have become secondary to material goals.

On New Jersey campuses, the shift to the right has manifested itself in various
ways:


- At Seton Hall University in South Orange, student Republicans added 149 new
voters to their ranks, while the Democrats added fewer than 40.


- In a mock election at Passaic Community College in Paterson, where a large
number of students are black or Hispanic, President Reagan defeated the
Democratic challenger, Walter F. Mondale, 51 percent to 49 percent.


- When a survey at Rutgers, the State University, asked, ''How financially
secure do you feel this year?'', a majority of students acknowledged that they
felt ''better off.''


- In a series of pre-election debates in Princeton's Student Senate, the
conservatives defeated the liberals five out of six times, marking the first
time in recent memory that the conservative line prevailed.

Shawn Mahieu, who was the Reagan campaign's youth coordinator for New Jersey,
said that the G.O.P. registered 3,003 students in a 6-month period that ended in
September.

In her campaign travels around New Jersey, Miss Mahieu observed that the
economy, more than any other issue, dominated student discussions. Suggesting a
reason for this, she said:

''A lot of kids are more pragmatic today. They are driven toward success and
having a family, and their quixotic nature is a thing of the past. Insofar as
they want success, it is definitely the 'Me Generation.' ''

At times, Miss Mahieu, who describes herself as a ''Robert Dole conservative,''
was unprepared for the responses she received.

''It surprised me how conservative these kids are right on down the line,'' she
said. ''Some of them made even me feel uncomfortable.''

Pamela Macklin, a part-time instructor at Passaic Community College and a
registered Democrat, entered the voting booth on Election Day without any idea
as to her choice for President. Only after completing the rest of the ballot did
she pull the lever for President Reagan.

''I voted for him not because I'm better off than I was four years ago,'' she
said, ''but because of the situation in general. Not because I'm in agreement
with him on abortion or prayers in school, but because I support his supply-side
economics.''

Ann Tyburski, chairman of Seton Hall Republicans, voted for President Reagan
even though her Federal aid benefits were eliminated at the start of the current
school year.

Accepting the loss, Miss Tyburski said:

''You have to have pains in order to have gains.''

Yoram R. Hazony, editor of The Princeton Tory, a student journal, attributed the
shift to the right to the notion that young people ''like to be on the cutting
edge.'' For many students, he said, the conservative movement represents just
that.

''I don't think that the spirit here is too different from the 60's,'' Mr.
Hazony said. ''In a sense, all of us are liberals. None of us wants to go back
to the days of bigotry. But because young people are placing more emphasis on
things like family and strong defense, it feels like we're the radicals.''

''The President is a known quantity,'' said Martin Bookbinder, a professor of
political science and economics at Passaic Community College. ''He represents
stability, opportunity and hope, the qualities that appeal to the students of
the 80's.''

But while student Republicans may be speaking out with growing confidence,
student Democrats are trying to place matters in perspective.

They contend that Mr. Mondale was still the favorite on many campuses. In
surveys at both Drew University in Madison and Rutgers, Mr. Mondale defeated
President Reagan by 51 percent to 49 percent. At Princeton, he was preferred
over the President by 60 percent to 40 percent.

J.P. Sarbanes, who was student coordinator for the Mondale campaign in New
Jersey, sees the conservatism on campuses today as more a function of apathy
than an active interest in political issues.

Today's college students, he said, have come of age in an era of Vietnam,
Watergate and a hostage crisis. As a result, Mr. Sarbanes said, ''there's a real
hesitancy for students to get involved in any movement.''

''Not because they don't want to get involved,'' he said, ''but because they're
scared of getting duped.''




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 18, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICAN MALE THROWS IN THE TOWEL

BYLINE: By David Lehman

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 663 words


David Lehman is the editor of ''James Merrill: Essays in Criticism.'' TOO LATE
AMERICAN BOYHOOD BLUES

By Frederick Busch.  275 pp. Boston: David R. Godine. $15.95.

The 10 stories collected in Frederick Busch's ''Too Bato American Boyhood
Blues'' concern, for the most part, men who tend to stand in the kitchen with a
dish towel on the shoulder, ''feeling needful.'' These are men whose wives have
left them - and who are spurned or kept guessing by the women they pursue,
sometimes with masochistic glee. Harry, the tabloid journalist in ''The News,''
is an extreme instance of this tendency. He chucks his job, drives in a
treacherous ice storm from New York City to a remote upstate village, and
descends unannounced on his reluctant former flame - all on the strength of a
tersely noncommittal postcard she has sent him after four years of silence.

The trouble with Harry is that he's feeling ''like a spinster'' now that he's
approaching 40. In Mr. Busch's universe, only the men are likely to get called
by that somewhat anachronistic term; Kathy, who sent Harry packing four years
back, is quite self-sufficient with her two sons and her job at the local
historical association. ''The kind of love you're talking about, the kind of
relationship you're talking about, I think it isn't in the picture for me now,''
Kathy solemnly declares. ''I feel like I'm Lady Brett and you're Jake,'' Harry
replies, adding a literary dimension to their chatter.

The reference to ''The Sun Also Rises'' is a pointed one. These stories
represent, indeed, an effort at Hemingway revisionism, at cutting Papa down to
size. For his epigraph, Mr. Busch takes Hemingway's line about American men
remaining boys all their lives - but his view of this phenomenon differs rather
strikingly from Hemingway's. It's as though it were too late in our culture for
the masculine bravado of Hemingway's ''Men Without Women.''

In ''Making Change,'' one of the stronger stories here, a middle-aged novelist
labels himself ''the Ernest Hemingway of the teapot set.'' ''I don't go in for
enough absinthe and heroin and racing cars and killing myself,'' he confides.
''My agent thinks that's my big problem. I diminish my marketability by not
killing myself enough.'' The theme is echoed in ''Stand, and Be Recognized,''
where a Vietnam- era draft escapee recalls living the cafe life in the south of
France: ''I used to sit there and drink pastis until I admitted that I wasn't
Hemingway and anise gave me the runs.'' In short, heroic adventure just isn't in
the cards for these characters. They're determined, rather, to begin - or begin
again - ''the crawl toward adulthood.''


THERE'S something terribly disheartening about Mr. Busch's vision of the ''great
American boy- men'' (Hemingway's phrase) and the way they live now. And no doubt
Mr. Busch intends it that way. Though his stories are set in a variety of
venues, he is particularly effective at evoking rural bleakness in upstate New
York: houses with imitation brick siding and interiors furnished by Montgomery
Ward, motels where ''portly traveling salesmen'' sit on barstools and watch ''on
the television set above the bar precisely what their preadolescents at home are
watching.'' Mr. Busch has a caustic wit that serves him well. He also works hard
at structuring his stories. Characteristically, he modulates from a salient
boyhood memory to the grown-up predicament it foreshadows - though, alas,
sometimes the symmetries seem forced and the clunk of artifice can be heard.

In ''The New Honesty,'' Mr. Busch cites Ambrose Bierce's definition of destiny
as ''a tyrant's authority for crime and a fool's excuse for failure.'' That's a
no-win situation any way you look at it, since there isn't an awful lot of room
for free will in these stories. Mr. Busch speaks of ''the new honesty'' with
requisite layers of irony, but one suspects that he wouldn't mind if the phrase
were applied to his work. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
ARIK-WESTY PINCERS

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 736 words


WASHINGTON A former U.S. Government official

who cordially despises Ariel

Sharon hopes the former general and Israeli Defense Minister wins his libel suit
against Time magazine, which charged that he encouraged Arabs to massacre Arabs.
Why? Because, the official says, somebody has to hold the damnably arrogant and
all-powerful Big Media to account when they are wrong.

In the same Federal courthouse in lower Manhattan, another member of what
considers itself to be the maligned military, Gen. William Westmoreland, demands
a $120 million libel judgment against CBS for charging in effect that he cooked
the intelligence books in Vietnam. Rooting for ''Westy'' are those who believe
the media must be punished for undermining the public support of that war.

I count myself among the minority who hail Arik Sharon for performing a great
service in dispersing the P.L.O., and among the majority who now believe the
coverage of Vietnam was tilted against General Westmoreland's fight to stop the
onrushing tyranny.

But I hope both generals lose their pincers movement in the war against the
press, and not merely because - to paraphrase Dean Rusk - I'm a member of the
press and I'm on our side.

The central issue in both cases is not ''What is the truth?'' Sorry, the final
decision on these innately controversial matters will not be made by a jury in
Manhattan. ''Encourage'' to a Sharon requires active direction, to a Sharon
critic means only a shrug; and ''conspiracy'' is the loosest word in the legal
language.

The real issue is ''If the charges made are adjudged to be inaccurate or grossly
unfair and damaging, should those who made the charges be held to account by
law, and to pay the damages?''

The average fair-minded person would say yes. Here is why I say no, and one
reason why I think the Constitution says no:

Intent and Good Faith are central ideas in law and morality. We all make
mistakes, sometimes egregious, often with terrible consequences. We punish
ourselves inwardly, or suffer obloquy from our fellows or ridicule from the
public, but are not punished by the law because our intent was not malicious.

The general who ordered the Union troops to assault the heights at
Fredericksburg, with disastrous results, was relieved and disgraced, but not
court-martialed; he erred with the intent to win.

The doctor who undertakes a risky operation, the lawyer who gambles on an
unorthodox defense to save his client, the businessman who bets the company on a
new product, all have one great limitation on their liability: If they took
their chance in good faith, ''if they failed while daring greatly,'' they may
ruin themselves in the profession or the marketplace but face no further
punishment in law.

The protection of acting in good faith, with no malicious intent, is what makes
decision-making possible. It applies to all of us. Should the parent or teacher
who mistakenly treats a dyslexic pupil as lazy or retarded be held accountable
in court for the damage to that child's career? Should a prosecutor and jury and
judge who combine to send a man to the electric chair be forced to pay damages
if another person later confesses to the crime?

Of course not. Yes, in extreme cases there are grounds for criminal neglect or
abuse of power or malpractice, and civil law casts a wider net than criminal
law, but in general our society does not hold people personally accountable for
the consequences of actions that were taken in good faith. If we did, the
second- guessing in courts would paralyze our power to decide.

That principle applies, with added constitutional force, to a journalist writing
a story about a controversial figure or subject. We rarely know the whole truth,
but neither that knowledge of our partial ignorance - nor the fear of libel
attack from an irate subject - should stop us from writing as much of what we
think is the truth that we do know.

In holding to account, intent is central. If Arik Sharon intended to loose Arab
murderers on the refugee camps, or if ''Westy'' Westmoreland intended to deceive
his superiors about enemy strength, then the generals should be court-martialed;
or if Time or CBS intended to ruin a reputation with no concern for the truth,
then those media should pay.

But if the generals and the press acted in good faith - as I believe they all
did - then the disputes should never have been brought into court.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese Attack Cambodian Rebel Camp

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 90 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 18


Vietnamese tanks and artillery attacked a Cambodian rebel camp today in what
Thai military officials said could signal the start of an early dry- season
offensive.

The Thai Army Operations Center in Bangkok said Vietnamese artillery began
shelling the rebel base at Nong Chan, 150 miles east of Bangkok, before dawn. It
said many of the camp's 13,000 residents fled into Thailand.

Nong Chan, situated a few miles from the Thai border, was routed by Vietnamese
soldiers in January 1983, and civilians have only recently returned there.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 19, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NUMBER OF SINGLE PARENT ADOPTIONS GROWS

BYLINE: By JUDY KLEMESRUD

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 4; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1357 words


Dr. Judith Kuppersmith, a Brooklyn psychologist, was in her late 30's when she
decided she wanted to adopt a child. But after visiting several adoption
agencies, she found she was ''last on everybody's list.'' ''I had three
problems,'' she said. ''My age, I was single, and I wanted an infant.''

Today Dr. Kuppersmith, 42, is the mother of a 3-year-old girl named Anya, whom
she adopted privately from Chile.

She is one of a growing number of single people in this country who are adopting
children, either privately or through agencies. Although no statistics are
available for single-parent adoptions, experts estimate that anywhere from 5 to
25 per cent of all adoption placements are now being made to single people. In
1981, the total number of adopted children in the United States was about 1.2
million, according to Child Trends, a Washington research group.

Dr. Kuppersmith got Anya when the infant was six weeks old, and the two now live
together in the spacious brownstone that the psychologist owns, and where she
has her office. She said the adoption was arranged by a Pennsylvania woman who
has contacts in Chile and who also helped with the legal arrangements. The total
cost of the adoption, she said, came to around $12,000.

''I think adopting was the best decision of my life - and I've had a very rich
life,'' said Dr. Kuppersmith, who also teaches psychology at the College of
Staten Island. ''Now I have this wonderful child to raise, to watch grow, and to
enjoy enormously.''

Effect of Women's Movement

Hope Marindin, chairman of the Committee for Single Adoptive Parents, a national
support and information group based in Chevy Chase, Md., called single-parent
adoption ''a small phenomenom, but it's increasing.'' She said it started in the
late 60's and that she thought it had been furthered by the women's movement.

''Although one in seven single adoptive parents are men,'' she added, ''most of
them are single women in their 30's with good jobs in such professions as
teaching, therapy, nursing and social work.''

Since many agencies still regard single people as the adoptive parents of last
resort, they are generally limited to what are called ''hard-to- place''
children: Older, handicapped or minority children. Single parents are also
eligible for children from certain foreign countries. White infants, rare these
days, are almost always placed with married couples.

Single people were welcome Sunday at an ''Adoption Fair'' sponsored by the
city's Special Services for Children at the New York City Technical College in
Brooklyn. Its purpose was to call attention to National Adoption Week, which is
this week, and to attract parents, married or single, for some of the 350
children now available for adoption through the city's public agency.

The average age of these children is 12, according to a spokesman, and 65
percent are black, 20 percent are Hispanic, and the rest are Asian or white.
Adoption subsidies of up to $250 a month are available for many of these
hard-to-place children, and some also qualify for medical coverage.

Despite the misgivings of some agencies about single-parent adoptions, many
professionals encourage them. ''It works,'' said Rosemary Cheng Stowe, director
of adoption at Spence-Chapin Services to Families and Children in Manhattan.
''If it is a question of whether a child should be waiting in limbo or have the
permanency of an adoptive home, then the home is the best answer.''

Meeting State Standards

David Liederman, executive director of the Child Welfare League of America,
said: ''It's good if it's done properly, and if the adoption meets the
appropriate state standards. We'd prefer that an accredited agency do it, and as
long as the single person is a proper and fit parent, fine.''

He added: ''It would be desirable if an extended family was involved in the
picture, to provide a support system.''

Dr. Kuppersmith said she had an extended family that includes her own family on
Long Island, many friends and a male friend who visits several times a week to
provide Anya with a ''father figure.''

''Still, one of my biggest worries is what would happen to her if I died,'' Dr.
Kuppersmith said. ''I know my sister would take her. Yet I have a fear of death
that I never had before, just because I am a single parent.''

Dr. Kuppersmith said she had tried unsuccessfully to get pregnant, but finally
decided on adoption instead, ''because it seems that adoption is a more socially
acceptable way for a single person.''

''People consider me a saint,'' she said with a smile, ''which is something I
never expected.''

Lea Wait, 38, a manager for strategic planning with the American Telephone and
Telegraph Company in Basking Ridge, N.J., is the single adoptive parent of three
girls from three different Asian countries. Caroline, 14 years old, is from
Korea; Alicia, 12, is from Thailand, and Rebecca, 11, is from Hong Kong. Miss
Wait adopted them through agencies.

''My life is so much better now,'' she said, as she sat in the family room of
her rambling Colonial home in Bernardsville, N.J. ''I no longer come home and
worry about the office, or my social life, or how to condition my hair. Now I
worry about important things, like Girl Scout meetings and money for the local
cookie sale.''

Miss Wait, who was divorced before she adopted, said the hardest part about
being a single parent was not having anyone with whom to share the child-raising
experience.

''After you get the kids in bed for the night, there is no one to sit down with
and say, 'How do I cope with that?' or 'Wasn't that terrific?' So you pick up
the phone with another parent from your adoptive parents' group.''

Miss Wait was one of the founders of Adoptive Single Parents of New Jersey, one
of about a dozen support groups in the country for single adoptive parents and
their children. The group's 150 families meet regularly.

'A Package Deal'

Like many single adoptive parents, Miss Wait still has hopes of getting married.
''But it would have to be to someone who would consider that the kids and I are
a package deal,'' she said. A recent relationship broke up, she said, when the
man she was seeing would not agree to the possibility of having more children,
either biologically or through adoption.

Not all adoptions by single persons work out successfully. Natalie McBride, a
junior high school science teacher from the Bronx, who has three adopted
children, said that her oldest, now 18, had to be sent to an adolescent center
because of ''adjustment problems'' that included fighting and verbal abuse at
home. The girl, who is blind, comes home on weekends and holidays.''We all get
along a lot better now,'' Miss McBride said.

Single men traditionally have had the hardest time adopting children, a
situation that Nathaniel Dashe of Queens laments. A 37-year-old nurse who served
in Vietnam, Mr. Dashe is the adoptive father of seven boys, ranging in age from
5 to 14. All, he said, are either physically or emotionally handicapped, and he
receives a subsidy for each of about $250 a month. He would not identify the
boys by name, saying he wanted to protect the privacy of their home life.

''It's not fair the way men are treated by the agencies,'' he said. ''Men love
children just like women do. To say that they don't is just old thinking. I've
always wanted to adopt children. I come from a family of 10, I went to Catholic
schools, I have very high values and I want to help black children.''

Cabin on a Lake

Mr. Dashe, who is divorced, owns a large, immaculate house that has a television
set in each of the five bedrooms, a set of encyclopedias on the mantel, and a
bicycle for each son. He said he also has a cabin on a lake in New Jersey where
he frequently takes the boys, who call him ''Daddy.''

He said he looks forward to the day when he sees his sons receive their high
school diplomas.

''My kids couldn't even read at first - they were throwing chairs and acting
up,'' he said. ''They started out in special education and now they're in the
mainstream, and that's something I'm very proud of.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of single parents with children

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MEDICINE UNDR SCRUTINY

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1665 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 19


In early 1964, for the first time in medical history, surgeons at the University
of Mississippi Medical Center transplanted an animal heart into a human. They
were treating a 68-year-old man whose heart was failing. No human heart was
available, so they used a chimpanzee heart instead. The heart lasted only an
hour before it proved incapable of handling the larger blood flow of an adult
man, and the patient died.

The experiment was disclosed only after it had failed. News coverage was scant.
There were some professional objections to the operation, but little hint of the
criticism ever reached a national audience.

The contrast between that operation and the recent transplant of a baboon heart
into Baby Fae could hardly be more striking. Daring research, for a variety of
reasons, has clearly become a public affair. And it is open to the critical
scrutiny - the applause and the censure - of everyone from ethical leaders to
the man in the street.



Frontiers of Research Scrutinized


Today, doctors who operate at the frontiers of medical knowledge are forced to
defend their procedures to a varied array of outside critics - agencies that
supply money, institutional review boards, medical ethicists, religious leaders,
health economists, whistleblowers, malpractice lawyers, television and print
journalists, pressure groups acting on behalf of patients, and even pressure
groups acting on behalf of the animals that, involuntarily, provide organs for
the patients.

What a change from two or three decades ago when many doctors and researchers
conducted dangerous, or even lethal, experiments on unsuspecting patients, with
nobody much looking and few questions asked. In those former times, doctors and
scientists reigned largely supreme, arrogating to themselves the decision on
whether or not to perform a pioneering procedure or even experiments of no
therapeutic value to the patients concerned but designed solely to advance
scientific knowledge.



Ground Rules Have Changed


In the short space of a professional lifetime, there has thus been a striking
change in the environment and ground rules surrounding pioneering clinical
research on human subjects. Never before in the history of medicine have
pioneering procedures been subjected to so much second-guessing from so many
sources.

The very concept of medical experimentation has taken on new coloration.

''In my childhood, experimentation was considered good and heroic and was
praised for bringing us new ideas,'' said Renee C. Fox, a medical sociologist at
the University of Pennsylvania and former member of a Presidential commission on
biomedical ethics. ''Now 'experimental' has become almost a pejorative word.
There's tremendous pressure to define things that are experimental as inherently
evil. If it's experimental, it almost sounds like we shouldn't be doing it.''

Whether the new outlook is good or bad is a matter of dispute. Some researchers
complain that the rising tide of scrutiny and criticism is inhibiting research
to the point where some critically important medical experiments of the past
could not be conducted in today's climate. Others scoff at this contention, or
view any slowdown as the necessary price for more ethical behavior by medical
scientists.



Changing Perception of Ethics

The new environment is shaped partly by changing perceptions of what constitutes
an ethical experiment or procedure. Decades ago scientists operating in the very
mainstream of medical practice could use patients as guinea pigs in experiments
that were often never explained to them, of no direct value to them, and
possibly even dangerous.

In one case, criticized in a 1966 medical journal article, an investigator
transplanted a cancerous tumor from a terminally ill patient to her volunteering
mother in the hope of ''gaining a little better understanding of cancer
immunity'' and perhaps producing tumor antibodies in the mother that might help
treat the daughter.

As it turned out, the procedure was of no value whatsoever to the fatally
stricken daughter; she died the next day. But the procedure was lethal to the
mother. Although the transplanted tumor was cut out of the mother three weeks
later, it was too late. A small piece of the tumor spread its seeds of
destruction through the mother's body and killed her 15 months later.

In another highly publicized case, doctors at the Jewish Chronic Disease
Hospital in Brooklyn in 1963 injected live cancer cells under the skin of 22
debilitated patients without informing them that cancer cells were being used.
The experiment was conducted to generate new scientific knowledge about how the
immune system reacts to foreign cancer cells and had no direct relevance to the
treatment of the poatients involved.

Although the doctors insisted that there was absolutely no chance that cancer
would be caused by the injection of the cancer cells, and although none of the
patients in fact were harmed by the procedure, the trickery involved led a
lawsuit, grievance hearings and mild disciplining of the two chief
investigators, who were found guilty of fraud, deceit and unprofessional conduct
by state licensing authorities.

What was most striking about the case was how normal and ''mainstream'' the
research appeared to be. The study had been masterminded by a top investigator
at the Sloan Kettering Institute for Cancer Research in New York City, was
supported by financing from the Federal Government and the American Cancer
Society, and was defended by leading cancer researchers as little different from
the practices of other scientists. ''If the whole profession is doing it, how
can you call it 'unprofessional conduct'?'' asked one lawyer for the
investigators.



New Guidelines Have Been Set

Such experiments would be difficult to justify today. In the intervening years,
two national commissions have developed ethical guidelines and recommendations
for biomedical research, Congressional hearings have spotlighted the issue, and
advocacy groups have formed to protect children and prisoners and poor people
and institutionalized patients from being used as guinea pigs.

By requiring institutions that receive research grants to establish
institutional review boards, which review the appropriateness of research
proposals, Federal financing agencies have put muscle behind ethical guidelines.
Even though Baby Fae's doctors received no direct Federal money, they had to
submit their planned transplantation for review by such a board.

The growing criticism of medical experimentation has been amplified by an
enormous increase in the volume and intensity of journalistic attention to
pioneering studies and operations. Two or three decades ago, doctors could
perform a radical experiment and get away with a terse announcement.

Contrast that with the daily reports on Baby Fae's condition and the
commentaries on the handling of her case transmitted through journalists camping
on the doorsteps of Loma Linda Hospital in California. The same televised
immediacy that turned Vietnam into the nation's first ''living room war'' has
now brought the hospital into the living room as well, allowing professional
critics and laymen to second- guess the procedure every step of the way.
Virtually everyone, it seems, has been able to form a personal opinion on the
propriety of Baby Fae's treatment, a result of the speed and pervasiveness of
modern communications.



Opinions Are Divided

Opinions are split on whether the new wave of second-guessing is a boon or a
bane to medical science. Some researchers complain that outside reviews,
criticisms and prohibitions have slowed the advance of medical science and
forced some medical researchers to change jobs in search of greater freedom to
experiment.

''It's much more difficult to do clinical investigations now than it was 30
years ago,'' said Jonas Salk, developer of the world's first polio vaccine. ''We
may need to re-examine whether we have gone too far. We can reach the point
where we regulate ourselves to the point of paralysis.''

At least some important experiments of the past could probably not be conducted
in today's climate of concern for the ethics of research. In the late 1950's,
for example, surgeons cut patients open in a sham operation designed to show
whether a new surgical treatment for angina pectoris, which involved tieing off
an internal artery, was effective. In two small studies, half the patients had
their arteries tied off while the other half were simply opened and reclosed
surgically and left with the erroneous impression that their arteries had been
tied. The studies showed that the full surgical procedure was no more effective
than the sham operation; whatever value it had was psychological.

The studies unquestionably saved many future patients from needless surgery, but
today it is doubtful that any ethics committee would allow patients to undergo
the risks of anesthesia and surgical cutting in a study that was intentionally
designed to offer them no treatment whatever.

Even so, most health experts welcome the outside criticism and constraints as a
needed brake on the hubris of medical researchers who might be inclined to
sacrifice the welfare of patients for the advance of science. ''It is harder to
do research today,'' agreed Harvey V. Fineberg, dean of the Harvard School of
Public Health, ''but I think that's a necessary and appropriate price for
gaining knowledge in an ethically justified way.''

Moreover, many experts believe that very little important research has been
completely blocked by ethical guidelines or public opposition; it has simply
been designed more carefully to meet ethical objections. For all the furor that
the Baby Fae case aroused, the fact remains that the doctors did, in fact,
perform the operation they had been gearing up to do after seven years of animal
experimentation.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PROBLEMS OF FARMS TAKE TOLL ON FAMILY LIFE

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1387 words

DATELINE: SPENCER, Iowa


''You know,'' said the mental health counselor, ''there is a psychiatric cancer
that is fraying our region's social fabric, pitting farmer against banker,
farmer against farmer, farmer against wife and farmer against children.''

The counselor, Peter Zevenbergen, the executive director of the Northwest Iowa
Mental Health Center here, is not alone in his concern over some silent but
significant changes creeping across the rural Middle West as it approaches
another long, cold winter.

Much has been written about the continuing financial crisis of the American
family farm, how the combination of stubbornly high interest rates, depressed
commodity prices and declining land values is forcing record numbers of farm
sales, foreclosures and bankruptcies in the nation's breadbasket.

But little attention has been paid to the emotional erosion that is devastating
many farm families and their small towns, areas that have historically given the
nation quantities of food and social values disproportionate to their small
populations.

Experts say the trouble takes a variety of forms - abuse of wives, children or
even animals, alcoholism, severe depression and suicide. Last month a
pistol-wielding Nebraska farmer was killed by the state police after he chased
away a deputy sheriff seeking to serve court papers. Last fall a Minnesota
farmer and his son lured two bankers to a fatal ambush on their repossessed
farm.

Numerous government and social agencies and rural organizations have counseling
hot lines for troubled farm families. ''It's a major problem throughout the
Midwest,'' said David Ostendorf of Rural America, an advocacy group. The suicide
rate in some rural Iowa counties is twice the national figure, and the six Iowa
counties with the highest suicide rates are rural.

In Missouri the occupation with the most suicides is farming. ''Figures are
likely to be higher for 1984,'' said Rex Campbell, a University of Missouri
sociologist. ''The suicide rate generally lags about a year behind severe
economic stress.''

For a long time, Iowa State University's extension service has been publishing
booklets on combating soil erosion and insect infestations. Now its literature
covers once foreign topics such as stress management, with detailed advice to
wives on signs of impending suicide in husbands.

''Right now,'' said the Rev. Tom Munn of Royal, Iowa, ''we are into some mighty
tough times in rural America. And I'm afraid they are going to last a good
while.''

The stagnant farm economy has not hit all areas with the same force. But
abandoned farmhouses are scattered everywhere. Most towns have at least a few
boarded-up businesses, adding an air of decay to streets that once bustled with
shoppers on Saturdays.

A number of local banks and grain elevators have gone bankrupt, shaking the
general confidence in vital institutions long taken for granted. Some successful
farmers have been forced under by interest payments far exceeding profits. One
study estimated a third of Iowa farmers would fail by 1986.

'He Starts Crying'

And many small-town bankers, who were telling farmers only a few years ago that
they had to borrow and expand to survive, now visit the same homesteads with
financial projections requiring the farm to be sold after generations in the
same family.

''We're dealing with guys we knew in grade school,'' said a rural banker.
''We've known them all our lives. I tell him the facts and he starts crying in
that chair. But if I let him go on, it threatens my stockholders and he could be
in even deeper money trouble next year.''

The mental health counselor, Mr. Zevenbergen, a 38-year-old veteran of Marine
ambush patrols in Vietnam, is deeply concerned about more far- reaching
ramifications.

''The Midwest has been a moderating influence,'' he said, ''a national balancing
wheel for the extremes of both coasts. What happens to the whole in the long run
when that moderating middle becomes seriously diseased?''

Teachers in this agricultural area of northwest Iowa, nearly 500 miles west of
Chicago, told of grade-school pupils crying in class for no apparent reason or
becoming unusually aggressive at play. Investigation invariably disclosed
financial and emotional tensions at home. In an interview one parent, the object
of a partial bank repossession, said her children would run and hide at
unexpected knocks on the farmhouse door.

So far treatments are limited in area and scope, and confined largely to group
support sessions where farm families are encouraged to share feelings and
frustrations, itself no small task in the reticent world of the independent
farmer.

Mr. Zevenbergen has seen his center's caseload jump 40 percent this year. The
center, a nonprofit clinic that receives 60 percent of its funds from nine
counties and 40 percent of its funds in private fees, has just completed a
series of meetings for farm wives.

'Farming Is Who I Am'

Mr. Zevenbergen began counseling one or two women last winter, but soon the
number increased. So he organized a group discussion to let proud, isolated
families learn that they were not alone in financial difficulty, a common
misconception in the countryside.

One recent Monday evening Mr. Zevenbergen expected a dozen wives to gather in
the conference room with one or two husbands, usually the last to seek help.
Instead 18 women and 11 men showed up. Many chain-smoked; one woman rattled her
knitting needles nervously.

''You farm the soil yourself,'' said an elderly farmer. ''You work hard and it
gives you a wonderful feeling and then for reasons beyond your control, suddenly
it's all crumbling. No one understands. No one seems to care. It's not just my
job that's threatened. It's my way of life. Farming is who I am.''

A woman described the independence her farm upbringing had taught her and then
admitted, near tears, that she had recently stood in a line for free government
cheese. ''Then I went home and vomited,'' she said.

Strains on Marriages

Some wives said they resented husbands keeping the family's serious financial
situation from them while others, consulted by husbands, felt guilty spending
money on groceries. They saw their husbands' self-esteem shrinking.

''It's been a real strain on our marriage,'' one man said. ''We were bickering
over little things that never used to matter. And the children would hide in
their room.''

''All this talk about world human rights,'' a woman said angrily. ''What about
our right to make a living? We go pushing land reforms in Central America so
farm families can get started while in our own country family farms are getting
crushed.''

''We started out many years ago with nothing,'' said a man who drew the
evening's only laugh, ''and today we've still got most of that left.''

Others expressed frustration at not having control of their lives, paying what
the seed dealer demanded and accepting what the grain elevator offered. ''When
is my time?'' a man asked.

Criticism of Bankers

Bankers came in for much criticism. ''I don't understand,'' said one man, ''why
they can't just lower the interest rate instead of selling a farmer out
completely at a fraction of his farm's value. Either way the bank loses money,
but this way they'd get it all back over time and they'd keep people who care
about the land on the land.''

Four bankers in this area, interviewed separately, said this was already
happening, because so much foreclosed land and repossessed equipment had
depressed market prices. One banker said he had become so consumed with clients'
difficulties and their threat to his institution that his own marriage was
endangered. ''I'd come home wanting to forget everything,'' he said, ''and she
said I'd become a stranger.''

One banker said he got threatening telephone calls at night and his wife quit
her bridge club for reasons she would not discuss. He believes they involved
criticism of him.

Six months ago two other bankers gave up their after-work drink at a local bar.
Other patrons, their high school classmates, would ostentatiously change tables,
turn their backs or loudly criticize their bank.

''All over,'' said Mr. Zevenbergen, ''we're isolating ourselves from each other.
And I think we're just starting to feel the pain.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AID TO REBLS IN 9 COUNTRIES SUGGSTED BY CONSERVATIVE GROUP

BYLINE: By BILL KELLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 522 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 19


A conservative research foundation has urged the Reagan Administration to adopt
a broad new policy of underwriting anti- Communist insurgency, including the use
of paramilitary forces to undermine governments in nine countries that
''threaten United States interests.''

The recommendation is part of a military and foreign policy agenda drafted by
the Heritage Foundation, which influenced the selection of personnel and the
shaping of policy during the Administration's first term.

The nine countries recommended as targets for unspecified ''paramilitary
assets'' are Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam, Angola, Ethiopia, Afghanistan, Nicaragua,
Iran and Libya.

The study noted that the Government is already financing what it called
''cautious, limited'' assistance to insurgents in Afghanistan and what it
described as a ''moderately effective'' campaign of aid to forces fighting the
Sandinista Government in Nicaragua.

The Heritage Foundation report suggested that these efforts were ''vague and
ill-defined.''

Broader Policy Sought


''The only hope for these limited endeavors lies in the framework of a broader
and more consistent United States policy, which in turn must be based on a
stronger public consensus than exists today,'' the report said.

The report said aid might take the form of assistance to existing rebel groups
or unspecified actions involving the Central Intelligence Agency and the
Department of Defense.

''Indigenous operational assets can be identified and developed, and the staff
resources of C.I.A. and D.O.D. are in a position to expand significantly if
required for a joint operational effort,'' the report said, referring to those
two agencies.

The report said that while efforts in the nine named countries may not be
successful, they would serve notice ''that the United States no longer will
countenance the subversion or overthrow of friendly governments within the
developing world.''

The report was to be issued to reporters Tuesday and is scheduled for
publication Dec. 7. Copies have been distributed to the White House and have
circulated in the Administration.

'Significant Impact'


The military and foreign policy section was written by eight scholars and
Heritage Foundation fellows, directed by W. Bruce Weinrod, a lawyer and former
Senate aide. Richard Shultz, an associate professor of international politics at
the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts University wrote the chapter
on insurgency and terrorism. His office said he was traveling and unavailable
today.

Richard V. Allen, President Reagan's former national security adviser and now a
fellow at the Heritage Foundation, said he believed the report ''will have a
very significant impact'' on Administration thinking.

A senior Administration official said the report had not yet been studied in
high Administration circles.

The report also recommends faster enlargement of the nuclear arsenal, a refusal
to consider arms treaties limiting space defense systems or nuclear testing, and
an end to voluntary compliance with the second strategic arms limitation treaty.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND TELLS LIBEL JURY CBS DECEIVED HIM ON FOCUS OF '82 PROGRAM

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1468 words


A. FARBER

Gen. William C. Westmoreland testified yesterday that CBS had deceived and
''rattlesnaked'' him during preparation of its 1982 documentary about Vietnam
that is now the subject of his $120 million libel suit against the network.

The 70-year-old retired general, continuing direct testimony in Federal District
Court in Manhattan, said that when he agreed to be interviewed on camera for the
broadcast, he was led to believe the focus of the program was the enemy's Tet
offensive of January 1968, during the last of his four years as commander of
American forces in Vietnam.

But during the interview at a CBS studio in New York on May 16, 1981, the
general said, Mike Wallace, the broadcast's narrator, asked him unexpected
questions about a 1967 dispute over the size and nature of the enemy forces in
South Vietnam.

Focuses on Controversy


As CBS had planned, that controversy between General Westmoreland's command and
the Central Intelligence Agency became the focus of the 90-minute CBS Reports
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' broadcast on Jan. 23,
1982.

The documentary alleged a ''conspiracy'' at the ''highest levels'' of military
intelligence to minimize the size of the enemy to give the appearance that
America was winning the war. The result of the conspiracy, Mr. Wallace said, was
to leave President Johnson, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and American troops
''totally unprepared'' for the scale of the Tet offensive.

General Westmoreland told the jury that when Mr. Wallace called him at his home
in Charleston, S.C., in early May 1981 and asked him to do an interview ''on a
special program about Vietnam,'' he asked Mr. Wallace whether it was ''going to
be a '60 Minutes' type program.''

''He said, 'Oh, no, this is to be an educational and objective type program,' ''
General Westmoreland said. During another call, the general testified, he was
told by George Crile, the documentary's producer, that the program was ''to be
built around the Tet offensive.''

Decided to Cooperate


So, the general testified, he decided to cooperate, and before he arrived in New
York, he read up on the subject of the offensive by reviewing his personal notes
at the Department of the Army in Washington.

He said he had been expecting a letter in South Carolina from CBS outlining
specific matters to be covered in the interview. But he said he did not receive
such a letter until he arrived at the Plaza Hotel on May 15. In the letter Mr.
Crile had described five areas that were to be covered in the interview. The
fourth asked: ''What about the controversy between C.I.A. and the military over
enemy strength estimates?''

Before the trial, Mr. Crile said that he had let General Westmoreland know
before the general left South Carolina that the dispute over enemy strength
estimates would be an issue during the interview. But the general said yesterday
he had not been told that before he came to New York.

Once the interview was under way, General Westmoreland testified, he found that
he was being questioned about this remote matter, which he had not had an
opportunity to research.

''I became very angry, very disillusioned,'' he recalled. ''I realized I was not
participating in a rational interview - this was an inquisition. I was
participating in my own lynching, but the problem was I didn't know what I was
being lynched for.''

As the general went on - saying that Mr. Crile and Mr. Wallace had ''gone for my
jugular'' and had ''ambushed'' him - David Boies, CBS's lawyer, objected and
that remark was stricken from the record by Judge Pierre N. Leval.

Judge Interrupts


Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, then asked the general why he had
not walked out of the interview.

Twice, the witness began to say that because ''I had seen so many times on '60
Minutes' . . . .''

Judge Leval interrupted. ''Is this being objected to, Mr. Boies?''

''Yes, your honor,'' said Mr. Boies.

The lawyers went to the bench. Finally, Mr. Burt was allowed to ask General
Westmoreland whether he had decided not to terminate the interview ''because
that would be taken as an admission of guilt?''

''Yes,'' said the witness, adding that he had told Mr. Wallace and Mr. Crile at
the end of the interview that he had been ''deceived about the nature of the
interview. And I said to them: 'I have been rattlesnaked.' ''

Both Mr. Wallace, who is 66, and Mr. Crile, 39, are also defendants in the
trial, now in its seventh week. Mr. Crile, who suggested the program to CBS in a
16-page proposal in November 1980 that used the word ''conspiracy'' 24 times,
has attended every session of the trial. Mr. Wallace, who has been in Ethiopia
on assignment, has missed all of General Westmoreland's testimony.

Late yesterday, the general's appearance on the stand was interrupted to allow
William P. Bundy, who had a conflict of schedule, to begin his testimony. Mr.
Boies successfully objected, on the grounds of relevance, to much of the
testimony by Mr. Bundy, who was Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and
Pacific Affairs under President Johnson. He, like General Westmoreland, is
expected to continue testifying today.

Denies High Infiltration


In the general's other testimony yesterday, he said that none of his
intelligence officers had reported to him that, in the fall of 1967, North
Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam was anywhere as high as 20,000 to
25,000 a month - a range that, he said, was not achieved by the enemy until the
weeks just before the Tet offensive.

Mr. Wallace said on the broadcast that ''CBS has learned that during the five
months preceding the Tet offensive, Westmoreland's infiltration analysts had
actually been reporting, not seven or eight thousand, but more than 25,000 North
Vietnamese coming down the Ho Chi Minh Trail each month, and that amounted to a
near invasion. But those reports of a dramatically increased infiltration were
systematically blocked.''

General Westmoreland himself seemed to lend credence to the CBS assertion by
saying on the broadcast that infiltration ''was in the magnitude of about 20,000
a month. That's actually - and this tempo started in the fall and continued.''

Wallace: Twenty thousand a month?

Westmoreland: Yes. On that order of magnitude.

Incorporating old footage, the documentary then showed the general appearing on
a Nov. 19, 1967, ''Meet the Press'' program in which he estimated that
infiltration at that time was ''between 5,500 and 6,000.''

''Sounds to me like misstatement,'' General Westmoreland told Mr. Wallace, in
response. ''And if I said that, I was wrong. I was wrong.''

Sent CBS a Letter

Yesterday, General Westmoreland said that several weeks after his interview, he
sent Mr. Wallace and Mr. Crile a letter enclosing official infiltration records
from that period.

Mr. Burt introduced a copy of the letter, in which the general noted, that
''after 14 years have gone by,'' he was ''unable to speak with precision on the
details of items presented to you by your researchers.'' He said he had now had
time to examine his files and that his ''estimate'' on ''Meet the Press'' had
been ''generally correct.''

The general told the jury that his letter was not acknowledged by CBS, and he
was not questioned about the new information he supplied. He also said it was
''totally inconceivable'' for infiltration into South Vietnam to have reached
25,000 a month without it being generally known.

The general testified that, like the White House and a variety of intelligence
agencies, he was aware by November 1967 that a large number of North Vietnamese
regular troops were moving southward in North Vietnam, without yet crossing the
border.

In his letter of June 9, 1981, and in another letter to Mr. Wallace and Mr.
Crile a month later, General Westmoreland urged the two - ''if it is your
purpose to be fair and objective during your quest, which I assume you intend to
be'' - to interview a half-dozen senior military or civilian officials from
1967, including Ellsworth Bunker, the former United States Ambassador in
Vietnam. Most were not interviewed.

Yesterday, Mr. Burt prompted laughter when he asked the general whether he
licked his lips often during the interview with Mr. Wallace - as was apparent
during the broadcast.

General Westmoreland explained that he hadn't known that, when Mr. Wallace was
speaking, a camera on him was still rolling.

''I was under bright lights, and my lips were dried out,'' he said. ''But there
was good fall-out from this. My wife introduced me to stuff which I've used ever
since.''

Mrs. Westmoreland, who attends the trial regularly, told reporters the ''stuff''
was Chap Stick.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GEORGE AIKEN, LONGTIME SENATOR AND G.O.P. MAVERICK, DIES AT 92

BYLINE: By ALBIN KREBS

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words


George D. Aiken, an independent- minded Republican who represented Vermont for
34 years in the United States Senate, died yesterday in a nursing home in
Montpelier, Vt. He was 92 years old and had been in failing health for several
months.

Mr. Aiken, a vintage Yankee of the old school, earned a reputation as a maverick
whose championship of liberal legislation often won him the enmity of members of
his own party.

He also had a reputation as a wry, commonsensical observer of the Washington
scene, who could pithily sum up a blunt solution to a complex dilemma.

One of Mr. Aiken's most famous pronouncements came in 1966, when, after having
supported Johnson Administration policy in the Vietnam War, he moved toward the
position of Senate ''doves.'' He said that if a face-saving device was needed to
pull out of the fighting, President Johnson should simply ''declare the United
States the winner and begin de-escalation.''

Claimed as His Plan

On its face, the suggestion seemed simplistic. But in 1973, after the
Administration of President Nixon had negotiated a Vietnam pullout plan that
would obviously lead to an eventual Communist takeover in South Vietnam, Mr.
Aiken could say: ''What we got was essentially what I recommended six years ago
- we said we had won, and we got out.''

A farmer by inheritance, tradition and occupation, Mr. Aiken, a member of the
Senate Agriculture Committee from the time he went to Congress in 1940, fought
for passage of much of the farm legislation on the books today, including
statutes on rural electrification and flood control, Federal crop insurance and
distribution of food surpluses to the poor.

He was the chief architect of the food stamp program, which became law in 1965,
two decades after he first proposed the idea.

Although he came from a rural, landlocked, underpopulated state, Mr. Aiken was
an avid internationalist, and as a longtime member and ranking Republican on the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee he supported a nonpartisan foreign policy.

Ever candid, Mr. Aiken could voice criticism in a nonpartisan fashion. In
''Aiken: Senate Diary,'' published in 1976, the Senator, then newly retired,
wrote of all of Congress:

''I have never seen so many incompetent persons in high office. Politics and
legislation have become more mixed and smellier than ever.''

Referring once to ''me-tooism,'' Mr. Aiken said: ''As Republicans, let us not be
afraid of the 'me-too' charge which is sometimes leveled at us. If a Democrat
says we need better health, I am not going to come out for poorer health just to
disagree with him.''

He Owned a Fruit Farm


George David Aiken, was born to Myra Cook and Edward Webster Aiken Aug. 20,
1892, at Dummerston, Vt.

Soon after his birth, the family moved to Putney, and Mr. Aiken attended schools
there and in nearby Brattleboro. His formal education stopped after high school,
and in 1909, he and a friend borrowed $100 to plant a patch of raspberries.
Within five years, the fruit farm grew to 500 acres, and Mr. Aiken was its sole
owner.

He grew interested in horticulture and extended his farming to the commercial
cultivation of wildflowers and fruits. He summed up his experiences in those
endeavors in two books, ''Pioneering With Fruits and Berries'' and ''Pioneering
With Wildflowers.''

In 1930, he was elected to the Vermont House of Representatives, in which three
generations of Aikens had served. In 1935, he was elected lieutenant governor
and two years later began the first of two two-year terms as Governor of
Vermont.

He Urged Low-Cost Power


Governor Aiken urged organization of large publicly owned electric generating
stations into regional combines that would make low-cost power available to all.

His early commitment to electric power cooperatives and dairy cooperatives led
naturally to later support of Federal measures such as those setting up the
Tennessee Valley Authority and the Rural Electrification Administration and
''liberal'' farm policies such as crop price supports.

In the Senate, where he served from 1941 until he retired in 1975, Mr. Aiken
liked to vote against outright subsidies on crops, but he sometimes found it
necessary, if not expedient, to vote ''straight farm bloc'' on such measures. He
preferred the road of price supports flexibly applied.

When his 20-year proposal for turning food surpluses into groceries on the
tables of the needy became law, in the form of the Food Stamp Act of 1965, Mr.
Aiken was jubilant.

Another great Aiken triumph, also long-cherished, was the creation of the St.
Lawrence Seaway, completed in 1959. The seaway, a joint project with Canada,
affords deep-draft navigation between the Atlantic and the Great Lakes through
canals, locks and dams, and includes a huge hydroelectric project that feeds
power to millions of consumers in the Northeast.

Mr. Aiken's independent liberalism in foreign affairs led him in 1954 to abandon
13 years' seniority on the Senate Labor and Public Welfare Committee.

There was a vacancy on the Foreign Relations Committee. If he had not claimed
it, it would have gone to Senator Joseph R. McCarthy of Wisconsin, who was then
conducting his ''crusade against Communism'' in the State Department. Mr. Aiken
had never made a secret of his dislike for his fellow Republican.

Respected Member of Senate


Mr. Aiken said he never regretted his move, for he was to become one of the
committee's most widely respected members.

Mike Mansfield, the longtime Senate majority leader who is now the United States
Ambassador to Japan, once said of his close friend Mr. Aiken: ''He is probably
the most solid man in Congress. He has honesty, charm, humaneness and, above
all, independence.''

Mr. Aiken also possessed another New England attribute, thrift. He regularly
returned part of his annual office allowance to the Treasury. And so complete
was his rectitude that, upon marrying his longtime administrative assistant,
Lola Pierotti, in 1967, he took her off his payroll even though she continued
her duties.

Despite his long tenure in Washington - a city he never grew to love - Mr. Aiken
always gave his occupation as ''farmer,'' rather than senator, and in fact
maintained the demeanor and appearance of a man just in from the fields. His
gray hair was a windswept, unruly shock, and his clothes, no matter how
carefully chosen, seemed not quite to fit him.

Mr. Aiken married his first wife, Beatrice Howard, in 1914. She died in 1966.
They had three daughters, and a son, Howard, was killed in an airplane crash in
1959.

In addition to his second wife, Mr. Aiken is survived by his daughters, Dorothy
Morse of Montpelier and Marjorie Cleverly and Barbara Jones of Putney; 11
grandchildren, and 19 great-grandchildren.

A funeral service for family and close friends will be held at 11 A.M.
Thanksgiving Day at the Putney Federated Church.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Aiken

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 20, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PAT BUCKLEY'S BENEFITS

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


THERE have been weeks along New York's charity circuit when it looked as if Mrs.
William F. Buckley Jr. was chairman of everything. This is not entirely correct.
She has never even attended an April in Paris Ball.

But the notion persists, aided, no doubt, by the frequency with which she
appears at the big benefits in yet another smashing designer dress and usually
to be photographed by yet another huddle of admiring paparazzi. Reporters
scribble down her every comment (''This dress feels as if it weighs a ton'')
mostly because she always has something to say and doesn't take anything too
seriously.

''Beep's summering in Spain,'' she announced last August. ''He swims in the sea.
I hear he's become a vegetarian.'' Beep isn't a person. He's her newest King
Charles spaniel. And if her observations do not jibe with ordinary people's
sense of reality (''I've never made the trip to or from Connecticut without its
resembling the worst excesses of the French Revoluiton''), she can be pragmatic
about life's exigencies.

Confronted last year with a heat wave the night of a fall fashion dinner and the
debt she felt she owed Oscar de la Renta for supporting the Hospital for Special
Surgery, one of her special interests, she wore his new jewel-trimmed black
velvet for the reception and cameras, then changed to a cooler silk for dinner.

That she seems to be everywhere is partly explained by her height (at nearly 6
feet, she is rarely invisible) and the awe her fund-raising talents generate
among her adoring peers. ''Get Pat on the committee,'' goes a familiar refrain,
''and everybody will come,'' and they do. Nor has it hurt that she is married to
Mr. Buckley, conservative editor, writer, intellectual cutup and one of the few
persons to whom the sitting President turns for advice.

Her power in social circles, and it is considerable, stems from the role she
plays at the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Though the New York Public Library, the
opera and other groups stage prestigious galas, the Metropolitan's Costume
Institute benefit in December is still a dinner-dance to which nearly every
serious partygoer aspires. And for the past six years, Mrs. Buckley has been its
chairman.

''I don't do it by myself,'' she said. ''Everybody from the guards to Philippe
de Montebello helps.''

Technically, that's true. The director and everyone else do help. But it is Mrs.
Buckley in cahoots with Mary Sykes Cahan who - to use a Buckleyesque description
- are the beasts of burden. Over the years, Mrs. Cahan's title has gradually
lengthened. Now she is senior public affairs associate assoluta. They see to the
decor and the food. They decide who is to invited to buy how many $750 tickets
(up $250 over last year), and where and with whom they will sit. Since just 850
people can be accommodated and there already is a waiting list, somebody is
bound to be angry or hurt. ''The Metropolitan,'' said Annette Reed, a trustee,
''owes her an incredible debt.''

Mrs. Buckley said the first priority always goes to ''those who've supported us
over the years.'' These are stores, corporations and individuals she calls ''the
regulars.'' She included Mrs. Reed, Mica Ertegun, Estee Lauder, Jane Engelhard,
Chessy Rayner, Nan Kempner, Lee Thaw and Dru Heinz, and was sure she'd left
somebody out. She says she ''strenuously admires'' several of these women as
well as Brooke Astor for the work they do for the city.

''I go to their things and they come to mine,'' she explained. ''We give each
other lots of support. They don't have to ask me. They know I'll help. And
they'll help me. Take the Voice Foundation. Mica's chairman. They couldn't reach
her in Turkey so they called me. We work so much in tandem I can cover for her.
She can cover for me.''

Besides the museum, Mrs. Buckley has a Memorial Sloan-Kettering benefit up her
sleeve, a new Maxim's to open and a series of private fund- raising concerts to
commemorate the 300th anniversary of Johann Sebastian Bach's birth. Judith
Norell, the harpsichordist, will play.

Mrs. Reed and Mr. De La Renta will be concert hosts along with Peter Sharp,
David Rockefeller, Noorna Sarofim and Ann Getty. ''Bill Blass and dear Estee are
always very generous,'' she added.

And why does Mrs. Buckley do so many benefits? She says it's a matter of
obligation, that she was brought up to help. ''When I was 14, I was a volunteer
at the Hospital for Crippled Children in Vancouver.''

Last year, she worked on a little- known ball for Vietnam veterans. ''We all owe
them an enormous debt,'' she said. Her concern for the veterans and the
''uplift'' she felt among the Republicans in Dallas last summer gave her pause.
''I'm going to become a citizen,'' she said, and she's working on it.

She is, of course, Canadian, one of few resident foreigners to raise millions
for American causes. ''Don't give me too much credit,'' she insisted. ''What I
do for the museum is my way of repaying in a small way the pleasure it has given
me since I came to New York.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 21, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Rebel Camp Is Reported to Fall

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 166 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov. 20


After a three-day artillery bombardment, Vietnamese forces seized most of a
major Cambodian rebel camp near the Thai border today, senior Thai military
officers said.

The officers, as well as Cambodian rebel officials, also said the Vietnamese
appeared poised to strike at other guerrilla strongholds on the Thai-Cambodian
border. They said the early dry- season offensive had already seriously wounded
dozens of Cambodians and sent more than 20,000 civilians fleeing the Nong Chan
camp.

The Thai Army secretariat's office Bangkok said Thai forces had been placed on
full alert near border areas and were ready to repel any Vietnamese soldiers who
might intrude into Thailand.

The reported seizure of the Nong Chan camp was confirmed by the army
secretariat's office, but no confirmation was available from other sources.
Initial reports of major military confrontations in the border area between the
Vietnamese and the Cambodian rebels at times have proved unreliable or
exaggerated.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 21, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PETNAGON;
LOOKING FOR GENERALS, KEEPING SOLIERS IN MIND

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 993 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 20


Over the next 10 years the leadership of the United States Army will gradually
pass into the hands of the class of 1984, the crop of 64 colonels who have just
been selected to become brigadier generals.

From their number will come the major generals who will command divisions and
military posts and, later, the lieutenant generals who will serve as corps
commanders and senior staff officers. A few may become full generals, leading
field forces or heading the Army in Washington.

According to Lieut. Gen. Robert M. Elton, the Army's chief of personnel, the 21
officers on a special selection board that scrutinized the records of 2,600
eligible colonels to choose the 64 new brigadier generals were told to ask
themselves: ''What jobs would I put this individual in over the next 10 years?''

''We look at the individual's potential for responsibility at the highest
levels,'' General Elton said, ''and we look at it in terms of how they have done
their jobs in the past.''

Of Reactive and Pro-Active


In a letter of instruction from Secretary of the Army John O. Marsh Jr. and the
Army Chief of Staff, Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., the selection board was asked to
seek out those who had broad qualifications rather than a single outstanding
attribute, General Elton said. Those chosen had to be troop commanders or
speciality leaders who had shown evidence of acting rather than reacting, who
showed personal concern for soldiers and who could chart new strategies for the
Army of the 1990's.

The selection board was asked, General Elton said, ''to look for those
individuals who have not just reacted to a situation and done well, because we
have a lot of officers who do that, but those who have been pro-active,'' an
Army word for anticipating a problem and acting to prevent it.

''We are looking for officers,'' he said, ''who see soldiers as individuals who
have problems getting to work because they have to live off post or because they
live in substandard housing or because a man's wife is just about to have a
baby, and she is only 17.''

The Selfish Need Not Apply


General Elton said the Army was ''interested in an individual who is ambitious,
but we are not interested in one who is so selfish that he can't wait until he
gets to the next job.'' And those officers who seek prestigious positions for
the sake of visibility are shunned, he added.

''You can see those who are picking their way through the roses,'' General Elton
said.

He said the board was also instructed to look for racial bias. ''We asked them
to look for flaws,'' he said. ''You might have an individual with a superb
record who is biased. That is not a good idea for a general officer.''

In addition, the Army has been emphasizing physical fitness. ''Some of our
people as they get up near 50 have a tendency to forget about fitness,'' General
Elton said. ''You just cannot do that. There are tremendous stresses, and we
just can't let that happen.''

Some of Those Selected


A profile of the class of '84 shows that almost all have commanded battalions of
600 to 800 soldiers and brigades of 3,000 soldiers or their equivalent in
support units. All are college graduates, and most have a master's degree.

Almost all have attended the Command and General Staff College or its equivalent
and the Army War College or another senior service school. Almost all have won
combat decorations or commendations for superior service.

One new general, Patrick Henry Brady, a medical service officer, won the Medal
of Honor, the nation's highest combat award, for rescuing 51 seriously wounded
men in Vietnam in one day even though two of the three helicopters he flew that
day were shot out from under him.

The records further show that 44 of the new generals received their commissions
through the Reserve Officer Training Corps at civilian universities, while only
14 are graduates of the Military Academy at West Point. Three came from the
Officers Candidate School and one from the National Guard.

One Woman in the Class


The sole woman in the class, Sherian Grace Cadoria, received a direct
appointment into the Women's Army Corps in 1961 and has spent much of her career
in the military police. She is now chief of the Army's law-enforcement division
in the Pentagon.

Perhaps the most unusual, Col. Daniel R. Schroeder, the chief of staff of the
24th Infantry Division at Fort Stewart, Ga., graduated from the Naval Academy at
Annapolis in 1961, then elected to take his commission in the Army. He has
served as a tactical officer at West Point, attended the Marine Corps Amphibious
Warfare School and earned a master's degree at the Air Force Institute of
Technology.

Officers begin to aspire to wearing stars at different points in their careers,
with most apparently not thinking about it until they reach lieutenant colonel
with about 15 years of service. One of those just selected, Col. Ward M.
LeHardy, said: ''My first glimmer came when I was picked for battalion command.
Coming out of that, I knew I had passed through a big gate.''

'You Can't Make It by Design'


But an officer who actively seeks promotion is not likely to be picked. Another
newly selected officer, Col. William F. Streeter, said: ''You can't make it by
design. It's important to do the job you have, to perform, to concentrate on the
job at hand.''

A third officer about to become a general, Col. Rudolph Ostovich 3d, said it was
vital to have mentors, or senior officers willing to teach young officers.
''It's been very important to have personal heroes who have taken the time to
develop me professionally,'' he said.

Colonel LeHardy, however, added a word of caution: ''Aspiring to something is
great. 'Be all you can be,' as the Army slogan says. But you have to hold a
little reserve back in case you don't make it. I wanted the journey to be more
valuable than the destination.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 21, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS LAWYERS TRY TO SHOW GENERAL DISTORTED TROOP STRENGTH

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1272 words


Moments after Gen. William C. Westmoreland testified yesterday that he ''never''
lied to his superiors in a 36- year military career, lawyers for CBS began their
effort to show that, in fact, the general had deceived President Johnson about
enemy strength in South Vietnam in 1967.

David Boies, the principal attorney for CBS in the general's $120 million libel
suit against the network, opened his cross-examination of the plaintiff in late
afternoon by suggesting that, on several occasions, General Westmoreland had
presented the President with estimates of Communist strength that he knew were
too low.

The 70-year-old retired general, whose testimony in Federal District Court in
Manhattan will continue today, said repeatedly that he had ''little
recollection'' of discussing enemy troop estimates with the President and that,
in any case, he relied for the figures he used on his intelligence chief in
Saigon, Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian.

Q. Did you say to the President that you thought the figures were inaccurate in
any way?

A. Certainly not.

'Accepted' Judgment

General Westmoreland, who seemed confident and comfortable under direct
examination during the past week, appeared ill at ease and impatient under an
hour and a half of questioning by Mr. Boies. His memory seemed faulty - ''I
can't recall,'' he said time and again - as he fidgeted with his hands and
glanced at the ceiling of the crowded courtroom.

The general, who commanded American forces in Vietnam between 1964 and 1968,
said at one one point yesterday that he ''had no choice but to accept the
judgment'' of General McChristian on the size of enemy forces, at least before
the summer of 1967.

''Mr. Boies, I had an intelligence chief to do this - I didn't get into all the
nuts and bolts,'' he said. General McChristian ''accumulated, formulated and I
accepted.''

But previously General Westmoreland testified that in 1967 he overruled a
recommendation by General McChristian and decided to exclude the Vietcong's
self-defense units from the official military listing of enemy strength known as
the order of battle.

'Humiliated' by Broadcast

The general's suit stems from a 1982 CBS Reports documentary titled ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' Both the producer of the documentary,
George Crile, and its narrator, Mike Wallace, are also defendants in the case,
as is Samuel A. Adams, a former analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency who
served as a paid consultant for the documentary.

All three men sat only feet away from the silver-haired general yesterday as he
told the jury that he had been ''humiliated'' by the broadcast and his
reputation impugned. ''It was an unbelievable experience,'' he said at the close
of his direct testimony.

According to the documentary, senior military intelligence officials engaged in
a ''conspiracy'' to minimize the size and nature of enemy forces in South
Vietnam in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968, to make it appear
that the United States was winning the war. As a result, Mr. Wallace said on the
broadcast, the President, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and American troops, as well
as the American public, were left ''totally unprepared'' for the magnitude of
the Tet attack.

One ''tactic'' of General Westmoreland aimed at ''arbitrarily'' reducing reports
on the size of the enemy, Mr. Wallace said, was to insist on the removal of the
part-time self-defense forces from the order of battle. Another, he said,
quoting former intelligence officers who had served in Vietnam in 1967, was to
impose a ceiling of 300,000 on the total size of Communist strength.

General Westmoreland has denied both charges, saying that he never set a limit
on the scope of enemy forces and took the part-time self-defense units out of
the order of battle only because he had become convinced that they posed no
offensive military threat and could not be accurately counted.

Meetings With C.I.A.

Before May 1967, the size of the hamlet-based self-defense forces had long been
estimated at 70,000 - or approximately two-thirds of a total of 112,000 for
''irregulars'' that also included mobile guerrilla forces. Yesterday, General
Westmoreland said the estimate of 112,000 was a ''static'' figure that he paid
''little attention to'' prior to May.

Then that month, as the result of new studies, General McChristian estimated the
size of the self-defense forces alone at 117,000, several thousand less than the
figure advanced by the C.I.A.

General McChristian, who left Vietnam for a new assignment on June 1, 1967,
favored the continued inclusion of the self-defense forces in the order of
battle ''to present a complete picture of enemy strength, but with the notation
that as a combat force they are only marginally effective.''

But at a series of meetings in the late summer of 1967, General Westmoreland's
command and the C.I.A. reached an agreement on an enemy military strength of
223,000 to 248,000 that described, but did not count, the self-defense forces
and that placed an estimated 75,000 to 85,000 Vietcong political cadre in a
separate category.

That accord, which the CBS program described as a C.I.A. ''capitulation'' to the
military, served as the basis for both a revised order of battle and for a new
intelligence estimate for Mr. Johnson.

President 'Very Well Briefed'

Before General Westmoreland's testimony resumed yesterday, William P. Bundy, who
was Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs in the
mid-1960's, testified as the 15th witness for the general that he believed the
1967 agreement to have been ''reasonable.''

Under cross-examination, he conceded that his judgment was based primarily on
reports by his colleagues - some of whom, according to documents introduced by
Mr. Boies, appeared to have later disagreed with Mr. Bundy - rather than
first-hand knowledge of enemy strength data.

General Westmoreland, under cross- examination, said that he rarely, if ever,
discussed enemy troop figures with the President because he found Mr. Johnson to
be ''very well briefed'' by Walt W. Rostow, Mr. Johnson's special assistant for
national security affairs.

''I really have little recollection of talking to him about it,'' the general
said, ''although he may have asked me some questions.''

But Mr. Boies introduced notes or reports from several meetings in the United
States between the President and General Westmoreland, with references to the
figure of 112,000 for ''irregular'' enemy strength in 1966 and to a total of
285,000 for all Communist forces in April 1967.

Letter Introduced

The CBS lawyer suggested that, at least by February 1967, following a conference
of intelligence officials in Honolulu attended by General McChristian, General
Westmoreland knew that the size of the self-defense units and other enemy forces
other than regular North Vietnam or Vietcong troops had been underestimated.

But General Westmoreland said he could recall no conversations with General
McChristian about the subject until at least May 1967.

Near the end of General Westmoreland's direct testimony, his lawyer, Dan M.
Burt, introduced several newspaper articles, a cartoon and a letter from a woman
in Houston that expressed outrage at the general over the acts portrayed on the
CBS documentary.

The Texas woman wrote General Westmoreland that, since he had ''lied'' to the
President and ''played God'' with the lives of American soldiers, she hoped
''the American people never give you another moment's peace.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 21, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MUSICAL CELEBRATES BASEBALL

BYLINE: By JANE GROSS

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 988 words


Harold Prince slouched in the freshly painted wooden seats rescued from Jersey
City's demolished Roosevelt Stadium, tapping his foot and humming off- key as
the actors and actresses in ''Diamonds'' went through their paces yesterday at
the Circle in the Square Downtown.

While Jackee Harry thumped out the gospel song, ''When God Threw Out the First
Ball,'' the director roared with laughter. When a ragtime piano tinkled
''Hundreds of Hats,'' a sweet tune about the turn-of- the century tradition of
sailing boaters onto the baseball field, Mr. Prince smiled beatifically. When
Chip Zien brandished a cane like Maurice Chevalier and urged the rehearsal
audience to sing along, Mr. Prince was the first to join a French chorus of
''Take Me Out to the Ballgame'' that ended with a lusty ''Un, deux, trois essais
dehors au vieux jeu du bal.''

''It's nice, isn't it?'' asked the director of the musical revue about baseball,
which begins previews on Friday at the theater on Bleecker Street, with opening
night set for Dec. 16. ''There's something innocent, naive, all-American and
generous about baseball. It's about all sorts of things, about dreams, and I
responded to that immediately. It's a mood I like to be in.''

Not Always Destined for Failure

Mr. Prince, who produced ''Damn Yankees'' nearly 30 years ago, disputes the
conventional wisdom that plays about sports are destined for theatrical
oblivion. Only a few, including ''The Changing Room,'' ''That Championship
Season'' and ''The Great White Hope,'' have thrived at the box office, but the
Tony Award-winning director has the reputation, the financial support and the
conviction to succeed where others have failed.

''Often the failure is due in large part to the people behind the project being
too much in love with the subject matter,'' said Stephen Martin, one of
''Diamonds'' producers, who asked Mr. Prince for advice on his project and wound
up with the director offering his services. ''They lose a general perspective
and become too specific.''

''When I decided to do this,'' Mr. Prince said, ''I said it had to satisfy me.
I'm not a baseball fiend. I don't understand the technicalities. What I like is
the ambiance and it had to be done so people like me would have a good time.''

''We're all interested to see how Hal Prince does,'' said Elizabeth Kraus, the
producer of ''Bleacher Bums,'' a production that recently completed a three-week
run at the Park Avenue Christian Church. ''A Perfect Diamond,'' another
limited-run Equity showcase production about baseball, played at the T.O.M.I.
Park Royale Theatre this fall and is expected to re-open in a few months at a
larger Off Broadway theatre with its $16,000 budget more than doubled.

More Than 40 Contributors

''Diamonds,'' by comparison, is a lavish and costly production, capitalized with
$600,000, according to Mr. Martin, who is presenting the revue along with Harold
DeFelice and Louis Scheeder, the producers of a well-received Off Broadway play
about Vietnam, ''How I Got That Story.'' The sketches and songs have been
prepared by more than 40 writers, composers and lyricists, among them Cy
Coleman, and Betty Comden and Adolph Green. The elaborate reconstruction of the
Circle in the Square Downtown was supervised by Tony Straiges, the set designer
who won a Tony this year for ''Sunday in the Park with George.''

While many of the numbers are irreverant, rambunctious and contemporary - like
Roy Blount's skit about a rookie, high on mescaline, who hits his first major
league home run - the thrust of the revue, and of Mr. Straiges's set, is
nostalgic. Abbott and Costello's ''Who's On First?'' has been revived, as has a
song from the 1880's, entitled ''Stay In Your Own Backyard,'' which urges blacks
not to aspire to the major leagues. ''It's our little tribute to the pre-Jackie
Robinson players,'' said Mr. Martin.

While Mr. Prince and his colleagues set out to entertain the less-than-avid fan,
they have paid attention to detail. Research was done at the Baseball Hall of
Fame in Cooperstown, N.Y., and film clips, including one of Humphrey Bogart
doing a paid promotion for baseball, have been culled from the library at Major
League Productions, a division of the baseball commissioner's office. Early
mistakes have been corrected, among them a reference to Walter Johnson pitching
a 13-inning night game for the Senators at a time when baseball was played only
at midday.

Mr. Martin and his fellow producers initially balked at the cost of importing
seats from Roosevelt Stadium, the former home of the Class AAA Jersey Giants.
Mr. Prince, however, insisted they were necessary for the total environment,
which includes blue sky and fluffy clouds, strolling vendors and sepia-and-
white cutouts that suggest the rooftops that were once the backdrop at stadiums
like Ebbets Field or Connie Mack Stadium in Philadelphia.  Game Has Become
Theatrical

''Besides loving baseball, what inspired the design was the script,'' said Mr.
Straiges, a Phillie fan who grew up in Minersville, Pa. ''Baseball has become
theatrical with fireworks, water fountains and everything color-coordinated for
TV. I wanted to include that and also be old fashioned, with the faded paint and
the photo blowups of old Coca-Cola signs.''

The atmosphere seems a balm to Mr. Prince, who is more accustomed to grand
Broadway theaters housing his ballyhooed productions like ''Fiddler on the
Roof,'' ''Cabaret'' or ''Evita.'' He initially declined a request to be
interviewed, then chatted irrepressibly about his latest project.

''This material absolutely affects the way you sleep at night, how you get up in
the morning and how you are with your family,'' he said, ''because that's what
you take home with you. The whole thing of working here is the most fun in the
world because I'm away from the pressure. 'Candide' in Brooklyn was the last
time I felt this jolly.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of scene

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Says Battle For Rebel Base Goes On

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 145 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Nov.  21


A Cambodian rebel leader said today that fighting was continuing for a major
guerrilla base near the Thai border, and he denied that Vietnamese troops had
overrun the camp.

Thai military and guerrilla sources said Tuesday that the Nong Chan camp, home
to some 21,000 Cambodian civilians and 4,000 guerrillas, had been captured by
Vietnamese troops after three days of fighting.

But Abdul Gaffar Peang Meth, of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front,
said at a news conference today that fighting was still raging and that at least
120 Vietnamese had been killed since Sunday.

He said that although one section of the sprawling camp, only 2,000 yards from
the Thai border, had been taken and razed by Vietnamese troops, others were
holding out.

Thai military sources at the border estimated guerrilla casualties at 22 killed
and more than 40 wounded.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BITTER CLASH IN CBS TRIAL TESTIMONY

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1336 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland and CBS lawyers clashed sharply in court yesterday,
as the general stabbed the air with his glasses and asserted his prerogatives as
a commander and the CBS lawyers, catching him in various discrepancies,
suggested that he couldn't get straight his decisions in 1967 or his testimony
now.

Typical of the day's proceedings at the general's seven-week-old libel trial
against the network was an angry exchange over General Westmoreland's decision
in the summer of 1967 to remove the Vietcong's self-defense forces from the
official military listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle.

''You were then the commander of American forces in Vietnam, weren't you, sir?''
said David Boies, who, as the principal attorney for CBS, was cross-examining
the witness in Federal Court in Manhattan.

''C'mon, Mr. Boies, you know that,'' the general shot back.

''Yes,'' said Mr. Boies, ''but I am wondering whether you forget it, sir.''

''Objection,'' shouted Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, as Judge
Pierre N. Leval interrupted a series of rapid-fire questions from Mr. Boies.

When the general prefaced ''order of battle'' with the term ''so-called'' - to
accentuate his testimony that the listing needed restructuring in 1967 to
''separate fighters from non-fighters'' - Mr. Boies lashed out at him.

''You didn't call the order of battle 'so-called' back in 1967, did you, sir?''
Mr. Boies asked. ''Did you call it 'so- called' when you were interviewed by
Mike Wallace?''

The general admitted he had not.

But General Westmoreland told the jury that the deletion of the self-defense
forces from the order of battle, against the recommendation of his intelligence
chief, Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, was his ''prerogative.''

''I exercised it,'' he said.

Arbitrary 'Ceiling'

The general's $120 million suit stems from a 1982 CBS Reports documentary
titled: ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' for which Mr. Wallace was
narrator.

Mr. Wallace, who is also a defendant in this case, interviewed General
Westmoreland in May 1981 for the documentary, which alleged a ''conspiracy'' at
the ''highest levels'' of military intelligence to minimize the strength of the
enemy in South Vietnam in 1967 to make it appear that America was winning the
war.

General Westmoreland, the broadcast stated, arbitrarily set a ''ceiling'' of
300,000 for the order of battle. Another ''tactic'' of the general, Mr. Wallace
said on the documentary, was to order the removal of the part-time, hamlet-based
self-defense forces. These units had been carried in the order of battle at
70,000. But, as the result of new studies in early 1967, General McChristian
estimated their number at 117,000.

On May 11, 1967, according to General Westmoreland, General McChristian gave him
a draft cable for Washington with higher figures for self-defense forces, as
well as for an enemy category called political cadre.

During his direct testimony last week, General Westmoreland testified that he
had deferred transmission of the cable and asked General McChristian for a full
briefing later. He denied telling his intelligence chief - contrary to General
McChristian's recollection - that the figures in the cable would be a
''political bombshell,'' a phrase he said ''is not in my lexicon.''

Yesterday, Mr. Boies came back to this subject.

Mr. Boies showed the witness a copy of his pre-trial deposition last January in
which he said that General McChristian's new figures represented a previous
''underestimate'' of enemy strength and that, without a ''re-ordering'' of the
order of battle, the total figure for the enemy ''would have been a real
bombshell.''

''That's not inconsistent with what I said before,'' the general explained,
saying that, during 14 days of being deposed, the word ''bombshell'' had been
''thrown around so much.''

''You just thrust it right into my lexicon, Mr. Boies,'' he said.

Although laughter swept the courtroom, Mr. Boies was unsmiling. He suggested
that the witness review the 1,642 previous pages of his deposition to see ''just
how recently this was thrown into your lexicon.''

''All 1,642?'' asked Judge Leval.

''Yes, I'd like to know,'' said Mr. Boies, going on:

Q. Did you ever say to Mr. Wallace or to me that ''bombshell'' was not part of
your lexicon?

A. No, but I guess I could have.

''Let me make it clear,'' the general said, turning, flushed, to the jury and
waving his black-rimmed reading glasses. ''If the cable had gone out without
explanation, it would have created a major public relations problem.'' He also
termed the problem a ''political'' one.

General Westmoreland's decision to exclude the self-defense forces from the
order of battle and to assign no numbers to them - as well as a related decision
he made to place 75,000 to 85,000 political cadre in a separate category outside
the listing of enemy strength - was taken after a briefing on May 19 or May 20,
1967.

Yesterday, the general sought to emphasize the relative importance of that
briefing, attended by a number of military officials, against what he said was
the ''insignificance'' of his earlier meeting with General McChristian.

At the same time, he complained about the prominence CBS had attached to the
matter of the self-defense forces, whom he said were comprised of ''old women
and young boys.''

''I mean, it's ridiculous,'' he snapped. ''I was four and a half years in that
country. Nobody knew more about it than I did. And it's ludicrous to put such
emphasis on this organization.''

What General McChristian believed, he said, ''was one thing. What I believed was
another. I was the commander. It was my responsibility. And, in the final
analysis, my judgment was endorsed at the highest level of American
intelligence.''

The general lowered his voice: ''You know that, Mr. Boies.''

''I don't know that at all, sir,'' said the defense lawyer, who is expected to
call witnesses later in the case to dispute not only General Westmoreland's
intentions and chronology of events but also his opinion regarding the threat
posed by the self-defense forces.

Mr. Boies, his hand on his hip and a sheaf of papers on a lectern, asked the
witness whether he spoke to General McChristian after the CBS documentary was
aired in January 1982. General Westmoreland said he might have.

Q. Do you recall saying to General McChristian at or about the time of the
broadcast that your conversation (on May 11, 1982) was a private matter between
West Pointers and should not be revealed publicly?

A. I do not recall that conversation.

Mr. Boies, drawing on ''historical notes'' General Westmoreland had kept in
1967, asked the witness why he had not recorded his May 11 meeting with General
McChristian.

A. I didn't put everything in my notes.

Q. But you put a lot of things in your notes, didn't you?

A. The meeting was inconsequential.

Q. Well, you put in your notes that you had arranged for your surgeon to look at
a visiting Congressional aide who had a head cold.

''That,'' said the general, grinning, ''was a human interest item.''

Mr. Boies went on to emphasize the difference between General Westmoreland's
''problem'' with the new strength estimates produced by General McChristian in
May 1967 and the witness's acceptance of earlier, and lower, figures by his
intelligence chief - including figures that were apparently shown to President
Johnson in April 1967.

The CBS lawyer also brought out that General Westmoreland had not hesitated to
approve a relatively low enemy strength total compiled by Gen. Phillip B.
Davidson Jr., who succeeded General McChristian on June 1, 1967.

And when General Westmoreland testified that he was ''not extremely
disappointed'' in the summer of 1967 to receive fewer troops than he had
requested, Mr. Boies pulled out a copy of his 1976 book, ''A Soldier Reports.''

On page 230, the general conceded, he had written just the opposite.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Artist's rendition of courtroom scene

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 22, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SCOUTING

BYLINE: By Thomas Rogers

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 295 words


Stressful Slogan


The University of North Carolina women's varsity soccer team won its fourth
consecutive national championship last Sunday when it defeated Connecticut, 2-0.

The Tar Heels, who finished the season with a 24-0-1 record, have never lost a
home game, winning 49 in a row since the program's inception in 1979. The
school's team, which has a 44-game unbeaten streak, stresses a pugnacious
playing style.

The players have adopted a controversial slogan that fits their style.

''I love the smell of napalm in the morning. That's been our motto for the whole
N.C.A.A. tournament,'' said Anson Dorrance, the coach. ''At first, it was a team
joke, and then it became a team battle cry.''

April Heinrichs, who scored the game-winning goal against Connecticut, said she
and a couple of her teammates heard the line when they recently saw the movie
''Apocalypse Now,'' which is about the Vietnam war.

A crowd of 3,500 spectators attended the championship game and some chanted,
''Napalm, napalm, napalm.'' A banner was displayed: ''U.N.C. Women Love the
Smell of Napalm in the Afternoon: N.C.A.A. Champs.''

One Chapel Hill woman wrote a letter of protest to The Daily Tar Heel, the
University of North Carolina student newspaper. In last Tuesday's issue, the
first item in the letters to the editor carried the headline, ''Tasteless joke
turns pride into disgust.''

''I certainly don't want to hurt any Vietnam vets,'' Dorrance said. ''It's not
to do anything but get us excited, and it really got us excited.

''I certainly don't feel we are using it in a callous fashion. It's an analogy
for our excitement . . . obviously, napalm is not something we should toy
with.'' Dorrance said the team will discontinue use of the slogan.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 24, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 673 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 45.

1. This faked picture was sent from one Government to another. What Governments
are they and what were the circumstances?

2. More than 3,000 fugitives in eight East Coast states were arrested in the
last 10 weeks. According to the director of the United States Marshals Service,
the percentage of those captured probably already back on the streets is
(10/25/50/66).

3. Temporary roadblocks set up to detect drunken drivers (are/are not)
constitutional, according to the New York State Court of Appeals.

4. On Broadway, only 499 seats of the 954-seat Ritz Theater will be sold for
each performance of ''Dancing in the End Zone.'' What is the reason?

5. The Polish liner Stefan Batory continued a 30-year long tradition. Explain.

6. It is when the nation's stores are beginning to look a lot like Christmas
that Spaeth Design in Manhattan no longer does. Explain.

7. Dwight Gooden, who was named the National League rookie of the year, struck
out 276 batters in his debut season. How does that total compare with the
strikeout totals of rookies in previous seasons?

8. According to a terse Justice Department statement, President Reagan, for
''foreign policy reasons,'' directed the closing of a criminal antitrust
investigation into passenger air travel that has soured relations between the
United States and another country. What country is it?

9. ''I am absolutely not being coy about it,'' said an Administration official.
''I have an intention and that is my intention; I have a desire and that is my
desire.'' Who is the official and what is the intention?

10. Brokerage houses, oil companies and airlines are some of the industries that
have been deluging A.T.& T. Bell Laboratories with inquiries about a discovery
by one of its employees. What kind of discovery is it?

11. This reticulate giraffe is spending a month in Newburgh, N.Y. What are the
circumstances?

12. The best indicator of how satisfied and happy a couple are, according to a
recent study, is (how much the two love each other/how equal their love is/how
similar their expressions of love are).

13. According to the Reagan Administration, the United States and the Soviet
Union agreed unconditionally to meet in Geneva to negotiate an agenda for talks
on limiting arms. True or false?

14. Demand for Cabbage Patch Kids dolls this Christmas is expected to be
(greater than/less than/about the same as) last year, according to retailers.

15. A citizens panel appointed by Governor Cuomo recommended that personal
income taxes be reduced by $815 million a year, a cut that would lower taxes by
about (4/6/8/10) percent for people earning more than $15,000.

16. Under a reorganizational plan adopted by the teams' owners, the United
States Football League will operate with (14/18/24) teams next season.

17. The authorities in Minnesota have dropped a widely publicized investigation
of alleged child murders that were linked to a sex abuse ring. Why?

18. Food supplies were cut off for thousands of drought victims at a famine
relief center in Korem, Ethopia. What happened?

19. The Smithsonian Institution expanded its collection of show business
memorabilia with a hand-knitted cardigan sweater, a trademark of the performer
who donated it. Who is he?

20. For the last 10 weekends, several families in New York City have slept on
plastic chairs, countertops and floors. What were the circumstances?

21. Margarine, rather than butter, is the spread that people use in (25/ 50/75)
percent of American households.

22. The man who said, in the 1960's, that the United States should announce
itself the winner in the Vietnam War and ''begin de-escalation'' has died at the
age of 92. Name him.

23. The International Business Machines Corporation is expected to face
(less/more) competition in the personal computer field over the next year.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 24, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

All But Annexed Afghanistan Afghanistan ostensibly remains an independent
country, with its own flag and seat in the U.N. But the reality is otherwise. A
puppet Communist government totters in Kabul, held in place by 110,000 Soviet
troops. What was supposed to be a limited and temporary intervention in 1979 has
lasted longer than the Soviet Union's war against Hitler. The invaders have made
four million Afghans stateless refugees in Pakistan and Iran - one-fourth of the
population they allegedly came to assist.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 374 words


In a now pious annual ritual, the United Nations has again admonished the Soviet
Union with a gently worded resolution that calls for the withdrawal of ''foreign
troops'' from Afghanistan. The General Assembly passed it for the fifth time
last week, 119 to 20, with 14 abstentions. That's three more ayes than in 1983,
which will hardly deter the Soviet Union from shrugging it off again.

Indeed, the Kremlin no longer even troubles to pretend that Kabul is a sovereign
capital. Moscow bypassed it in ordering the release of a French journalist who
had been seized in September and sentenced to 18 years imprisonment. Jacques
Abouchar was freed on the Kremlin's order after France threatened to ignore a
ceremony marking the 60th year of Franco-Soviet relations. This deprecation of
Afghan statehood so embarrassed France's Communists that they then boycotted the
ceremony.

Moscow insists that Soviet troops are now only supplementing the military
campaigns waged by a conscripted Afghan army. That is a lie. Mr. Abouchar was
captured by Soviet soldiers. A major offensive last spring against the
rebel-held Panjshir Valley was carried out by Soviet planes and tanks. The new
strategy of starving insurgent regions is planned and savagely executed by
Soviet forces.

The Soviet media report next to nothing about this miserable, pointless war
against a once-nonaligned, indeed friendly neighbor. But tellingly, they no
longer ignore what must be a highly unpopular drain. The Soviet public is
expected to believe that only foreign intervention, especially from the United
States, keeps the conflict alive.

The Afghan rebels are obviously receiving relatively unsophisticated weapons
from Western and Islamic well-wishers. That help, allowing them to hold sway in
the countryside, is no less justifiable than Soviet help to Communist insurgents
in Indochina not so long ago. In Vietnam, Soviet diplomacy argued for
reconciliation and a withdrawal of foreign armies, the terms it rejects for
Afghanistan.

The fate of Afghanistan is reason enough to oppose the Soviet grab by every
available means. The example that this ugly war sets for the conduct of powerful
nations toward weak neighbors makes it doubly intolerable.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE DEPLORES DISARRAY IN NEW CHAMBER OF EQUALS

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 2692 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 24


The United States Senate was created as a legislative aristocracy whose members'
six-year terms would insulate them from passing political passions. In the view
of many senators, however, it has degenerated into a raucous town meeting,
focusing on narrow issues of the moment rather than the broad policy decisions
envisioned by the founding fathers.

To many senators, nothing sounded the alarm so clearly as the tumultuous closing
days and nights of the session last month, when members arose from gym cots in
predawn hours to vote on hundreds of amendments to a money bill so complex that
few, if any, knew what they were voting on.

'Monkey-Wrench Politics'

''We are witnessing the disintegration of the U.S. Senate,'' said Senator Dan
Quayle, Republican of Indiana. He is chairman of a committee that has been
studying the chamber and hopes to complete recommendations for reform in the
next few days.



The panel was established in June because of widespread discontent over a
generally chaotic atmosphere that includes all-night sessions and what many
regard as an overload of committee assignments, the decline of the Senate as a
premier forum for debate and what one leadership aide called ''monkey-wrench
politics'' - the willingness of members to throw a monkey wrench into things to
achieve their own goals, no matter what the larger cost.

The democratization of the Senate, its transformation from a body ruled by a few
barons to a chamber of 100 equal members, will be among the major topics of
discussion Wednesday when Republican senators gather to elect a new majority
leader and begin to chart a course as the Senate approaches its third century.
With the help of the Quayle recommendations, senators are to decide early next
year whether it would be better to continue the trend toward equality among
members or to vest more power in the leadership.


What they want to avoid is a repetition of the close of the last session. These
were among the actions in those final days:


- Foreign aid bills were approved without any debate as part of an overall money
bill.


- A major civil rights bill was filibustered to death, although the chamber
previously voted 92 to 4 to limit debate. In another breach of tradition, the
bill's 63 sponsors had bypassed the committee with jurisdiction over the bill to
bring the measure directly to the floor.


- Senators initiated six cloture petitions to limit debate, hoping to thwart
efforts to add legislation concerning abortion, school prayer and gun control to
the money bill.

The clear consensus among members was that the Senate was out of control; many
put the blame on democratization.

In the view of most members, the modern Senate derives from the changes of the
1970's, in the wake of Vietnam and Watergate. In 1961, when Lyndon B. Johnson
became Vice President under John F. Kennedy, Mike Mansfield succeeded Johnson as
majority leader. Mr. Mansfield, Democrat of Montana, envisioned a Senate of 100
equals and opened up committee assignments to junior senators. These younger
members were also given larger staffs, which enhanced their own power and that
of their senior aides.

''Mansfield was anti-elitist,'' said Charles Ferris, who was an aide to the
majority leader. ''He believed that there should not be super-senators. The
notion that there were giants in the Senate assumed there were pygmies.''

Paradoxically, democratization has created a situation in which it has become
increasingly difficult for the majority to prevail. A decade of diffusion of
authority has steadily eroded the powers of seniority and leadership, creating
near anarchy. Many senators believe this has subverted the institution's
constitutional purpose and effectiveness, as well as the esteem with which the
Senate is regarded by the public.

Breaks With the Past

In addition, modern technology - television, air travel, public opinion polling
and the use of computers - has all but destroyed the insularity of the chamber,
as senators now vie for 30-second television news spots. The ornate chamber of
what has often been called the world's greatest deliberative body no longer
resounds to the thunder and whispers of great debates.

Further, increased public scrutiny, from open committee meetings to disclosure
of senators' financial dealings, has produced caution along with accountability.
A limitation on outside income has led many senators to conclude that only the
rich can afford the Senate; more than half the members are millionaires.

And in another break with the past, when men grew old in the Senate, nearly half
of the current senators are in their freshman terms; members lament the lack of
an institutional memory. They also bemoan a breakdown in civility in the
chamber, and speak of ''legislative gridlock'' caused by ''elected bureaucrats''
whose proliferation of staff and legislation has led to the ''trivialization''
of the Senate.

''The Senate has lost its greatness,'' said former Senator Abraham Ribicoff,
Democrat of Connecticut, who was co-chairman of a 1983 study of the chamber.
''The Senate has lost its influence as being a major factor in how this country
is governed.''

Reflecting Nation's Values

Despite their frustrations, many members believe that the changes in the Senate
reflect an anti-institutional bias that swept the nation in the wake of the
Vietnam War and the Watergate scandals, and say that the Senate continues to
reflect the nation's values and priorities.

They believe, for example, that the five-month stalemate on military spending,
from April to September, reflected the nation's uncertainty on the issue.

''This place does reflect the constituency rather accurately,'' said Senator
Warren B. Rudman, Republican of New Hampshire.

''What really is changing is the country,'' said former Senator James B.
Pearson, Republican of Kansas, who was co-chairman of the 1983 study of the
Senate with Mr. Ribicoff.

Others argue that it is dangerous to sacrifice democratization for efficiency.
Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum, a liberal Democrat from Ohio, said, ''I'm not one
who believes that the difference between a good and bad legislature is how many
bills we have passed.''

Despite the problems, many members continue to regard the chamber as the
crossroads of great issues, and note that a major event anywhere in the world
has repercussions in that body.

'Where the Action Really Is'

''This is where the action really is,'' said the majority leader, Howard H.
Baker Jr. of Tennessee, who is retiring this year. ''This is where the policy is
set and this is where the dynamics are set up. This is where the conflicts are
resolved.''

But like almost all his colleagues, Mr. Baker laments the decline of the Senate
as a public forum. ''I think it is a matter of national loss that the Senate as
a body has forfeited a great amount of its status as the nation's prime forum
for the debate of public issues,'' he said.

Mr. Baker calls his colleagues ''elected bureaucrats'' who develop expertise in
a single field rather than a general approach to problems.

One result of the general anarchy on the floor, he noted, was that the
leadership was often forced to limit debate to move the chamber to vote on major
issues. Last September, for example, the Senate had a cloture vote on a motion
to proceed to a highway bill.

The cloture rule was adopted in the Wilson Administraton in response to a
filibuster against a bill that would have permitted the arming of merchant
vessels in World War I, a matter of grave national importance. And it was first
invoked to limit debate on the Treaty of Versailles, another matter in which the
most fundamental principles were at stake.

Partly as a result of the easing of cloture procedures in the civil rights
battles of the 1960's, there have been 30 cloture votes in the last four years,
the same number as in the 45 years from the Treaty of Versailles through the
Civil Rights Act of 1965.

Other Signs of Discontent

There were other signs of discontent. Many senators were dismayed by the short
shrift given a far-reaching proposal involving the nation's commitment to the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization. The legislation, offered by Senator Sam
Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, was rejected after only two hours of post-midnight
debate. It was one of 103 proposed amendments to a military policy bill that
distracted the bill's managers from a broad debate on military preparedness.

Some senators believe that the chamber abandoned its historic role in 1981 when
it hastily adopted a deficit-reduction package that repealed or amended hundreds
of laws. Under Senate tradition, it would have taken a year to repeal or amend
only three or four of those laws.

''From an institutional point of view, it was a subversion of the process,'' Mr.
Quayle said. He noted, however, that the action occurred shortly after the
Republicans gained control of the Senate, with 16 freshman members. ''So many of
us were new. We didn't think that much about the institution of the Senate.''

Senators complain that procedures require them to vote numerous times on
individual major issues as they arise in the budget, in bills to authorize
spending on projects and in legislation to appropriate money for projects.

''Take an issue like the MX,'' Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of Alaska, told
the Quayle committee. ''It is possible to raise an issue like that 10 times
under the normal procedure, and an unlimited number of times if a senator really
wants to raise it. And it becomes totally confusing to the public and to the
membership itself.''


Another complicating factor is the expanded role of freshmen senators, long
relegated to subservience. In the old Senate, first-term Senators took many
months, sometimes years, to make their maiden speeches. All their colleagues
attended such events and parties were held afterward. But now that everyone can
talk, many say, nobody listens. Few senators are on the floor to hear even major
speeches.

Freshmen are rewarded with subcommittee chairmanships shortly after they arrive
on Capitol Hill. In today's Senate, all but two of the 55 Republicans enjoy
committee and subcommittee chairmanships. The two are the newest Senators,
Daniel J. Evans of Washington and Pete Wilson of California.

Freshmen have stunned their colleagues by taking the lead in major legislative
initiatives, including a successful effort to repeal withholding taxes on
interest and dividends, and a coalition budget.

Such actions engendered resentment among some of the more senior members, but
not the breach in civility occasioned when Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of
North Carolina, filibustered against a proposed gas tax during a scheduled
Christmas vacation. The filibuster led Senator Alan K. Simpson, a conservative
Republican from Wyoming, to declaim on the Senate floor, ''Seldom have I seen a
more obnoxious and obdurate performance.''

Mr. Rudman believes, however, that incivility always lurked beneath the
chamber's surface. ''The so-called courtliness in the old days was strictly
style,'' Mr. Rudman said. ''There was courtliness in the debates on the floor,
and political assassination in the cloakrooms. They'd break your kneecaps.
There's more honor in the Senate today.''

The Other Extreme

Few seek a return to the 1950's, when the Senate was run with an iron hand by a
small group of barons led by Lyndon Johnson as the majority leader. In those
days, senators had to appeal to the leadership for everything from travel
allowances to room assignments.

''People say that Lyndon Johnson's leadership was our finest hour, but I think
it was our worst,'' said Senator William Proxmire, Democrat of Wisconsin. ''It
was one man's will. It was n't a reflection of the views of the country as a
whole.''

The purpose of the Senate, as described in the Federalist papers, was to provide
stability and continuity, review the actions of the more numerous and
less-tenured House of Representatives and resist the whims of change.

Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia, the minority leader, who came
to the Senate in 1959, noted that the founding fathers had likened the Senate to
the saucer in which the coffee was poured, to cool it down a bit.

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, a scholar of government,
traces the modern Senate to ratification of the 17th amendment in 1913, which
provided for the direct election of senators.

''The founding fathers envisioned a body that was one removed from popular
choice, chosen by the state legislatures,'' Mr. Moynihan said. ''The Senate was
to represent the interests of the states. Delaware and New York were to be
equals. When senators were chosen by the state legislatures, there was a greater
probability that they would do just that.''

In the mid-1970's, junior senators were awarded increased authority. In a
crucial victory, they won the right to hire additional legislative staff members
to assist in their committee duties, and to have staff members sit in on
committee meetings in the senators' absence.


But most senators now say the staff situation is out of hand. The number of
Senate staff members has grown to 1,176, from 595 in 1968. Senator Baker
attributes much of the legislative proliferation to the increase in the number
of staff members, who have been accused of seeking to justify their existence by
generating bills.

Senators lament that whereas they used to control their staffs, their staffs now
control them. Senator John C. Stennis, Democrat of Missisippi, who came to the
chamber in 1948, said recently, ''Aides used to talk to senators with deference;
now they are telling senators what to say.''

Mr. Moynihan attributes the proliferation of staff to an attempt to keep pace
with the growth of White House staff. He has developed a theory, the ''Iron Law
of Emulation,'' holding that institutions in conflict emulate each other. Thus,
he says, when the White House created an Office of Management and Budget,
Congress created a Congressional Budget Office. When the White House named a
science adviser, Congress created an Office of Technology Assessment.

''When we began to do everything the President does, staff took over,'' Mr.
Moynihan said. ''We found ourselves working for our staffs.''

Junior senators were further aided by changes in the committee structure in the
late 1970's. These changes reduced the number of committees and subcommittees to
126, limited a senator's membership on committees and the number of
chairmanships he could hold. But the Senate has turned a blind eye to some who
have defied these limitations.

Eye on Campaign

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Vermont Democrat, serves on 16 committees and
subcommittees, more than any other senator. Like all his colleagues, he
complains that he cannot keep up with his assignments. Why, then, does n't he
quit a few?

''You build up your own constituencies in the state, and you know that if you
drop any committees it becomes a campaign issue,'' he explained. ''People say,
'Pat Leahy doesn't care about us anymore.' ''

Senate conservatives, meanwhile, devised parliamentary strategies that enhanced
the power of minorities in the chamber. The most controversial tactic was one
created in the 1970's by then Senator James B. Allen, Democrat of Alabama. It
exploits a loophole in the rules that permits senators to obtain votes on
amendments that were pending when cloture was invoked. In the case of the civil
rights bill, Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, who led the filibuster,
filed more than 700 amendments.

''Yogi Berra once said, 'It ain't over until it's over,' '' Mr. Rudman recalled.
''In the Senate, it's never over.''

But, like most of his colleagues who continue to take pride in the chamber, the
Senator said he would not trade his job.

''There is no more important work for anyone interested in public policy than
the U.S. Senate,'' he said. ''But anyone who is achievement-oriented and likes
instant gratification better not come down here.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Changing Senate; First of four articles

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Dan Quayle, Indiana; Photo of Senator Howard H. Baker
Jr., Tennessee

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Barbara G. Apple Is Minnesota Bride

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 79, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 190 words


Barbara Gale Apple, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Irving Apple of Minneapolis, was
married yesterday to William R. Sullivan, a son of Donna Sullivan of Alexandria,
Va., and the late Col. William G. Sullivan, U.S.A. Judge Eugene Menenko of the
Hennepin County District Court performed the ceremony at the Lafayette Club in
Minnetonka Beach, Minn.

Janice Holly Apple was maid of honor for her sister and S. Waite Rawls 3d was
best man.

Mrs. Sullivan, a marketing director at the American Express Travel Related
Services Company in New York, graduated cum laude from the Wharton School of the
University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard
University. Her father is managing partner of Apple & Apple, a Minneapolis
accounting firm. Her mother is president of Marion Apple & Associates,
manufacturers' representatives.

Mr. Sullivan, a senior vice president of Shearson Lehman/American Express in New
York, received B.S. and M.B.A. degrees from the University of Virginia, where he
is on the board of the Colgate Darden Graduate School of Business
Administration. He served as an Army first lieutenant in Vietnam.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A WASTE HAULER UNDER THE GUN

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2578 words


Less than a decade ago, garbage

was a glamor industry. Landfill

space was running out, and the specter of a planet drowning in trash loomed
large. Any company that could get rid of garbage - or better still, recycle it
or convert it to fuel - became a Wall Street darling.

Against this backdrop, the meteoric rise of Waste Management Inc. was easily
predictable. It promised glittering recycling and treatment technologies for all
kinds of wastes. As waste disposal rules were tightened throughout the country,
generators of garbage or toxic chemical wastes welcomed those technologies as
ideal ways to dispose of refuse without damaging the environment. ''We're a
company born of regulation,'' said Phillip B. Rooney, who two weeks ago was
named Waste Management's president and chief operating officer.

These days, it is a company beset by regulation. It has been charged with
improperly handling toxic wastes. Its records have been scrutinized by the
Securities and Exchange Commission, the Environmental Protection Agency, and a
host of state authorities. Its handling of at-sea incineration of toxic wastes
has brought it under even more fire from the E.P.A.

Wall Street responded to the spate of difficulties in its usual fashion. Waste
Management's stock sank from an all-time high of $61.875 early last year to a
low of $27.25 last summer. Clearly, investors felt that the millions the company
would have to spend on fines, legal costs, and remedial construction would make
it unprofitable.

That has not happened. The huge company is not only surviving the trial by
regulation, it appears to be thriving. Its revenues and profits have continued
to climb. Its stock has rebounded to more than $40 a share last week. ''They
have effectively moved to overcome some of their operational weaknesses and are
in a position second to none,'' said Kidder Peabody's Jeffrey A. Klein, a long-
time booster of the company's stock.

Several factors are at play in Waste Management's ability to thrive under
adversity. The financial settlements and fines that it faces come nowhere near
the size of some of the highly- publicized penalties that generators of toxic
substances contend with.

The Manville Corporation, for example, filed for Chapter 11 protection under the
Bankruptcy Code because of the prospect of $2 billion in claims from victims of
asbestos, once its principal product. The chemical companies that produced Agent
Orange, a defoliant contaminated with dioxin, have agreed to pay $180 million to
Vietnam veterans. The highest settlement Waste Management has agreed to was for
$20 million to resolve complaints that it was improperly storing polychlorinated
biphenyls - P.C.B.'s - in Ohio. That is no insignificant sum, but it is one that
Waste Management, with revenues of more than $1 billion, can readily absorb.

Moreover, although Waste Management's sheer size and prominence has made it the
primary target of many regulatory actions, its competitors are not getting off
scott free. Leading rivals, such as Browning- Ferris Industries and its
subsidiary, Cecos International, as well as a profusion of smaller waste
haulers, have also run afoul of the law.


PERHAPS most important, the waste disposal business shows no signs of lagging.
Solid waste disposal is already a $10 billion to $12 billion a year business,
and is growing. Waste Management commands about a 10 percent share of that
market. Hazardous waste, usually disposed of in the form of liquids, is a
smaller business - somewhere in the vicinity of $1 billion a year - but promises
to grow even more rapidly. There is an estimated 264 million metric tons of
hazardous waste generated annually in this country, and only about 4 percent is
currently being farmed out to waste disposal companies. The rest is disposed of
''on site'' by chemical companies, nuclear plants and other generators of waste.

But new provisions of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act bring even
small waste generators under disposal requirements. And ever- tightening
environmental regulations are encouraging the largest waste generators to seek
the help of disposal specialists. Analysts predict that the market for
''off-site'' disposal can only increase - and that Waste Management will emerge
with a stronger grip on the fragmented industry.

Indeed, Waste Management's officials seem unfazed by the company's morass of
regulatory troubles. ''I think there's a general acceptance now that this is a
controversial field, that we're the leader in it and perhaps we're going to be
involved in more controversy than some smaller companies,'' Mr. Rooney said.
''As long as the rest of the industry faces the same expectations, the more
stringent and rigorous the regulation, the better our business is going to be.''

In fact, Waste Management already is expanding to meet what it expects will be a
growing business. Last summer the company, which was already the largest waste
disposer in the country, with 9 percent of the total market, spent $423 million
to acquire a 60 percent share of S.C.A. Services Inc., the No. 3 company in the
field. The acquisition turned Waste Management, which is headquartered in
Oakbrook, Ill., into an enterprise with $1.5 billion in annual revenues and
20,000 employees in 37 states and five foreign countries. And it gave the
company important new markets in the Northeast and West, as well as ownership of
a vital chemical waste incinerator in Chicago.


IT is all but impossible to discern

exactly how much regulatory

trouble lies ahead for Waste Management. Congress, regulatory agencies,
environmental groups and industry remain at loggerheads over how much liability
waste handlers, as opposed to waste generators, should have in situations where
toxic wastes find their way into water or air. Moreover, many of the cases Waste
Management already is involved in are veiled in secrecy.

For example, Courtney M. Price, E.P.A.'s Assistant Administrator for enforcement
and compliance monitoring, confirmed that the agency has been inspecting Waste
Management disposal sites across the country, but declined to give further
details. Richard H. Mays, the E.P.A.'s senior enforcement counsel, said the
inspections were partly designed to follow up recent state findings.

Specific results of the inspections have not been announced. But one report said
that about 120 violations had been uncovered at 14 disposal sites. Waste
Management officials said the only violations they had been advised of concerned
such infractions as missing records, and that none involved ''major
environmental consequences.''

Other findings are more potentially troublesome. In a recently published report,
the E.P.A. faulted Chemical Waste Management, the subsidiary handling Waste
Management's hazardous waste operations, and Hooker Chemical and Plastics
Corporation (now called the Occidental Chemical Corporation) for improper safety
procedures in the ocean incineration of dioxin-contaminated waste from an
upstate New York landfill near Love Canal. The report said the companies knew
the waste was contaminated but failed to conduct proper tests before the
disposal.

Waste Management has disputed the findings. Although the original E.P.A. permit
that allowed the at-sea incineration specified only certain wastes, a
last-minute change in the wording expanded the permit to cover ''other organic
components'' - and thus, by implication, dioxin. Don Reddicliffe, a spokesman
for Waste Management, maintains that the company had not been required to test
for dioxin, and had actually taken more safeguards than E.P.A. had insisted
upon. Still, the E.P.A. has ruled out, until at least next year, the granting of
an operating permit for Waste Management's two incinerator ships, Vulcanus I and
II.

That delay is exacerbating Chemical Waste Management's problems at its Emelle
facility in Alabama, one of the nation's largest hazardous waste landfills,
which last year received some 288,000 tons of waste from 45 states. Earlier this
year, the company was found to have violated an E.P.A. regulation by continuing
to store P.C.B.'s that were to have been disposed of by Jan. 1, 1983. Waste
Management says those wastes had been destined for burning.

Initially, E.P.A. proposed penalizing the company $321,000 for the violation.
Several months later, however, the company and the agency agreed instead to a
consent order embodying a $100,000 civil penalty that was to be refunded to the
company if it removed the waste.

But that proposed settlement, in turn, was attacked by the state as excessively
favorable to the company and replaced by a more stringent proposal calling for a
$1.05 million penalty. Of this, $600,000 was for civil fines and $450,000 for
environmental studies. The settlement is still under negotiation, and the
company has been gradually removing its two million gallons of P.C.B.'s.

The Emelle site remains bedeviled by controversy. For some months, Jim Evans,
the Montgomery, Ala., district attorney, has been conducting a grand jury
investigation into Waste Management's filings with the Alabama Department of
Environmental Management. The E.P.A., in a report on shipments of hazardous
wastes from New York to Emelle, said there were ''discrepancies'' in trucking
records that indicate the waste was picked up for disposal before the material
was analyzed.

At the same time, residents of Sumter County near the Emelle landfill have
formed a group called Alabamians for a Clean Environment that has questioned the
site's safety, citing in part local newspaper accounts of conflicting samples
from monitoring wells. Company consultants have maintained that the site sits
atop a 700-foot-thick layer of leak- proof chalk that a drop of water would take
10,000 years to penetrate.

The community's anger has extended beyond environmental issues to charges of
racial and economic discrimination. Linda Munoz, a leader of the local group,
claims that the landfill was located in a poor, black area because that
population seemed unlikely to object. Waste Management did not select the site
but purchased it in 1978 from Resource Industries of Alabama Inc., which
established it in 1977. One of the owners of Resource Industries was James
Parsons, a son- in-law of Gov. George C. Wallace. Mr. Rooney said that, as part
of the sale agreement, Mr. Parsons still gets royalties on waste shipments to
Emelle.

Emelle, as trouble-frought as it is, is not the last on the list of Waste
Management's ongoing environmental woes. Chemical Waste Management, in the
largest settlement of its kind, agreed last May to pay $10 million to the Ohio
E.P.A. and Sandusky County, and to spend another $10 million in remedial work to
settle charges that the company had illegally stored P.C.B.'s at a disposal site
in Vickery. The site remains closed to new waste shipments and will remain shut
for about two years, according to the company. The Federal E.P.A. also is
considering penalties.


SO far, Waste Management's bottom line has remained relatively immune to the
fines and legal costs. Only about 20 percent of its business comes from the
disposal of hazardous waste, the area most prone to legal problems. Altogether,
the company last year earned $120 million on revenues of $1.04 billion. For the
first nine months of 1984, it reported revenues of $926.8 million, up from
$765.6 million for the comparable period last year. Earnings for the first three
quarters of this year totaled $103.3 million, up from $91.5 million in the 1983
period.

Earnings per share last year stood at $2.50, and this year leading analysts are
looking to a figure of about $2.95. Next year, some say, earnings per share
could rise to $3.80.

The company has recently gone through some major organizational changes that
analysts say will allow it to better plan for growth. Mr. Rooney, 40, an
executive and director of Waste Management since 1969, assumed the posts of
president and chief operating officer from Dean L. Buntrock, 53, one of Waste
Management's three founders, who remains chairman and chief executive officer.

''Phil is a strong, hands-on operating guy,'' said William Genco, a Merrill
Lynch, Pierce, Fenner & Smith Inc. analyst who has long been bullish on Waste
Management. ''That will free Dean up to do government relations and acquisitions
like S.C.A.'' Mr. Rooney said that Mr. Buntrock would also focus on long- range
company planning.

Mr. Rooney, meanwhile, says he will continue to beef up Waste Mangement's
internal environmental controls. ''We've made a lot of changes,'' he said. Among
these, he noted, was the introduction of an ''environmental auditing program''
to test for possible groundwater contamination around company disposal sites.
Also set up last year, he said, was a system of ''compliance officers'' at
disposal sites who report any infractions directly to a headquarters official
rather than the site management.

The combination of continued E.P.A. scrutiny and stronger internal controls will
yet exonerate Waste Management in the public's eye, Mr. Rooney insists. ''Our
operations are open to view,'' he said, speaking from the company's art-bedecked
headquarters near Chicago. ''And every time we have a review, we become a
stronger company.''


A 1970'S LANDFILL:A 1980'S CONTROVERSY


Many of the environmental hassles in which waste haulers are enmeshed dredge up
past decisions as much as current sins. A prime example is the ongoing dispute
that Waste Management Inc., is having with the Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency over its 10-year-old E.S.L. landfill site.

Waste Management closed the brimming Joliet, Ill., landfill, which holds a
variety of liquid and solid wastes, last year, but is seeking a permit to reopen
and expand the site. The state E.P.A. has denied the permit, charging that the
landfill is leaking dangerous substances and should be dug up.

Finis Williams, an assistant attorney general in the state's environmental
control division, stated in a hearing that some of the wells the company had set
up to test groundwater for contamination had been dry and unable to monitor
pollution. He said that samples of groundwater near the landfill did indeed
reveal the presence of toxic chemicals, and that there was a good chance that
the local water supply was contaminated.

The geology of the facility ''is unsuitable to hold hazardous waste,'' Mr.
Williams concluded. The clear implication was that nothing more toxic than
ordinary garbage should have been put in E.S.L. in the first place. An
accompanying E.P.A. report recommended that the site be permanently shut down
''and all waste exhumed.''

Waste Management employees themselves had flagged danger at the site. In 1979,
Kirk Stemple, technical manager at E.S.L., wrote to one of his superiors that
disposal practices there were ''an open invitation to disaster.'' Two other
employees wrote to headquarters to warn that ''because the underlying bedrock is
fissioned and creviced, any leakage from these trenches will directly enter an
aquifer that is used as a domestic water supply.''

Nonetheless, witnesses for Waste Management testified recently that the site was
safe and the monitoring adequate. The Illinois Pollution Control Board agreed,
and ordered the E.P.A. to issue a permit for a new disposal trench. The E.P.A.
requested a further hearing. The board is expected to rule on that request
tomorrow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Chart of financial data

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAN GENERALS WAGING WAR BE WOUNDED BY THE PRESS?

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section 4; Page 18, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1005 words


Until now, most of those who have made libel law in this country have been
overshadowed by the cases that bear their names. L.B. Sullivan, for instance, is
far less familiar than New York Times v. Sullivan, the landmark Supreme Court
decision he spawned. This is changing, however, in Federal District Court in
Manhattan, where two of the most prominent figures in recent military history,
William C. Westmoreland and Ariel Sharon, are waging warfare of a different
sort: multimillion-dollar libel suits against big news organizations.

To the defendants in the cases, CBS and Time Inc., the notoriety of the
plaintiffs has vital legal consequences. Both of them, they contend, have been
so conspicuous, so influential, so powerful in their official capacities that
the traditional laws of libel do not apply to those who report on their
activities.

Always, a libel case requires courts to balance an individual's interest in his
reputation against the press's rights under the First Amendment. For public
officials, the balance struck in the Sullivan case was a ''qualified
privilege'': they may sue for libel, but must prove both that the material
challenged is false and that it was printed either recklessly or with malice.

Mr. Sullivan, however, was an obscure city commissioner in Montgomery, Ala.;
General Westmoreland was the commander of half a million American troops in
Vietnam, and Mr. Sharon was the architect of Israel's longest and most divisive
war. Plaintiffs such as these, CBS and Time contend, fall into a different
category: people who have become such profoundly public ''public figures'' that
they've lost their individuality, at least legally. In essence, they argue, each
was so intertwined with the epochal events of his era that he become synonomous
with the government he served - and governments can't sue for libel. Each, they
argue further, entered the limelight voluntarily and assumed the attendant
risks. Each is so inherently newsworthy that he can defend himself without
invoking the assistance of the court. And each was involved in affairs of utmost
public concern, where totally uninhibited, unfettered reporting must prevail.

Lawyers for the plaintiffs counter that the Supreme Court has consciously
refused to shield the press so completely. A decision to enter public life, even
at its highest levels, they say, should not constitute an invitation to be
libeled with impunity. ''While public figures - or even public officials - may
invite criticism through their own voluntary actions, they have not surrendered
their interest in their good names and reputations,'' General Westmoreland's
court papers state. ''The cases provide no authority for holding that public
officials, present or former, may be libeled with abandon.''

Nor, they claim, can General Westmoreland or Mr. Sharon be automatically equated
with their governments - particularly since both CBS and Time accuse them of
acts that ran counter to official government policy.

Both CBS and Time are represented by the same law firm - Cravath, Swaine & Moore
of New York - and their strategies are uncannily alike, including what might be
called their ''l'etat, c'est lui'' defense. General Westmoreland, CBS argues,
was ''inevitably and totally identified with the United States war effort,''
while Mr. Sharon, Time contends, was ''totally identified'' with Israel's
invasion of Lebanon. Any attack on Mr. Westmoreland in his official capacity is
''indistinguishable from an attack on the Government's military conduct of the
war''; any similar comment on Mr. Sharon ''is indistinguishable from comment on
the Israeli Government's military conduct of Operation Peace for Galilee.''

The parallels continue. Both defendants argue that under longstanding
principles, high public officials like General Westmoreland and Mr. Sharon
cannot be sued for libel, and as a matter of fairness and reciprocity, should
not be allowed to bring libel actions against others. Mr. Sharon, Time notes, is
free to tell anyone he wants - his troops, fellow Knesset members, the American
public - that Time Inc. is anti-Semitic, and is nonetheless immune from libel
suits. ''If Time sued Sharon for libel the case would be dismissed forthwith,''
it argues. ''So, likewise, should this one.''

The wars in Vietnam and Lebanon, the defendants have also argued individually,
were seminal public events generating heated discussion and debate - precisely
the kind of debate the First Amendment protects. Both argue that each conflict
was so thoroughly ventilated and debated that reporting on it, even falsely,
must be considered protected. ''The issue of plaintiff's conduct before, during
and after the massacre,'' Time's lawyers state, ''is now part of the public
domain, eliminating any enforceable right plaintiff might have had to prevent
speakers from taking a particular view of the matter - including the reporting
of charges which may be untrue.''

Whether any of these arguments will prevail is unclear. Neither defendant,
however, could find much encouragement from an opinion written earlier this
month by Judge Abraham D. Sofaer, who is presiding over the Sharon case. The
Supreme Court, Judge Sofaer wrote in an opinion denying Time's motion to dismiss
the case, had provided ample other means, short of absolute immunity, to protect
news organizations when they report on official conduct. Under Time's logic, he
noted, the magazine could have reported that Mr. Sharon had entered the Sabra
refugee camp and shot unarmed civilians, even though it knew such an account was
false, and still have been immune from a libel suit.

''Nothing in the First Amendment requires that the press have absolute freedom
to pass such rumors off as fact, regardless how certain a reporter is of their
falsity or how damaging they are to an official's reputation,'' he wrote. ''The
constitutional value of free speech does not in all circumstances outweigh the
state's interests in protecting the reputations of its citizens.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of General Westmoreland; photo of Ariel Sharon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Sports of The Times;
The Shooting of Ben Wilson

BYLINE: By Ira Berkow

SECTION: Section 5; Page 7, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 970 words


A magazine, ''Hoop Basketball Yearbook/ '85,'' arrived in the mail not long ago.
It details the coming season from the pros to the colleges to the high schools.
On page 86, it lists ''High School's Hottest Prospects.'' One of them was ''6-8
Ben Wilson of Chicago Simeon HS,'' a 185-pound senior forward who was ''being
recruited by most of the nation's powers.''

The magazine describes Wilson as ''an emotional, spirited player who sparked his
team to wins in its final 26 games as it captured the Illinois AA championship
and finished with a 30-1 record.''

The Chicago high school basketball season has begun, but Ben Wilson is not
playing, not hearing the roar of the crowd for his shots, not trying to spark
his team to another state championship. There will be no more phone calls from
recruiters; no longer will they be ringing his doorbell.

Last Thursday, Thanksgiving Day, a headline on the first page of The New York
Times sports section read, ''Chicago Prep Star Is Dead of Wounds.'' The prep
star was Ben Wilson. He was 17 years old.

The news-agency story said that on Tuesday, during a lunch break, Wilson and two
female friends bumped into three youths outside a store. A quarrel began and one
of the youths tried to rob Wilson. He resisted and one of the youths, according
to the police report, drew a .22 caliber pistol and fired two shots into Wilson.

Ben Wilson died in a hospital the day after he had been shot. The Rev. T. L.
Barrett, of the Wilson family's church, said: ''What happened yesterday is not
new. It is glorified and celebrated because the victim was a star and a
champion. But it happens day after day after day in our community.''

He was talking, of course, about senseless and deadly violence. And as severe as
the problem surely is there, he need not have confined it to his community.



It recalled another shooting of an athlete in Chicago under circumstances
equally as grotesque. The gun blast that shattered the midnight stillness on
June 14, 1949, and sent Eddie Waitkus crashing against the wall of a young
woman's room in the Edgewater Beach Hotel, rocked me, too. I was then a
9-year-old baseball fan who had enjoyed the baseball style of Waitkus, a former
Cub who the winter before had been traded to the Philadelphia Phillies.

On several occasions at Wrigley Field, I had watched the lanky, long-faced,
left-handed Waitkus. He had a cool and buttery style around first base. I had
admired him, but I was not alone. I learned after that night of June 14 that a
Chicago teen-ager named Ruth Ann Steinhagen was also fond of him, but in a
totally different way. She must have been in some of the crowds I was in that
waited an hour after games under the stands and cheered as the players emerged
from the clubhouse, all hair- slicked and deific.

Who knows, who can predict the actions derived from the stirrings within some
people, young or old, black or white, male or female. What kind of people were
those youths who shot Ben Wilson? What kind of person was Ruth Ann Steinhagen?

''As time went on,'' Ruth Ann Steinhagen would tell the felony court, ''I just
became nuttier and nuttier about the guy. And I knew I would never get to know
him in a normal way, so I kept thinking I will never get him and if I can't have
him, nobody else can. And then I decided I would kill him. I didn't know how or
when, but I knew I would kill him.''

Ruth Ann Steinhagen, who would be judged criminally insane, rented a room in the
hotel, sent a message to Waitkus and then, when he entered the room, she put a
bullet hole through his lung.

The bland savagery of that shooting, the cutting down of a hero, is part of our
national mythology now, and the incident was the basis for the critical scene in
Bernard Malamud's novel, and the recent film, ''The Natural.''



I have never forgotten that shooting of 35 years ago. The bullet ripped a hole
through my boyish notion that sports were not a part of the real world, that
they were impregnable to the madness around us. Although Waitkus survived four
operations and lived - miraculously, he played the full 154-game schedule the
next season as his Philly ''Whiz Kids'' won the National League pennant - I was
learning of the mortality of men, which included athletes.

The shooting of Waitkus was also the beginning of a lifetime of experiencing the
hollowness of senseless tragedies, of the murders of the Kennedys, of the Rev.
Martin Luther King, of the sniper Whitman, the mad Manson, the unspeakable
slaughters in Vietnam, and also in the world of sports, the massacre of the 11
Israelis at the Munich Olympics.

''A day hardly passes, we feel, without some new threat to the ordered peace
that makes life bearable,'' wrote Anthony Lewis in The Times shortly after the
Munich murders. ''We sense a society at risk from terrorists, hijackers,
assassins - creatures beyond the familiar retraints of reason and humanity.''

That appeared on Sept. 18, 1972, a day after the obituary of Eddie Waitkus.

Waitkus was 53 when he died of cancer of the esophagus in a Boston hospital. In
preparing an article at the time, I called his sister, Stella Kasperwicz. She
did not believe that his having been shot had directly led to his death. ''But
it might have taken away some of his endurance,'' she said.

Waitkus had played the last year of his 11-year big-league career in 1955. In
the following years, he was an instructor in Ted Williams's summer baseball
camp, made some speeches and collected his pension. He retained an interest in
sports. His sister said that she and Eddie had talked about the tragedy at the
Olympics.

''Eddie thought it was awful,'' she recalled, ''and he said that none of us will
ever be the same because of it.''

To many, that echoes the sentiments for Ben Wilson, dead at 17.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mary Wilson

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SEARCH OF A CENTRAL AMERICAN POLICY

BYLINE: By James Chace

SECTION: Section 6; Page 48, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5790 words


James Chace is an editor of The New York Times Book Review and author of
''Endless War: How We Got Involved in Central America and What Can Be Done.''

PRESIDENT Reagan enters his second term with his Central American policy in
disarray. Neither of his major objectives - the overthrow of the Sandinista
Government in Nicaragua and the military defeat of the leftist guerrillas in El
Salvador - is likely to be achieved without the use of American troops.

Washington's emphasis on local military forces, supported by the Central
Intelligence Agency and supplied with American arms, has sharply increased the
danger of regional war. So, too, have the actions of the Soviet Union and Cuba
in supplying weapons and political support for Nicaragua and the Salvadoran
rebels. The recent commotion over the apparently false report that Soviet MIG's
were on their way to Nicaragua shows how tense the situation has become. The
Administration, however, appears to be deeply divided over how to proceed. Ways
must be found to soften up the deadlock and open the road to peace and security.

Early this fall, in search of those elusive elements, I visited Nicaragua, El
Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica for the third year in a row. Before and during
my trip, I discussed the situation with highly placed figures in government and
private life. These included Sergio Ramirez Mercado, a member of the three-man
junta then ruling Nicaragua; Luis Alberto Monge, President of Costa Rica; Julio
Adolfo Rey Prendes, Salvadoran Minister of the Presidency, and Col. Adolfo
Blandon, chief of staff of the Salvadoran armed forces, as well as a number of
Honduran leaders and officials of the Roman Catholic Church. In addition, I had
extensive conversations with United States military and diplomatic
representatives and spent time in territory controlled by the Salvadoran
guerrillas.

My broad conclusion is that the United States policy that would best provide for
stability in Central America - and for our own national security - would be a
policy aimed at the demilitarization of the region. This same policy would also
enlist the support of most Central Americans. The Sandinistas are avowed
Marxists bent on constructing a Marxist-Leninist state in Nicaragua. But they
have not been - nor are they likely to be - swayed from this path by the kind of
economic and military pressures that have been mounted by President Reagan
during his first term. The armed attacks by the ''contras,'' the American-backed
anti-Sandinista rebels operating out of neighboring Honduras, cannot overthrow
the Managua regime; they only encourage greater unity within Nicaragua's ruling
group. Any hope of evolution toward a more politically pluralist state - and
this hope, I admit, is slim - has to come from within the country, under
economic and political pressure from Socialist parties and governments in
Western Europe and Latin America.

For the United States, the most constructive policy would be to negotiate
security guarantees with the Sandinistas. Such an accord should put an end to
the contras' war and, at the same time, allay regional fears of Nicaraguan
efforts to export revolution. In line with that approach, the United States
should give full support to the attempt of the so-called Contadora powers -
Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia and Panama - to negotiate agreements for security
and democratic reforms for the whole area.

At the same time, the United States must leave no doubt that it would use force
to prevent the deployment in Nicaragua of any advanced offensive weaponry - such
as MIG fighter planes - that could threaten the United States or any strategic
facility in the region, such as the Panama Canal, that Washington is committed
by treaty to defend. Were Nicaragua to launch an attack on any of its neighbors,
the United States could lawfully intervene under the terms of the 1947
Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance, known as the Rio pact, if so
requested by a two-thirds majority of the other signatories.

In El Salvador, the Government and the high echelons of the military have at
last come to recognize that the war against the leftist guerillas cannot be won.
President Jose Napoleon Duarte and his top army commanders have taken serious
steps - and without first clearing them with Washington - to open a dialogue
with the rebels. In so doing, they have rejected the Reagan Administration's
emphasis on a military solution to the conflict.

At this juncture, the clear policy of the United States should be to couple
demilitarization of the region with encouragement of democracy through economic
rewards and political support. Democracy, after all, has flourished in Costa
Rica. In all the other Central American countries, whenever the people have had
a fair chance, they have chosen the path of democratic reform. The United States
ought to promote democracy not simply out of fear of Communist takeovers, as
though the countries of the region were dominos to be toppled by the Soviet
Union, but because it is in the national interest of the United States - for
moral as well as security considerations - to do so.

NICARAGUA



 ON A SOFT AUTUMNAL morning on the road to Esteli in northern Nicaragua, Daniel
Ortega Saavedra, the Sandinista candidate for President in the recent national
election, greets a turnout of local militia with a raised fist and cries of
''Poder popular'' - ''Power to the people.'' A humorless man in his late 30's,
Comandante Ortega rarely smiles, even when he is pelted with flowers by children
at a party rally. At the question-and-answer sessions he prefers, he is laconic,
tough, uncompromising. Asked by a peasant why he has not received the land he
was promised, Ortega tells him to join a cooperative farm. Asked why Nicaragua
does not go into neighboring Honduras to clean out the contras, he answers with
questions of his own: ''Why does the United States want us to talk to these
contras? Why does the church not speak out? Why does the Archbishop of Managua
not denounce the killings?''

The next day, at Sunday mass in the spare, whitewashed church of Santo Domingo
outside Managua, a rock band blares out ''The Battle Hymn of the Republic.''
Looking somewhat bemused by the music, the conservative Archbishop, Miguel
Obando y Bravo, waits patiently for the hymn to conclude. In his homily he
inveighs against the ''contradiction'' between Christianity and the Marxist
direction of the Nicaraguan revolution. The Sandinista leaders respect the
Archbishop as a tough, unyielding adversary. Tomas Borge, the Minister of the
Interior, is reported to have said, ''If I were running the opposition, I'd run
Obando.''

The most striking phenomenon in Nicaragua today is the extent of the opposition
to the Sandinista regime. When the dictator Anastasio Somoza Debayle was
overthrown in 1979, the Sandinista guerrrillas enjoyed widespread support. The
guerrillas and their allies, operating under the banner of the Sandinista
National Liberation Front (F.S.L.N.), promised a mixed economy, political
pluralism and a foreign policy of nonalignment. None of these promises have been
kept.

The private sector still accounts for more than 50 percent of the predominantly
agricultural economy, but prices are controlled by the state, so that peasants
who are forced to sell their produce to the Government cannot earn enough to pay
for what they need. The Government controls all banks, all access to foreign
exchange, and regulates all imports.

In foreign policy, the Sandinistas have tried to maintain good relations with
the social democratic parties of Western Europe and Latin America, but they have
also developed particularly close ties to the Soviet bloc, and especially to
Cuba. Many of the 6,000 or so Cuban advisers stationed in Nicaragua work in
health and education, but others have helped to train the army and to organize
the Sandinistas' intelligence and internal security apparatus. The arms received
from the Soviet bloc include about 100 medium tanks, several helicopter
gunships, antiaircraft missiles and small arms.

As for political pluralism, a state of emergency declared in 1982 suspended
habeus corpus, imposed press censorship and curbed the right to strike. The
emergency, ostensibly a response to the military activities of the contras, was
relaxed during the election campaign, but censorship was reimposed in the
closing weeks before the Nov. 4 vote. In addition, the Sandinistas have
organized Cuban-style Committees to Defend Sandinism - local block organizations
that are used not only to carry out administrative tasks but to spy on
neighbors.

These broken promises have given rise to resistance on the part of the political
opposition and the Roman Catholic hierarchy - a disaffection that is likely to
grow in spite of the majority vote won by the Sandinistas in the election.
Originally, the election was intended by the Government to legitimize Sandinista
rule. Instead, after the emergence last July of a strong political opposition
led by Arturo Jose Cruz, the elect)on became a test of the Sandinistas'
commitment to the democratic process. Formerly a member of the Sandinista junta
and a head of the country's Central Bank, Cruz went into self-imniposed exile in
1982 in despair over the Sandinistas' refusal to honor their promises. He
returned only when it seemed possible to put together a program that could
receive wide support*

Cruz suceeded in unifying the three largest opposition parties in Nicaragua into
the so called coordinadora coalition, along with two labor unions and prominent
businessmen.  He then bargained hard with the Sandinistas for a free and fair
election, insisting on freedom of movement, equal acess to the press and
television, neutral international observers, postponement of the balloting until
mid-January 1985 to give the opposition time to campaign, and a public
commitment by the Sandinistas to respect the election's results.

The Sandinistas appeared to agree.  But after everything was worked out at a
meeting of the Socialist International in Rio de Janeiro in early October, the
Sandinistas refused to extend the deadline for registration by 72 hours to give
the Cruz people time to consult with their adherents in Managua - this dispite
pleas from Western European and Latin American Socialist leaders on the scene.

The Sandinistas, it is now clear, were faced with a delema.  If they outpolled
Cruz by an overwhelming margin, they could claim a popular mandate to
consolidate their power.  But if Cruz won a sizable portion of the vote - and
the presence of many workedrs and peasants at his campaign rallies suggested
that he might win as much as 40 percent - the Sandinistas would find it far more
difficult to proceed with their plans.  To tighten controls after such a show of
opposition to their program would further isolate the Nicaraguan Government from
almost all of Latin America, and from Western Europe as well.

The last-minute breakdown of negotiations between the Coordinadora and the
Sandinistas may have come about precisely because the Sandinista hardliners did
not want to risk the possibility of a large pro-Cruz vote.  This, at least, is
what some leaders of the Socialist International believe.  It was, after all,
Bayardo Arce Castano, the Sandinista who was in charge of negotiating the
electoral process, who declared last May the elections were ''bothersome.'' What
a revolution needs, he was reported as saying, ''is the power to enforce.  This
power to enforce is precisely what constitutes the defense of the proletariat -
the ability of the class to impose its will, using instruments at hand, without
going into formal or bourgeois details.''

Of course, six small oppostion parties were on the ballot in the election that
was held on schedule, and together they won more than one third of the vote.
But these parties never had the kind of popular support that was enjoyed by the
Coordinadora coalition.  Had the Cruz opposition been on the ballot, the
Sandinistas might have been hard pressed to come up with a decent majority.

Without Cruz in the race, it was a hollow victory for the Sandinistas.  In fact,
during the campaign, the Sandinistas' vice-presidential candidate, Sergio
Ramfrez, admitted to me in an interview in Managua that the Sandininista
National Liberation Front needed a decisive election victory over Arturo Cruz to
win the legitimacy it was seeking.  ''There is now an international image,''
Ramfrez said, ''that our elections have no significane.''

The Cruz phenomenon showed that there could be effective opposition to the
Sndinistas without counterrevolution.  In his campaigning, Cruz called for the
demilitarization of Nicaragua, leaving only a police force, as in Costa Rica, to
provide for security.  He also asked for a dialogue with the contras, who are no
longer mainly composed of former supporters of Somoza.  As he put in in Managua,
how can there be ''true peace'' except through ''national reconciliation''?

BY NOW, THE C.I.A.'S ''COVERT war'' against the Nicaraguan Government is no
secret to anyone.  Yet the policy, as pursued by the Reagan Administration, does
not appear to have been fully thought through.

American officials conceded that the contrast are not strong enough to topple
the Managua regime.  To do that, large-scale attacks against major cities would
have to be launced, and only the United States could carry those out
successfully.  Nonetheless, the Reagan Administration has regarded the
guerrillas as a useful form of pressure on the Sandinistas to change the nature
of their Government.

Yet even this limited purpose is not being served.  The most significant result
of the the contras' harassing operations in the sparsely settled northern part
of Nicaragua has been to bolster the political unity of the regime and
strengthen the hand of the hard-liners.  The contras have unquestionably killed
some innocent people, and the Sandinistas have used the contra danger to rally
the population, justify their own military buildup and suspend civil liberties.

Beyond that, the contras pose a cruelly divisive issue for the United States.
Congress voted last month to cut off all funding to the rebles.  The subsequent
revelation that the C.I.A. had prepared a manual for the rebels that included
advice on kidnapping and killing Government officials caused public outrage.
These are tactics the United States condemns as terrorist when practiced by
other countries.

THE REVOLUTION THAT broke out in Nicaragua in 1979 was welcomed by that
country's neighbors.  Costa Rica had provided a haven for the Sandinista rebels.
Venezuela had given money and weapons, Panama weapons and training.  To help the
Sandinistas after they gained power, Mexico joined witrh Venezuela to offer
Nicaragua oil at less than market prices, with payment postponed.  Five years
later, the presence of Cuban advisers, the shrinking of civil liberties and the
growing size of the Nicaraguan armed forces, which now comprise about 50.000
regulars and 50.000 militiamen, haver left Nicaragua with few friends in the
region.  Venezuela has suspended oil shipments.  Mexico insists that Nicaragua
pay for its oil deliveries in cash or produce.  Costa Rica, angry at the
direction of the Sandinista revolution, has taken an increasingly hard line.

In an interview at his official residence, the Costa Rican President, Luis
Alberto Monge, stressed his opposition top the Sandinistas.  For this reason, he
has agreed to let the voice of America broadcast into Nicaragua from privately
owned facilities in Costa Rica.  In a way, this is tit for tat; the Sandinistas,
with Soviet-bloc help, have increased the ability of their radio stations to
broadcast into Costa Rica.

The growing isolation of the Sandinistas from their one-time supporters in Latin
America has been matched by the increasing suspicion of the European Socialist
parties.  The French Socialists are profoundly unhappy with the generally
Leninist direction of the revolution.  The Socialists in power in Madrid are
deeply concerned, according to a high Spanish official in the foreign Office,
about the possible introduction of Cuban and Soviet forces into Central America.

Small wonder, then, that the European Socialists gave their full support to the
draft for a peaceful settlement for Central America that was put forward in
September by the Contadora group.  The treaty called for signers to offer
amnesty to political dissidents, hold impartial elections under independent
auspices and end support for groups fighting to overthrow other goverments.  It
also proposed a ban on the construction of foreign military bases in Central
America, a reduction of military advisers in the region and the eventual
withdrawal of all such personnel.  In its essentials, the Contadora treaty not
only tried to confront the security needs of the region but encouraged internal
democratic behavior - requiring, for example, that each signatory allow
''diverse currents of opinion'' to participate in politics.

The terms of the treaty received an overwhelming endorsement from the foreign
ministers of the European community, who were meeting in San Jose, Costa Rica.
Nor was the value of the moment lost on the Sandinistas, who immediately
declared their willingness to sign.  But the Reagan Administration, though
claiming to support the Contadora process, reacted with frosty legalisms.  It
criticized the treaty for failing to provide strict controls to insure
Nicaragua's compliance with the restrictions on a military buildup and on any
shipment of arms to the rebles in El Salvador.

The Administration's position has only hardened since then. In Washington's
view, the boycott of the Nicaraguan election by the Cruz coalition has rendered
meaningless those provisions of the treaty that guarantee the ''effective
participation of the people as a whole'' in the political process.
Administration officials are reported to have demanded that any Central American
peace plan be contingent on a new Nicaraguan election, with all parties taking
part. Moreover, a memorandum prepared by the National Security Council staff
stated: ''We have trumped the latest Nicaraguan/Mexican efforts to rush
signature of an unsatisfactory Contadora agreement.''

The Contadora nations have agreed to try to come up with more specific
procedures for verifying compliance with the treaty. But they are determined not
to gut the treaty or to engage in lengthy negotiations over procedural details
that would further delay the peace process.

By so quickly dismissing Nicaragua's willingness to sign the treaty, the Reagan
Administration exposed what appears to be its true position - a refusal to
accept the Sandinistas in power no matter what security guarantees they might be
willing to provide. This is what Fred Ikle, an Under Secretary of Defense, made
explicit when he said that if the United States cannot ''prevent consolidation
of a Sandinista regime in Nicaragua . . . we have to anticipate the partition of
Central America.'' How this preventive action can be taken without intensifying
the military confrontation with Nicaragua has never been made clear.

What was most contradictory in the Administration's initial rejection of
Contadora was Washington's willingness to continue talks with Nicaragua at the
small Mexican resort town of Manzanillo, where the American negotiator, Harry W.
Schlaudeman, had held a number of meetings with Victor Hugo Tinoco, the
Sandinista Deputy Foreign Minister, over a period of five months.

It was the State Department that took the lead in pressing for bilateral talks,
in an apparent effort to get the Nicaraguans to spell out the concessions they
might be willing to make on security issues and on liberalizing their regime.
Should the Manzanillo talks continue, this would doubtless reflect the split
between the State Department and the White House, where the top political
appointees seem to discount any possible accommodation with the Sandinistas. Or,
to put the most cynical interpretation on them, the talks were simply an
American election ploy to show that the Reagan Administration was willing to sit
down with its adversaries. As an Administration official familiar with the talks
admitted in early November: ''No one will tell Schlaudeman what the end game is,
what the road map to a final agreement is. The reason is that the Administration
doesn't really want a settlement with the Sandinistas.''


HONDURAS




 IN HONDURAS, THE REAGAN ADministration's policy of militarizing the region has
gone ahead with startling speed. Today, there are about 1,000 American troops in
Honduras. American military grants have risen from $11 million in fiscal 1982 to
$77.5 million in fiscal 1984. Among the joint projects is a Regional Military
Training Center, where Green Berets have been training soldiers from other
Central American countries.

This arrangement seemed to suit the Honduran military just fine - until last
March, when the military ousted Gen. Gustavo Alvarez Martinez, commander of the
armed forces, mainly because he had arrogated too much power to himself. The
current President, Roberto Suazo Cordova, was elected three years ago in a
democratic manner, but the army remains the guarantor of civilian rule. And the
new collective military leadership has started to challenge Washington's
tendency to decide what is best for Honduras.

To begin with, the Honduran generals do not want any more Salvadoran troops
trained in their country: The bitter legacy of a 1969 border war with El
Salvador has reasserted itself. But the decision also reflects a wish to
formalize relations between Honduras and the United States on security issues.
In early November, the Honduran Government requested an official security pact
with the United States and a doubling of American economic aid in return for
Honduran willingness to provide Washington with facilities for United States
military deployments. American officials are unenthusiastic about concluding
such a treaty, fearing that singling out Honduras would devalue the security
arrangements with other Latin American countries under the Rio pact.

Behind this nervousness is the issue that most troubles Honduras - the existence
of about 10,000 anti-Sandinista contras, well-trained and heavily armed,
operating from Honduran territory or just inside the Nicaraguan border. The
Congressional vote to terminate American aid for the contras caused shudders to
run through the Honduran Government and military high command. If the United
States walked away from the forces it had created, what would happen to these
thousands of armed troops? The fear is that the presence of these irregular
forces, thwarted in their mission and left to fend for themselves, would have a
dangerously destabilizing effect on the fragile Honduran democracy. ''I'd like
to send the contras to Miami,'' a high Honduran officer told me.



EL SALVADOR



 BY FAR THE MOST DRAMATIC and promising peace initiative in Central America in
recent months has been the meeting in mid-October between the President of El
Salvador and the leftist guerrillas who now control roughly 30 percent of the
country. Accompanied by his Minister of Defense, Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova,
and two close political advisers, President Duarte met with two guerrilla
comandantes and the two leading figures of the guerrillas' political wing,
Guillermo Ungo and Ruben Zamora. Four church officials, including the Archbishop
of San Salvador, Arturo Rivera y Damas, acted as witnesses.

True, little of substance was accomplished at the meeting in the small town of
La Palma, in rebel-held territory. No ceasefire was negotiated, for that would
have granted the guerrillas a territorial legitimacy that neither the army nor
the Government would concede. But an important first step has been taken. A
joint commission was set up ''to discuss all aspects that could lead to the
achievement of peace.'' More talks were scheduled, and representatives of both
sides agreed to debate the issues in Los Angeles under the auspices of a private
American group, the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions.

It was President Duarte who seized the moment and went unarmed into the heart of
guerrilla country, with only the Boy Scouts to protect him. Yet he was able to
do so only because he had the support of the army high command. In El Salvador
today, the armed forces hold the levers of power. For the present, they have
decided to support Duarte, who was elected last May against strong rightist
opposition, and the high command has backed his new policy of dialogue with the
rebels.

This may be the last chance for democracy in El Salvador. When President Duarte
took office last June, he used the authority of his office to attack abuses of
human rights - abuses that, in the last five years, have included the
assassination of thousands of civilians by right-wing death squads operating
with the connivance of the armed forces. Since then, the military leaders have
sustained the President in his removal of highly placed officers connected with
the worst excesses of the death squads.

No officer, it is true, has yet been brought to trial for murder, and it is
highly unlikely that Duarte will be able to prosecute officers at the highest
level. One high Government official I spoke to said that, in the end, ''we will
have to have a general amnesty in order to live together.'' Nevertheless, it is
significant that the activities of the death squads have diminished - 185
persons killed in the first nine months of 1984, compared to 1,090 murdered
during the same period in 1983.

In fact, in the months to come, it may prove far more difficult to control an
increase in civilian deaths that is likely to occur for a different reason - the
army's new strategy of using mobile air cavalry to keep the 10,000- man
guerrilla force on the move.

This strategy has been made possible by the influx of new American aircraft and
firepower. With the $196 million in military aid the United States Congress
approved in the 1984 fiscal year, the Salvadoran armed forces will be able to
buy 13 more helicopters, which will give them some 45 helicopters by early
December. In addition, the Salvadoran air force has six A-37 light attack
airplanes, equipped with machine guns and 500- pound bombs. The Pentagon is also
converting two Salvadoran air-force cargo planes into gunships equipped with
rapid-fire machine guns. These planes are deadly antipersonnel weapons, and
identification of targets from the air is extremely difficult under the best of
circumstances.

Already there have been reports of soldiers killing many unarmed civilians.
According to the Archbishop's Legal Oversight Office in San Salvador, 1,331
civilians were killed by the regular armed forces during the first six months of
1984. This pattern is likely to continue. It is hard to imagine how pilots will
be able to distinguish between simple campesinos and armed guerrillas in an air
attack.

To listen to Col. Adolfo Blandon, the armed forces chief of staff, the army has
taken the initiative. He gestures at a war map showing the rebel-held zones that
sprawl like red inkblots over the landscape of El Salvador. The army, he says,
now keeps patrols in the field for days on end, rather than returning to the
barracks at the end of the day. And with their new air- combat capability, the
army expects to be able to keep the rebels from massing for an attack. The
guerrillas are clearly vulnerable to these new tactics. They lack an air
capability and depend mainly on small arms they capture from Government troops,
receive from the Soviet bloc through Nicaragua, or buy on the world market.

Colonel Blandon admits that the new tactics may kill more civilians, but he
shrugs: ''This is a special kind of war.'' In his easygoing manner, he explains:
''Terrorists use civilians as a shield. They begin fire fights when soldiers are
around, and civilians are killed as well.'' He says it is now the army's job
''to convince peasants that, by bringing them to a refugee camp, the army won't
kill them.''

As in Vietnam, the Government is trying to ''win the hearts and minds of the
people.'' But until the army can take and hold an area where the guerrillas now
operate freely, and demonstrate that it is the protector of the villagers, the
war will remain stalemated. Gen. Paul F. Gorman, who heads the United States
Southern Command, located in Panama, has predicted that, with enough weapons and
more military advisers, the Salvadoran Army would control 80 to 90 percent of
Salvadoran territory within two years. That view is shared neither by the
Salvadoran Government nor by the Salvadoran Army's chief of staff.

Instead, well ahead of the La Palma meeting, the Government and the high command
decided to expand contacts with the rebels. With the Roman Catholic Church
acting as mediator, talks were carried out over a period of months in Mexico and
Costa Rica to allow for a number of prisoner exchanges. As Julio Rey Prendes,
the President's right-hand man, told me, ''We have had to move slowly. The army
has changed, and is changing, and is starting to accept Duarte. But some of them
have problems with the dialogue, any dialogue.'' On the other hand, he implied,
some officers are pushing the Government to move faster on talks with the rebels
than the Government is ready to go. There is even talk among Salvadorans and
Western diplomats of holding a plebiscite on the results of any negotiation.

At La Palma, the guerrillas insisted on negotiations on some formula that would
give them a share of political power and would restructure the armed forces.
This is not a realistic possibility, because the army clearly rejects any such
idea. Nonetheless, some bargain could be reached in the forthcoming meetings
between the rebels and the Government. The rebels could be given a place on the
electoral commission that is to be set up for the 1985 legislative and municipal
elections. They could also have a role in the preparation of a plebiscite that
might be used to satisfy some of their demands for social and economic reforms.
In any case, the Salvadorans - both the Government and the guerrillas - have
taken the peace process into their own hands, and no one can predict the
eventual outcome.

Meanwhile the war will go on, as both sides look for any tactical advantage they
can gain before a possible ceasefire. The armed forces believe that, to
negotiate from a position of strength, they will need all the air and firepower
they can muster. And the guerrillas will doubtless seek to demonstrate the
vulnerability of mobile helicopter tactics. If the guerrillas succeed in
humiliating the army in the months ahead, or if the army's new tactics result in
the indiscriminate killing of civilians, the possibillity for negotiations will
be seriously diminished. The hard-liners in the armed forces could then take
over military operations, and the death squads could return with a vengeance.

THE IMPLICATIONS FOR THE United States are not hard to draw. The pace of events
in Nicaragua and El Salvador may put further pressure on Washington to look for
negotiated solutions to both conflicts. Should revised Contadora agreements
finally be signed by the countries of the region, Washington will find it hard
to stand alone in opposition. At that point, the new Reagan Administration ought
to endorse the treaty. At the very least, the Contadora treaty will hold the
Sandinistas accountable for their behavior, and will encourage Latin American
governments to join with Western European powers in putting economic and
diplomatic pressure on the Sandinistas to move toward greater political
pluralism.

If, as may well prove to be the case, the Sandinistas use their election victory
as an excuse to stamp out all opposition and construct a Cuban-style state
protected by Soviet rubles from economic collapse, Nicaragua will remain poor
and isolated, a social and economic failure. Short of direct American military
intervention, such a development would be beyond the power of the United States
to prevent. However, even an avowedly Marxist- Leninist regime in Nicaragua need
not constitute a threat to our vital interests. Negotiated security agreements
provide a pragmatic basis - the only sound basis - for dealing with whatever
government rules in Managua. The incentives for Nicaragua to negotiate such
agreements are very high. As the Contadora proposals recognize, American public
opinion will not tolerate the stationing of any advanced Soviet offensive
weapons in Nicaragua.

In El Salvador, the situation is more hopeful than it has been in five years of
savage civil war. If the level of political violence continues to fall, and if
the armed forces succeed in convincing the civilians that they are there to
protect rather than punish, the Government's efforts to persuade the leftist
rebels to enter the political process may well succeed. Now it is up to the
United States to actively encourage the Salvadoran Government in its efforts to
look for a political rather than a military solution.

Although the United States can hardly create democracy in Central America, it
can nurture a weak democracy like Honduras by helping to demilitarize the
country, and it can strengthen a hardy democracy like Costa Rica with
preferential trade arrangements. It is not direct economic aid that these
countries need so much as the foreign investment and trade stimulus that could
lay the basis for nonviolent solutions to their critical social and economic
problems.

For the foreseeable future, we will have to expend much of our energy and
inventiveness in dealing with problems in the Western Hemisphere. We should not
do so alone. We should work with the regional powers to get the Cubans out of
Central America - as the Contadora treaty calls for - and to make it easier for
each country in the region to develop democratic institutions and dispense with
destabilizing arms supplies from the Soviet bloc, or from anywhere else. In this
endeavor, we should welcome the help of our European allies.

Above all, we should not leap at military solutions to political dilemmas. By
exploring paths to negotiations in both Nicaragua and El Salvador, Washington
may find, to its own surprise, that this is a better route to democracy than
protracted war.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 759 words


Nov. 25, 1984Fiction*1

CHANGES, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) The crises that arise when a
television anchorwoman and a glamorous physician fall in love.  *2

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  *3

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Fawcett Crest, $4.50.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  *4

THE ROBOTS OF DAWN, by Isaac Asimov. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) A human
detective from Earth investigates the murder of a robot on the planet Aurora.
*5

SINNERS, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $3.95.) Sex and scandal in Hollywood.  *6

THE FRANCHISE, by Peter Gent. (Ballantine, $3.95.) Behind the scenes of
professional football.  *7

BOWDRIE'S LAW, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $2.95.) Short stories about a Texas
Ranger. *8

DINOSAUR PLANET SURVIVORS, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $2.95.) In
this sequel to ''Dinosaur Planet,'' two natives awaken after 40 years to find a
new generation of sinister inhabitants.  *9

THE AUERBACH WILL, by Stephen Birmingham.  (Berkley, $3.95.) Three generations
of a German Jewish family in New York.  *10*

BLOOD AND ORCHIDS, by Norman Katkov.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) Four Hawaiian youths
are accused of raping a Navy officer's wife.  11*

THE TOMB, by F. Paul Wilson. (Berkley, $3.95.) A sacred spot desecrated years
ago wreaks vengeance on people today.  12

CHEROKEE, by Donald Clayton Porter. (Bantam, $3.95.) The ''White Indian'' series
continues with a story of war between Senecas and Cherokees.  13*

MORETA: Dragonlady of Pern, by Anne McCaffrey. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.) On a
distant planet, humans and dragons fight a spore invasion.  14

RAINSONG, by Phyllis A. Whitney. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) The role Rick, a pop
music idol, plays in the life of his wife and widow. 15

DARKFALL, by Dean R. Koontz. (Berkley, $3.95.) Ratlike creatures escape from
hell to leave a trail of disfigured corpses in this tale of horror.  The
listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores. These figures are statistically
adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets across the United States. The
number of titles within the two subdivisions of nonfiction can change from week
to week, reflecting changes in book buying.  *An asterisk before a book's title
indicates that its sales, weighted to reflect the bookselling industry
nationally, are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.



 Nonfiction

General *1

MOTHERHOOD, THE SECOND OLDEST PROFESSION, by Erma Bombeck. (Dell, $3.95.) Humor
by the syndicated columnist.  *2

CORONER, by Thomas T. Noguchi with Joseph DiMona. (Pocket, $3.50.) Accounts of
the deaths of seven celebrities by Los Angeles's ex-coroner.  *3

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (NAL/ Signet, $4.50.) Americans flee an
Iranian prison.  *4

FATAL VISION, by Joe McGinniss. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The case of an Ivy League
graduate, doctor and convicted killer of his wife and daughters.  *5

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  *6

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  *7

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspiration.  *8

CHICKENHAWK, by Robert Mason. (Penguin, $3.95.) A helicopter pilot's life in
Vietnam.



Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous *1

GARFIELD LOSES HIS FEET, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $5.95.) Cartoon humor.  *2

NO MORE SECRETS FOR ME, by Oralee Wachter.  (Little, Brown, $4.95.) How children
can defend themselves against sexual abuse.  *3*

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  *4

IN SEARCH OF THE FAR SIDE, by Gary Larson.  (Andrews, McMeel & Parker, $4.95.) A
new collection of the syndicated ''Far Side'' cartoons.  *5*

THE OLD FARMER'S 1985 ALMANAC.  (Yankee Publishing, $1.75.) The 193d edition.
*6

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
For 1984.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3649 words


FICTION

NOVEL WITH COCAINE. By M Ageyev. Translated by Micheal Henry Helm. (Dutton,
$15.95.) The narrator of this feverish, personal novel, set at about the time of
the Russian Revolution, is a schoolboy of 17 already tortured by
double-consciousness; he poses for himself, hates his pose, then revels in the
hatred. With Dostoyevskian obsessiveness, he chronicles his downward spin into
deceit and debauchery. His loathing of his devoted mother, whom he eventually
robs, his ungrateful acceptance of his nanny's last few kopeks and his
deliberate infection of a young girl with syphilis, are all acts he recognizes
as vile even as he celebrates their vileness. After graduating from school, he
falls in love with a married woman and discovers that he cannot physically love
the person he emotionally loves, so he must defile her, too. He then moves on to
cocaine, embracing with cool rationality the delusions of grandeur and euphoria
it brings him. ''What if, as I was convinced, a tiny speck of cocaine could
provide my organism with instantaneous happiness on a scale I had never dreamed
of before?'' The answer, he tells himself, is that he would never have to work
for happiness again. Fascinating as a tale of addiction, ''Novel With Cocaine''
is even more intriguing because of the mystery surrounding it. It was written
during the Revolution by an anonymous author - Ageyev is a pseudonym - then sent
to Paris and first published in a Russian emigre magazine in 1936. The author,
who at the time was living in Istanbul, disappeared soon afterward. Whether he
was acquainted with cocaine and where he stood on the Revolution can only be
guessed, but the novel can be taken as a metaphor for the dividing of a state,
the head going in one direction, the heart in another; the theme of warring
consciousness is strong throughout it. ''Isn't the human soul somewhat like a
swing which, once given a push in the direction of humanity, is ipso facto
predisposed to return in the direction of bestiality?'' - Helen Bendict

STRONG MEDICINE. By Arthur Hailey. (Doubleday, $16.95.) In 1957, when Celia de
Grey, a saleswoman for Felding-Roth, a New Jersey-based pharmaceutical firm,
convinces Dr. Andrew Jordan to try a new drug on a hopelessly ill patient and
the patient miraculously recovers, Celia's career at the drug firm is
established. And, despite his initial annoyance with her persistence, Dr. Jordan
finds himself as much taken with Celia as her superiors at Felding-Roth; in the
hospital cafeteria, just after the patient recovers, he tells Celia, ''I was
going to wait until another time we met, but I may as well tell you now. I've
decided to marry you.'' One month later, we are told in the next paragraph,
Celia and Andrew ''were married in a quiet civil ceremony.'' So much for
romance. Having neatly dispatched much of the emotional interest of ''Strong
Medicine'' in the first 19 pages, Arthur Hailey - the best-selling author of
''Airport'' and ''Hotel'' - moves along to the crux of this mechanically written
novel: the dissection and analysis of the pharmaceutical industry. With few
digressions along the lines of human emotion or psychological understanding, Mr.
Hailey follows Celia's career up the business ladder and answers most questions
you might have about the industry. Placebos, unscrupulous researchers, animal
rights advocates protesting experimentation, unethical salesmen, a Congressional
investigation - they're all here. If you're into pharmaceutics, this is just
your bottle of pills. But Mr. Hailey's less than workmanlike prose won't make
the medicine easier to take. And you may finish the book convinced that a
magazine article about the drug industry, unimpeded by a host of humdrum,
issue-oriented characters, would have sufficed. - Mel Watkins

THE LIVES OF RACHEL. By Joel Gross. (NAL, $16.95) Joel Gross's popular ''The
Books of Rachel'' told of five highly unusual Jewish women named Rachel whose
lives ranged from the 15th century to the present; ''The Lives of Rachel''
depicts five earlier Rachels, from 168 B.C. to 1096 A.D., and does so in a most
readable way. Each Rachel is a strong woman, true to her faith under difficult
and often fatal conditions. Each is intelligent, insightful - often to a
mystical degree - and plainly different and special in her time. Two of the
Rachels live in Jerusalem, one in London, one in Nicodemia and the last in
Mainz. In each of these places, plunder, rape, burning, enslavement, torture and
mass murder are the known and often accepted conditions. One comes away from
this book believing that most contemporary instances of violence and barbarism
are simply outbreaks of a predisposition endemic to the human animal. But these
Rachels care, help, heal, and in that sense are different from most of the
people around them. Still, one of them is tortured and dies horribly for
refusing to betray her husband; one is enslaved, raped, brutalized and then
killed when she kills her enslaver to protect another victim. Another makes
Excalibur for King Arthur. The fourth, with her faith, saves many from the
bubonic plague - even some who would readily kill her and all Jews. And the
fifth escapes a pogrom with the help of a Christian nobleman who loves her and
whom she loves but for whom she will not sacrifice her beliefs. The author tells
us at the end that ''all men connect to ancient glories and tragedies . . . even
if at some moments in time we forget that all families, all men, all bloods are
one,'' which is a bit chilling after what he has told us so convincingly in
these five connected stories about our past. - Robert P. Mills

SNAIL. By Richard Miller. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $16.95.) Not as wickedly
wise as ''Alice in Wonderland,'' or as dizzyingly surreal as Raymond Roussel's
novels, Richard Miller's ''Snail'' moves nevertheless on the high grounds of the
fantasy genre. This action-packed picaresque novel features a demi-immortal who
is initially introduced as Third Reich War Minister Fritz von Blomberg, a
handicap that does not prevent him from enjoying several lusty and bewildered
reincarnations, including a present-day American one. A willing puppet in the
hands of arch-rivals Pallas Athena and the Wandering Jew, Fritz time-trips
through Tangier in the early 1960's, New Orleans during the Vietnam War and
several other expanded and transformed locations. There is some charm and
delight in all this silliness, especially in the throwaway lines referring to
American pop mythology. In America, a hamburger empire is in charge of the
world, the gods operate a pinball machine and Hitler is a 6-year-old boy. The
comic book version of the cosmos rolls on, filled with pathos and quite a few
cliches. Alas, the stuff wears thin after a while, and the weakness typical of
American pop surrealism shows its boring visage. From Tom Robbins's big-thumbed
heroines to Richard Brautigan's naifs, this genre suffers from a surfeit of the
obvious and a terminal penchant for cuteness. Mr. Miller avoids taking his
dime-store mysticism too seriously, but the stuff is often painful.
nevertheless. At times, it all sounds like a desperate stew of discarded novels
in several genres, including soft-core pornography, finally melted together in
the picaresque. Still, the wink of complicity that this sort of mildly stoned
satire used to elicit is rarely returned these days. - Andrei Codrescu

THE ZURICH NUMBERS. By Bill Granger. (Crown, $14.95.) The Zurich numbers are not
Swiss bank accounts. They are a system for trafficking in people. The scenario
of Bill Granger's latest November Man intrigue is ingenious and infernal and it
carries a light cargo of moral freight. ''The Zurich Numbers'' begins when two
Eastern Bloc hit men try to terminate our hero in a rundown mansion on Chicago's
South Side. The November Man is Devereaux, a world-weary counterintelligence
agent out of the Windy City, the author's hometown. He's a marked man who needs
a low profile as life insurance. But he has too much character to refuse help to
an unfortunate charwoman who has been brought to the United States from Poland
by a multinational office-cleaning concern called the Universal Janitorial
Service. The Universal bunch is the Western end of a scam that imports
indentured spies with their children as collateral. As Devereaux is sucked into
this vortex of double and triple agents, Mr. Granger laces the action with a
subtle range of moral misbehavior. Some of the bad guys turn better and some of
the good guys are very bad. And what are we to make of the honest Swiss broker
of this numbers game that deals in souls? He's a Peter Lorre type who keeps the
books for both sides. None of these problems of conscience retards the momentum,
which ends in a violent show-stopper at a Polish circus. I can't wait for
November next. - Martin Levin

VILLA APHRODITE. By Thomas Baird. (Joan Kahn/St. Martin's, $14.95.) A villa in
Florence, a great John Singer Sargent portrait, Filippo Brunelleschi's Santo
Spirito, a gold nautilus by Benvenuto Cellini and a lost Raphael drawing - in
''Villa Aphrodite,'' Thomas Baird, who teaches art history, creates an intricate
pattern of amorous intrigue and art-world plotting, skillfully using the icons
of his profession to provide glitter and splendor. Mr. Baird's subject is a
venerable one: the encounter between the ingenuousness of the New World and the
immense sophistication of the Old. His cast of characters includes an
impoverished aristocrat, struggling to maintain both his family honor and
heirlooms; a self-absorbed American scholar, smugly convinced he is ''nailing
down the Madonna of Foligno'' during his mornings at the German Library; an
American manipulator, angling for control of Texan billions and Florentine
treasures; an ineffective esthete, neither scholar nor dealer, dabbling round
the edges of the action; and, of course, a couple of young lovers, who perform a
complicated dance of courtship as a counterpoint to the art intrigue. But the
richness of Mr. Baird's patterning is, alas, the thinnest of veneers. The
brilliance of the text is all borrowed from the artwork; the characterizations
are barely skin deep, and the mechanics of the plot creak as the gears revolve.
After the lovers finally are in each others' arms, the young man announces
cheerfully, ''Maybe that wasn't textbook wonderful, but it was better than I
expected.'' He wins the young woman easily with this sort of romantic murmur,
but readers, may be more resistant. - Roxana Robinson

Alhambra on the Atlantic

The rosy optimism that marked the United States as it entered the 20th century
could not have been better reflected than by two young institutions - the
picture postcard and Coney Island. Penny postcards brilliantly captured the
hyperbole of one of the world's true wonderlands, Brooklyn's own Alhambra on the
Atlantic.

In CONEY ISLAND: A Postcard Journey to the City of Fire (Brightwaters Press, 235
Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10003, $24.95), Richard Snow, the managing
editor of American Heritage magazine, and Kiyoshi Kanai, a designer, give us the
story of Coney Island from 1900 to World War I, the years that saw it become a
Mecca for the fun- loving masses, a warning for those who saw it as a Sodom and,
not least, a subject for many of the great writers of the time. Mr. Snow does
not fob us off with reproductions of the postcards alone, although they are
pretty enough. He also provides an ample text - in his own words and others' -
that captures the excitement of the amusement park. It was loved or hated, but
no one could shrug it off, even the architecture critics of the day, who either
marveled at or detested the weird skyline the promoters had thrown up on the
beach.  A Coney Island still exists, but the one described here - with its
lavish exhibitions (a re-creation of the Boer War, for example), mechanically
marvelous thrills, con men and role as one of the entertainment centerpieces of
the nation - is gone. It is good to have it so neatly and colorfully
memorialized. - Richard F. Shepard

NONFICTION

THE COMINTERN AND THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR. By E.H. Carr. Edited by Tamara
Deutscher. (Pantheon, Cloth, $14.95. Paper, $7.95.) There is something
depressingly familiar about this account of a great power meddling in a distant
country's bloody civil war. Much has changed since 1935, of course, in our
assumptions about war, the balance of power and the nature of geopolitical
rivalry. Yet none of this undermines the contemporary resonance of the late
British historian E. H. Carr's picture of Soviet involvement in the Spanish
Civil War - an intervention that even then had little to do with revolutionary
idealism and everything to do with Realpolitik. Written in 1982, ''The Comintern
and the Spanish Civil War'' is a spare and admirably dispassionate work on a
subject that usually evokes intense emotion and recriminatory prose. Carr
believesthe Spanish war was the first round in the struggle against fascism, and
he is deeply disappointed by the tepid international reaction at the time,
particularly in Moscow, which was caught between its fear of fascism and its
concern not to frighten England and France by encouraging extremism in Spain.
The result, in Carr's view, was disastrous for the Spanish left, and he is
ruthlessly honest in exploring the contradictions between Joseph Stalin's
political moderation - his encouragement of a non-Communist popular front
government in Madrid - and the extensive military aid and advice that eventually
gave Moscow effective control over Spain's military, its Government and its
newly formed secret police. Carr was a committed leftist who shared nothing of
today's fearful preoccupation with the spread of Communist ideas. This does
nothing to change his damning picture of what can happen when a great power
intervenes in a foreign war in the name of ideology. - Tamar Jacoby

* NEPTUNE'S REVENGE: The Ocean of Tomorrow. By Anne W. Simon. (Franklin Watts,
$15.95.) Anne W. Simon, the author of ''The Thin Edge: Coast and Man in Crisis''
and other books, is concerned about overfishing, oil spills, the dumping of
toxic and radioactive wastes at sea and rising carbon dioxide levels in the
atmosphere (which she argues will almost certainly melt the polar icecaps and
flood coastal areas within the next two centuries). Unfortunately, she is
unwilling to brook compromise or even discuss nuances of the issues she raises.
Miss Simon scoffs at the idea that oceans may have some ''assimilative
capacity'' to absorb wastes and calls for zero levels of pollution. She says we
need alternatives to fossil fuels but doesn't even consider the possibility that
nuclear power might be the only realistic alternative. Even more confusing is
her criticism of the attempts by a series of American Presidents to limit
foreign access to America's coastal fishing grounds. She admits that overfishing
occurs because these areas have been open to unrestricted use by other nations.
Yet she dismisses efforts by the United States to claim ownership of our coastal
waters as a real estate ''grab'' and claims efforts to limit fishing have only
led to ''anarchy.'' Miss Simon raises important issues, and ''Neptune's
Revenge'' will probably be welcomed by environmentalists. Whether its sketchy
criticisms and dubious solutions will attract much attention beyond these
circles, however, is open to question. - William Tucker

COME TOGETHER: John Lennon in His Time.  By Jon Wiener (Random House, Cloth,
$19.95. Paper, $10.95.) Amid the torrent of books about John Lennon, ''Come
Together'' stands out as one of the few that don't want to deify, dish the dirt
about or otherwise exploit the slain former Beatle. A sympathetic documentary
history of Lennon's political thinking (which went through many phases), ''Come
Together'' says that during the counterculture's flowering, rock music had real
clout in the American political arena. Certainly some Government officials
thought so, or they wouldn't have initiated deportation proceedings after Lennon
aligned himself with the activist left. Jon Wiener, a history professor at the
University of California, Irvine, obtained 26 pounds of F.B.I. and Immigration
and Naturalization Service files on Lennon under the Freedom of Information Act,
and there is some grim humor in his chapter about this material. The
Government's bumbling investigation of Lennon produced some ludicrous
misinformation and paranoia (song lyrics printed on album jackets were treated
as classified information, for example). But if the Government's campaign
against Lennon was a comedy of errors, Mr. Wiener argues, it was also
successful. Lennon won his three-year battle against deportation, but it
demoralized him. The author interweaves his account of Lennon's political life
with a running history of the media's reactions to the man and his work, giving
special attention to the opinions of New Left journalists and rock critics. Mr.
Wiener also offers his own intelligent, if overly reverent, analyses of Lennon's
songs. - Stephen Holden

ACROSS THE RIVER: Politics and Education in the City. By Joseph P. Viteritti.
(Holmes & Meier, Cloth, 29.50. Paper, $14.95.) By working from 1978 to 1981 as a
special assistant to Frank Macchiarola, the chancellor of the New York City
public schools, Joseph P. Viteritti got a chance to see policy made and
implemented. He was supported by a National Institute of Education grant, and
this useful and informative book is the result. While not everyone approved of
how Mr. Macchiarola went about achieving his goals (improving students' test
scores, the quality of teaching and the standards of educational competency, to
name a few), many give him credit for trying to change the quality and image of
the public schools during New York's worst budget crisis. In ''Across the
River'' (the school board's headquarters are in Brooklyn), Mr. Viteritti closely
examines the educational and budgetary decisions made during Mr. Macchiarola's
stewardship, as well as the roles played by the Mayor, the Governor,
legislators, budget officers, union leaders, state education officials, New York
school board members and a host of others. Class sizes, teachers' salaries and
graduation requirements were both educational and political issues. Mr.
Viteritti is partisan, and opponents of many policies do not get much of a
chance to explain their positions. Still, he does try to be fair. And he admits
he was often surprised by positions taken on various issues by Mr. Macchiarola,
Mayor Koch, Albert Shanker, the teachers' union leader, and others. The author's
conclusion: the educational system can be managed. - Arnold L. Goren

THE BRAIN. By Richard M. Restak. (Bantam, $24.95.) The human brain should be the
most interesting thing on earth. It gives us all our perceptions of life and the
world. But the brain's central importance does not make it easy to write about.
Many books on the subject are likely to put most brains to sleep. ''The Brain,''
published as a companion to the Public Broadcasting System's superb eight-part
series on the brain, is a well- written book by Richard M. Restak, a
neurologist. It is rich in imagination and filled with lore about the brain as
well as details about the history of brain research and up-to-date scientific
insights into the brain's function. Because of its modest size (371 pages), it
does not try to be exhaustive, but it does offer an intriguing and thoroughly
understandable overview. It also makes a good beginning for anyone who wants to
explore such special subjects as memory, sleep, the different functions of the
brain's two hemispheres, physical coordination, epilepsy, stroke, mental illness
or Alzheimer's disease. The book is copiously illustrated. It uses color views
of some of the spectacular models developed for television to show how the brain
would look in action if one could see it, immensely magnified, from the inside.
More useful for the book's purposes are the many well- labeled black-and-white
drawings of the brain's parts. Anyone who has seen the television series will
find ''The Brain'' a welcome companion, reinforcing the series and adding much
of its own. Harold M. Schmeck Jr.

THE PUSAN PERIMETER: Korea, 1950. By Edwin P. Hoyt. (Stein & Day, $19.95.) This
is the first of a series of books on the Korean War planned by the military
historian Edwin P. Hoyt. If the ones to come are as painstakingly researched as
''The Pusan Perimeter,'' the series will be a definitive resource for military
scholars and war buffs. The narrative is fleshed out with the author's frank
critiques of the strategies and tactics employed in the field, plus a good
amount of political analysis. The human side of the war - how the soldiers doing
the fighting felt - emerges only peripherally, but war's essential brutality
comes through strongly in the blow-by- blow accounts of the principal
engagements. The story begins with the surprise attack by North Korea against
South Korea on June 25, 1950. Mr. Hoyt describes how the Americans and South
Koreans were pushed to within 50 miles of the city of Pusan, near the southern
tip of the Korean Peninsula, before they finally were able to halt the enemy's
advance three months later - after a succession of humiliating reverses at the
hands of the numerically superior Communist troops. The main impact of ''The
Pusan Perimeter'' comes from the description of the United States'
unpreparedness for an adequate response to an all-out attack. The point is still
topical. With Korea remaining a potential tinderbox for the United States and
the Soviet Union, the question is whether the debacle of the summer of 1950
could be repeated, this time with the possible use of nuclear arms. - Robert
Trumbull

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Gen. Douglas MacArthur with Ambassador John J. Muccio in Korea
,1950; Postcard showing steeplechase at Coney Island at the turn of the century

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 25, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 44, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words


THE DIARIES OF JANE SOMERS, by Doris Lessing. (Vintage, $6.95.) Doris Lessing
published two novels this year and last under the pen name Jane Somers. The
author of more than 25 books, Miss Lessing wanted to highlight difficulties
faced by unknown writers, to encourage them and to fool reviewers. The novels
are ''The Diary of a Good Neighbour'' and ''If The Old Could. . . .'' Both are
now in ''The Diaries of Jane Somers.'' Our reviewer, Caroline Seebohm, wrote of
''If The Old Could . . .'' that ''the problems of older women and sex, of
loneliness and of the generation gap are all central to this novel's theme. . .
. this is an extremely courageous attempt (to deal with these subjects), and
Jane Somers is a courageous writer.''

IN THE LAND OF ISRAEL, by Amos Oz. (Vintage, $5.95.) Amos Oz, the Israeli
novelist, toured his country in 1982 interviewing fellow Israelis - including
Sephardic Jews, West Bank settlers and Arabs. ''In the Land of Israel,''
translated by Maurie Goldberg-Bartura, is ''stunning'' and ''brilliantly
controlled, a careful if galloping report by an artist wearing a journalist's
mask, who portrays his country through conversations,'' Roger Rosenblatt said in
The Book Review last year. ''The extraordinary dialogues (Mr. Oz) wrote from
these encounters first appeared in the socialist newspaper Davar. The voices are
not types.''

RUNNER MACK, by Barry Beckham. (Howard University, $6.95.) The story is about a
baseball player who aspires to the major leagues but is drafted into the Army
and involved in a plot to bomb the White House and take over the United States.
Our reviewer, Mel Watkins, wrote that Barry Beckham's 1972 novel ''can be seen
as an allegorical chronical of the Afro-American's historical experience from
slave ship to the present emergence of militant revolutionaries.'' He added that
''Runner Mack'' is ''skillfully written and richly imaginative.'' Another title
in Howard University Press's ''Library of Contemporary Literature'' is

DANCERS ON THE SHORE, by William Melvin Kelley ($6.95). The collection of 16
short stories was published in 1964, two years after Mr. Kelley's novel, ''A
Different Drummer.'' These stories of forlorn and friendless people have been
described as clearly written and structurally controlled.

CONVERSATIONS WITH THE ENEMY, by Winston Groom and Duncan Spencer. (Penguin,
$7.95.) In 1965, when Marine Pvt. Robert Garwood returned home from Vietnam
after 14 years as a prisoner of war, the military placed several charges against
him, including desertion. Last year our reviewer, C. D. B. Bryan, was fascinated
by the ''detailed and vivid reconstruction of his internment'' in
''Conversations With The Enemy.'' He added, ''What is disturbing about the book
is the disparity between Private Garwood's version of his experience and the
testimony of his accusers.''

DELCORSO'S GALLERY, by Philip Caputo. (Dell, $3.95.) In this 1983 novel by the
author of the memoir ''A Rumor of War,'' the battle zones of Vietnam and Lebanon
are seen through a combat photographer's eyes. Joe Klein remarked in these pages
that ''Philip Caputo writes with all the subtlety of a punch in the gut, but his
descriptions of combat photographers and correspondents at work are right on the
money.''

PROUST: Portrait of a Genius, by Andre Maurois. (Carroll & Graf, $10.95.) When
it came out in 1950, ''Proust: Portrait of a Genius'' presented previously
unpublished letters and instructions to Marcel Proust's broker. There were also
new interpretations of Proust's characters. Justin O'Brien wrote in The Book
Review, ''To the already vast literature on Proust (of which the selective
bibliography in this volume gives but a sampling) and to his own thoughtful and
sensitive reading of the great novel, Andre Maurois has been able to add a whole
new body of documentation to confirm his interpretation.'' This work by the
French novelist, essayist and biographer was translated by Gerard Hopkins.

MEDITATIONS IN GREEN, by Stephen Wright. (Bantam, $3.95.) The protagonist of
''Meditations in Green'' is Specialist 4 James Griffin, who is with the 1069th
Military Intelligence Group in Vietnam. He goes there bright, eager and
confident; he returns home a spaced- out heroin addict. Walter Kendrick said
here that Stephen Wright's ''talent is impressive'' and called the 1983 book a
''brilliant, scarifying first novel . . . lurid, extravagant, rhapsodic and
horrific by turns - sometimes all at once.''

RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams, by David K. Shipler. (Penguin, $7.95.)
David K. Shipler, a New York Times correspondent who was the paper's Moscow
bureau chief from 1977 to 1979, directs the reader's attention to the question
whether the Soviet system is inherently incapable of managing its problems or
whether it will overcome a deadening bureaucracy, sloth and cynicism. Our
reviewer, Marshall D. Shulman, said ''Russia: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams'' is
''an observant and beautifully written account, in the tradition of books by
other serious and scholarly journalists.''

HINDSIGHT, by Peter Dickinson. (Pantheon, $2.95.) Since Peter Dickinson is
sometimes referred to as a darling of folks who like avant-garde suspense
writing, it is not unusual that he opens his 1983 novel, ''Hindsight,'' with the
sentence ''This is a murder story.'' He then proceeds to write a book in which
the technique of the novel is an instrument of detection. There is also a novel
within the novel, about a 12-year-old boy at an English country school.  THE
KINGDOM BY THE SEA: A Journey Around

Great Britain, by Paul Theroux. (Washington Square, $4.95.) For three months in
1982, Paul Theroux, the expatriate American novelist and travel writer, did the
British Isles. Our reviewer, Auberon Waugh, said last year that ''if one forgets
his declared intention of discovering the true Britain outside London and treats
the book simply as an eccentric travelogue through the loneliest and nastiest
corners of Britain, then one must admit that he has done a good job. . .  His
perception of the kingdom by the sea may be a partial one, and in my view
jaundiced, but it makes a stimulating book for all that.''B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 26, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ROLE PLAYED BY 'SIDE BAR' CONFERENCE IN CBS TRIAL

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1332 words


A. FARBER

On Oct. 11 - while the lawyer for Gen. William C. Westmoreland was offering his
opening statement in the general's libel suit against CBS in Federal District
Court in Manhattan - the attorney for the network moved for a mistrial.

The request was made not in open court, where the jury or the press or the
spectators could hear it. It was made at a whispered, private conference between
the lawyers and Judge Pierre N. Leval, at the side of the judge's raised,
massive wood bench that is farthest from the jury box.

The motion by David Boies, who objected to the ''misuse of evidence and
argument'' by his opponent, Dan M. Burt, was denied. But many times since, in
the trial that will go into its eighth week today with General Westmoreland
returning to the stand, Mr. Boies or Mr. Burt have interrupted testimony to
avail themselves of the legal procedure known as the ''side bar'' conference.

''May we approach the bench,'' one or the other lawyer will say. ''May we
approach at side bar.'' And, generally, Judge Leval will allow them.
Occasionally, the judge himself asks for the conferences, where discussions have
ranged from the accessibility of ''truth'' to the relevance of an ''inflammatory
incident'' like the My Lai massacre in Vietnam in 1968 to cryptic references to
data apparently obtained by ''Martian photography'' and ''side- looking airborne
radar.''

Focusing Case for Jury

The side bar conferences, in a trial of this length and complexity even more
than in many simpler proceedings, play a significant role in helping the judge
and the lawyers to ultimately focus the case for the jury. They also provide
unusual insights into the legal maneuvering inherent in major trials. And they
can deal with the esoteric.

At one side bar, Judge Leval barred introduction of a statement made some time
before the trial by a witness for General Westmoreland who, according to Mr.
Boies, said it was possible to escape the effects of a nuclear explosion by
''walking one hour, 59 minutes'' away from the hit ''and then placing oneself
behind a lilac bush.''

General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam between 1964 and
1968, contends in his $120 million suit that he was defamed on a 1982 CBS
Reports documentary titled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

The broadcast, he says, falsely accused him of deceiving President Johnson and
the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of enemy strength in Vietnam
in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968 - mainly by the ''tactic''
of removing the self-defense forces from the official military listing of enemy
strength and by imposing an ''arbitrary'' ceiling of 300,000 on reports of enemy
forces.

CBS insists that the documentary - which alleged a high-level ''conspiracy'' to
''suppress'' critical intelligence on the enemy in 1967 - was true.

To prevail, General Westmoreland must prove that statements made on the
broadcast were libelous, were ''of and concerning'' him, were false and were
made with knowledge by CBS that they were false or with reckless disregard for
whether they were true.

Most of this legal battle, like any other, is being fought in the open, with Mr.
Burt arguing there was an open debate over enemy strength with everyone in the
intelligence community knowing all the numbers and with Mr. Boies saying the
debate was not a ''good faith one'' in which Washington was given all the facts.
While these arguments are made for all to hear, just as they would hear
testimony, the arguments advanced at the ''side bar'' conferences - where Mr.
Burt once got so excited that he apologized for ''the heat'' of his remarks -
can be found only in the transcripts of each day's proceeding. Judge Leval has
admonished the jury not to be ''influenced'' by what they read about the case.

Disputed exhibits are ruled in or out on the basis of what is said at the side
bar conferences. A lawyer is told whether he can pursue a particular line of
questioning. And importantly, Judge Leval and the lawyers struggle over how to
confine the evidence or testimony to the case's parameters.

'Great Capacity to Confuse'

''I am not going to allow this trial to be broadened into some kind of
historical inquiry of how we fared in Vietnam,'' the judge cautioned the lawyers
at one side bar, ''whether we won or lost, what the reasons were, whether the
President and Chiefs of Staff were aware or unaware of the size of the enemy
strength.''

The issue in the trial, the judge stressed, was whether General Westmoreland
''attempted to deceive.''

It was not, he said, whether the American people or their leaders, with their
multiple sources of information, were actually misled about the strength of
North Vietnamese or Vietcong forces - a subject that, he said, ''has a great
capacity to confuse and misdirect the jury.''

Nor, the judge said, was the issue whether ''we were prepared or unprepared''
for the Tet offensive. The documentary charged that, as a result of the
intelligence deception - which, it said, included the ''systematic blocking'' of
reports that North Vietnamese infiltration into South Vietnam was quadruple the
rate made known - the President, the Joint Chiefs and American troops were left
''totally unprepared for the size'' of the Tet attack.

Still, Judge Leval conceded that it was impossible to set a ''blanket'' rule
barring all testimony in this area.  So the trial has been punctuated by
laborious efforts to determine how many of the enemy took part in the Tet
offensive, vivid accounts of fire fights during the attack, and testimony over
the political as well as military impact of the attack.

Broadcast 'Picked Apart'

With respect to the real size of the enemy, Judge Leval said at a side bar,
''there isn't any definitive truth to be nailed down - what we are talking about
is all estimates.'' For example, he said, evidence of infiltration into South
Vietnam in 1967 was nothing but ''hearsay, except by posting yourself on the Ho
Chi Minh Trail with a counter and going click, click, click as they run by.''

Even as the jury listens to hour after hour of testimony about such matters as
infiltration, the firing of a lieutenant colonel in Vietnam who, according to
the documentary, wanted to report higher figures, and an assertion on the
broadcast that officers had been ordered to tamper with enemy strength data in a
military computer after the Tet attack, CBS lawyers are arguing, at side bars,
to stop the discussion.

The broadcast, Mr. Boies complained to Judge Leval, was ''being picked apart''
by Mr. Burt to include matters unrelated to General Westmoreland that have no
place at the trial and were inevitably going to ''prejudice'' the jury. In any
event, Mr. Boies said, he wanted to ''make a record'' for appeal if CBS loses
the case.

''I understand your point,'' said Judge Leval. ''I think it's well put.'' But
the judge said that, for now, he was ruling against Mr. Boies. The documentary,
he said, was ''susceptible to the understanding'' by the viewer that these
actions ''were part of a chain of conspiratorial'' and ''improper'' conduct
ordered by General Westmoreland.

At one side bar, where he accused a witness of ''lying,'' Mr. Boies said he and
Judge Leval obviously differed ''about the appropriate scope of cross-
examination.'' At another, he objected to General Westmoreland's ''speeches''
from the stand. At others, he and Mr. Burt clashed over the introduction of
notes or ''outtakes'' - unused portions of television film - that were made
during the preparation of the documentary.

When Mr. Burt said the outtakes were ''just like reporter's notes,'' Mr. Boies
retorted: ''But not every reporter's note is admissible.'' Judge Leval told Mr.
Burt that, before he could play portions of the outtakes for the jury, he had to
demonstrate the ways in which they might show that CBS ''acted with knowing or
reckless falsity.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 27, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Beating Swords Into Lemons In June 1982, while losing a single aircraft, the
Israeli Air Force destroyed 19 Syrian missile sites in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley,
as well as 79 Syrian MIG's. That feat of arms holds a lesson to make the United
States Defense Department blush.

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 440 words


The Pentagon likes to attribute Israeli victories to high technology obtained
from the Pentagon. Actually, intensive training and skillful tactics are the
main explanations. But technology did play an important role in defeating the
Syrian missile sites. The Israelis used pilotless aircraft to provoke the
Syrians into switching on their missile radars, then mapped and jammed their
frequencies and attacked them safely with other aircraft.

Those Remotely Piloted Vehicles, or R.P.V.'s, are superb reconnaissance craft.
They can reconnoiter terrain too dangerous for any pilot. They're small, hard to
shoot down and cheap enough to be expendable. But the Pentagon's main R.P.V.
won't be ready until 1988.

The U.S. Air Force used jet-powered R.P.V.'s in Vietnam, but lost interest after
the war. The Air Force is led by promoted pilots, not R.P.V. operators. A
General Accounting Office report noted in 1981 that RPV's, even though capable
of saving pilots' lives, were seen as ''too drab and unexciting to generate much
enthusiasm.''

The Army recognized the importance of R.P.V.'s and began developing one in 1974.
But it hasn't yet gotten off the ground because of the disorder of
''gold-plating,'' endemic to the Pentagon's weapons.  As a weapon is designed,
every potential user adds a new requirement. Each new frill may marginally
enhance the weapon, but taken together the extra appliances often add so greatly
to the weapon's size, weight and complexity that its overall performance is
degraded and its price soars.

The prototype of the Army's R.P.V., called the Aquila, was powered by a $100
go-cart engine and cost only $100,000 when it first flew in 1976. Then a
committee improved it. The missions it assigned required a larger engine,
night-vision equipment and electronic warfare devices.

The Aquila is now 66 percent heavier. Its range and endurance have plummeted,
its cost has soared to more than $800,000. ''One man's gold-plating is another
man's absolute necessity,'' the Army's program manager told The Wall Street
Journal.


The Aquila, carrying everyone's ''absolute necessity,'' is four years behind
schedule. Its higher cost has made it more capable than Israel's but robbed it
of cheapness and expendability, a prime quality of R.P.V.'s. Israel has a cheap
and effective weapon already in hand; the Pentagon's is still on the drawing
board.

The Pentagon was gold-plating weapons long before Secretary Weinberger took
charge in 1981. But the money he has obtained makes the disorder spread. The
Israelis can't afford the money for gold- plating - nor weapons that don't work.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 27, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR SENATE FOREIGN RELATIONS PANEL, MORE PARTISANSHIP AND LESS INFLUENCE

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2375 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 26


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee, once the crown jewel of prestige and the
focus for national policy debates, has almost become just another committee.

In many ways, the decline has reflected changes in the Senate as a whole:
growing partisanship and ideological polarization along with reduced power
relative to the more disciplined House and the assertive executive branch.

This is the prevailing judgment among scholars, Senate staff members,
Administration officials and some senators, including committee members, as they
await a decision by Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina on whether he will
assert his seniority and take control of the committee after the defeat of its
chairman, Charles H. Percy of Illinois, in the Nov. 6 election.

Historically, the committee has been the repository of considerable foreign
affairs expertise and experience, but now only three of its 18 members have
served on it for 10 years or more, and half have served for 4 years or less.
This turnover exceeds the average for the Senate as a whole and for other
committees, and both of those turnover rates are unusually high.

Chairmen Are Vulnerable

Three of the committee's last four chairmen have lost re-election efforts in the
last 10 years: J. W. Fulbright of Arkansas and Frank Church of Idaho, both
Democrats, and this month Mr. Percy, a Republican. That, too, exceeds the Senate
average and tends to weaken the committee since a committee is usually no more
powerful than its chairman.

To Mr. Fulbright, who held the post from 1969 to 1975, the chairman of the
foreign relations panel is particularly ''vulnerable to being identified by the
voters with foreign issues and not enough with local ones.''

For two decades, until about six years ago, foreign aid bills had been the
legislative centerpiece of the Foreign Relations Committee's power. But the
Senate has passed only one foreign aid bill since 1978. In other years, the
necessary financing was accomplished mainly through concurrent resolutions
controlled by the Approriations Committee.

The Foreign Relations Committee has lost more influence than other authorizing
or legislating committees, both because of Administration oppostion to some of
its legislation and because the committee is still considered more liberal than
the Senate as a whole.

This less powerful position is a far cry from the 1960's and 1970's, when the
committee was led by such Democrats as Mr. Fulbright and Hubert H. Humphrey of
Minnesota, and Republicans like Jacob K. Javits of New York and Clifford P. Case
of New Jersey. As most of those interviewed saw it, those men were moderates or
moderate liberals with sufficient knowledge and standing to command national
attention and the ear of Administration leaders and to forge bipartisan
compromises.

In the view of liberals and moderates, a takeover by Mr. Helms, who has strong
conservative views, would serve only to accentuate divisions on the committee
and differences between it and the Administration, which now says it wants to
move on arms control with the Soviet Union and negotiations in Africa and on
other fronts.

If Mr. Helms forgoes the chairmanship, next in line would be Richard G. Lugar of
Indiana and Charles McC. Mathias Jr. of Maryland. Each is considered more
moderate than Mr. Helms.

A Place to Speak Out

In past years, the committee was virtually the only national platform for
Senators to speak out on foreign affairs. ''Jack Kennedy felt he had to be on it
in the 1950's to pursue the Presidency, not so Teddy Kennedy,'' said Richard C.
Holbrooke, a high State Department official in the Carter Administration.

The committee was the forum for debating the United States role in the world in
the 1950's, the Vietnam War in the 1960's and early 1970's and, throughout the
70's, for putting checks on Presidential flexibility in foreign affairs, airing
treaties on arms control and the Panama Canal and helping fashion the nation's
new relationship with China. The television cameras and the front pages of
newspapers followed its activities, but this attention has declined in recent
years.

''Our problem in the last four years is that the Reagan Administration hasn't
done anything diplomatically, treaties and the like, except for making arms
sales, that requires Senate action,'' one committee staff member said.

''And even in the Carter Administration,'' the aide continued, ''the cameras
weren't there most of the time because the committee was not at war with the
Administration and there just wasn't the same interest in the issues or the
process or the personalities to attract them.''

Fewer Public Hearings

Mr. Fulbright put it this way: ''The only way to get attention is to hit the
executive over the head. The only way is to appeal to the public with public
hearings. We rarely had a majority of the votes. All we could do was to educate
the public.''

Conservative senators and staff members said that these hearings often mislead
the public and led to unfortunate legislation restricting Presidential
authority. ''We're not complaining about the absence of public circuses, and
we're not unhappy about the fact that the days of liberal legislation are
over,'' said a longtime conservative staff member.

Authorities such as Nelson W. Polsby, a professor at the University of
California at Berkeley, and I. M. Destler of the Institute for International
Economics, say it is very difficult to measure how the committee's power has
changed from its heyday to the present. Both said the committee's influence had
been generally overstated, particularly its power inside a Senate that has often
found itself more conservative than the Foreign Relations Committee.

''Since the Vandenberg period,'' said Mr. Destler, ''the committee has often
lost fights on key issues on the Senate floor because it was more liberal and
internationalist than the body as a whole. But it was instrumental in shaping
and anticipating important national debates on foreign policy.'' He was
referring to Senator Arthur Vandenberg, Republican of Michigan in the 30's and
40's, who converted from a powerful isolationist to an even more powerful
internationalist and helped take the Senate along with him.

Less Conservative Than Senate

According to standards developed by Congressional Quarterly, which publishes an
authoritative weekly about Congress, the committee was at least 10 percentage
points below most other committees in supporting positions backed by most
conservatives. The committee as a whole accorded with conservative views 45
percent of the time in 1969, 48 percent in 1979 and 52 percent in 1983. This,
according to Thomas Mann, executive director of the American Political Science
Association, followed the general conservative drift of the Senate as a whole.
Although both the committee and the full Senate became more conservative, the
committee remained more liberal than the chamber as a whole.

At the same time, the split between Democrats and Republicans on the committee
over conservative positions grew rapidly. In 1969, according to Congressional
Quarterly, Democrats on the panel supported conservative positions 39 percent of
the time as againt 55 percent for Republicans. The comparisons were 34 to 69 in
1979 and 25 to 76 in 1983.

This partisanship was mirrored and reinforced by a decision by Republican
committee members in the late 1970's to hire their own staff. There had been one
bipartisan staff, an unusual phenomenon in the Senate.

A More Partisan Staff

As a longtime Senate staff member recalled: ''The committee used to send out
staff to study a problem in Vietnam or the Middle East. They'd come back with a
report on the facts and asking some hard questions about whether the
Administration's policy was achievable, and the committee would take this as its
starting point.''

''Given the sharp divisions and points of view now,'' the aide said, ''this is
impossible.''

The more partisan staff arrangement is further accentuated by the fact that, for
the last decade, members have been allowed to send personal staff
representatives to the committee, even though most other Senate committees do
not permit such an arrangement. These aides can attend committee meetings and
hearings and act for the senators.

More so than in the past, in the last three years the committee could not come
together on major issues. Partisan splits often led to deadlock or what members
saw as weak compromises on disputes about Central America, the presence of the
marines in Lebanon, aid to Turkey and arms sales to Saudi Arabia.

However, liberals and moderates on occasion did reach across party lines, as
when Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, and Senator
Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, worked together on Central
America.

Power has been fragmented within the committee, much as it has been in the
Senate as a whole. Subcommittes were created or given added standing when
Senator John J. Sparkman of Alabama replaced Mr. Fulbright as chairman in 1975.
While Mr. Sparkman's successor, Senator Frank Church of Idaho, tried to reverse
this trend, subcommittees remain more powerful than previously. This has diluted
the power of the committee as a whole.

Percy's Role Criticized

To a number of committee members and staff members, these problems could have
been contained if Mr. Percy and his immediate predecessors had been stronger
chairmen.

Mr. Percy is widely criticized for being confused and vacillating. His defenders
say he tried a balancing act between the Senate and the Administration, ''tried
conciliation within the committee and cooperation with the White House,'' in the
words of one supporter. But, Mr. Percy's defenders say, things did not go well
for the committee because of White House opposition.

Senior Administration officials, past and present, acknowledge unhappiness with
much of the committee's work, but insist that they could not count on Mr. Percy
or his committee. ''Therefore, we had to shop around for another place to do our
business,'' said one former senior official.

The White House often asked the majority leader, Howard H. Baker of Tennessee,
to play the principal role, and he did. Time and again, at White House urging,
Mr. Baker took the lead away from the committee - on issues such as Central
America, Lebanon and the sale of Awacs aircraft to Saudi Arabia.

As several Senate and Administration officials noted, the deal between the
Congress and the White House on the marines in Lebanon early this year was
worked out in Mr. Baker's office. It allowed the Administration to keep marines
in Lebanon for 18 months rather than the 90 days provided for in the War Powers
Act.

Baker Pulls Rank


Administration officials and Senate staff members also noted that in times of
crisis over Lebanon or the Russian shooting down of the Korean airliner or the
invasion of Grenada, Mr. Baker pulled rank and took the initiative away from Mr.
Percy by having the Administration brief the full Senate and not just the
Foreign Relations Committee. This, too, was a break from common practice.

On more routine matters such as the need for annual foreign aid funds,
Administration officials for the most part acknowledged that they would rather
have no bill authorizing foriegn aid than accept the aid bills coming out of the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee or the House Foreign Affairs Committee.

The Administration officials found the appropriations committees in each chamber
to be more sympathetic, and the officials satisfied themselves with continuing
resolutions approving funding levels. A Foreign Aid Bill approved in 1981 was
the only one passed by Congress in the last six years.

Also, over the years, particular individuals have been more important than the
committee on certain matters. Before he died, Senator Henry M. Jackson, Democrat
of Washington, was widely regarded as the most influential senator on arms
control and Soviet-American questions. Mr. Helms, a member of the committee, is
seen as having disproportionate influence on executive branch appointments and
Central American questions.

More Power for Other Panel


With the spillover of so many foreign affairs questions such as arms sales,
overseas bases and arms control into the wider area of national security, the
Senate Armed Services Committee has carved out some of what was formerly
exclusive Foreign Relations Committee turf.

Over the same period, the House began to emerge as a greater force on many
issues, including foreign affairs.

In part, this was because party leadership in the House remained powerful and
able to deliver votes at a time of growing fragmention of power in the Senate.
It was also because certain House members such as Lee H. Hamilton, Democrat of
Indiana, and Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, who have been widely
viewed as bright and aggressive, gained seniority and began to attract the
attention usually reserved for senior members of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee.

''The Senate Committee was a better forum for us than the House Foreign
Relations Committee, but we couldn't avoid the House,'' said the former senior
Administration official.

When the White House was bargaining with Mr. Baker over the invoking of the War
Powers Act regarding Lebanon, the other major party to the discussions was the
Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., and House Foreign Affairs Committee
members, not their counterparts on the Senate Committee.

The view of almost all those interviewed was that it would be difficult for the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee to recover most of its lost power and
prestige, even with a powerful new chairman, that most of the Committee's
problems go beyond personalities to deeper questions of partisanship and foreign
policy philosophy and to the mood of the Congress that once again looks more to
the President for leadership in foreign affairs.

As Mr. Fulbright said, ''partisan passions are strong'' and it is ''dangerous to
trifle with the conventional wisdom'' about matters such as Soviet-American
affairs and the Middle East.

NEXT: The outlook for 1985.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Changing Senate; Third of four articles

GRAPHIC: photo of Sen. Jesse Helms and Sen. Charles Percy

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 27, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL AND CBS LAWYER CLASH ON ENEMY DATA

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1078 words


A. FARBER

Gen. William C. Westmoreland accused a lawyer for CBS of not knowing what he was
doing yesterday when the lawyer suggested that the general had supplied
President Johnson with misleading comparisons of enemy strength in Vietnam
between 1966 and 1967.

The flare-up - with both the general and the lawyer, David Boies, waving aloft a
chart of statistics provided the President in November 1967 - erupted at the end
of a day of relatively quiet cross-examination in Federal District Court in
Manhattan.

''I understand this chart, which apparently you don't,'' General Westmoreland
told Mr. Boies caustically. ''I don't know how to say it, Mr. Boies, but you
don't know what you're doing.''

Mr. Boies retorted that his understanding of the data was the same as that
explained at the start of the Westmoreland-CBS libel trial eight weeks ago by
Walt W. Rostow, Mr. Johnson's special assistant for national security affairs.

''So, what you're saying,'' Mr. Boies added, ''is that both Dr. Rostow and I
don't understand the chart?''

A. Well, certainly you don't. He does now.

Q. Have you talked to him since he testified?

A. No, but I was told somebody had and he now understands it.

Westmoreland Took Stand Nov. 15


General Westmoreland, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from January 1964
to June 1968, is suing CBS for $120 million over a 1982 CBS Reports documentary
titled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' Yesterday, the 70-year-old
retired general referred to it as the ''so- called documentary.''

General Westmoreland maintains that the broadcast defamed him by saying he had
deceived the President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature
of the enemy in South Vietnam in the year preceding the Tet offensive of January
1968.

As part of an effort to minimize the size of the enemy, to make it appear that
America was winning the war, the documentary said, General Westmoreland adopted
the ''tactic'' of removing the Vietcong's self-defense forces from the official
military listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle.

General Westmoreland took the stand Nov. 15 as the 14th witness in the trial,
presided over by Judge Pierre N. Leval. His cross-examination will continue this
morning, when Mr. Boies is expected to renew his questions about the data
supplied President Johnson in late November 1967.

Enemy Strength Figures Read


The exchange yesterday began when Mr. Boies read to the jury a series of enemy
strength figures from an August 1966 intelligence report prepared by General
Westmoreland's command in Saigon.

The figures showed 111,764 combat forces, 18,753 combat support forces, 39,175
political cadre and 112,760 militia, for a total of 282,452. Included in the
112,760 militia figure, according to prior testimony, were about 70,000 Vietcong
part-time, hamlet-based self- defense forces.

Then, Mr. Boies showed General Westmoreland a one-page bar chart of enemy
strength data that he and Ellsworth Bunker, the United States Ambassador in
Saigon, had provided Mr. Rostow and the President during a briefing in
Washington in November 1967.

The chart listed total VC/NVA - Viet Cong/North Vietnamese Army - strength at
207,000 in the third quarter of 1965, 285,000 in the third quarter of 1966 and
242,000 in the third quarter of 1967.

Underneath the chart was a notation that ''figures do not include'' political
cadre that were now estimated at 80,000.

When Mr. Rostow first showed this and related charts on the enemy to Mr.
Johnson, he wrote a memorandum saying that they ''reflect the best data
available at this time to our field commanders on the movement of the war''
between late 1965 and late 1967.

''The evidence of progress these statistics demonstrate,'' Mr. Rostow went on,
''is confirmed by captured documents, prisoner interrogations, estimates of
field commanders and other sources.''

Yesterday, Mr. Boies asked General Westmoreland whether he agreed with that
assessment, and the witness said he did.

'President Aware of That'


When Mr. Rostow testified on Oct. 16 as General Westmoreland's first witness,
with the general looking on, the former White House aide said the figure of
242,000 for the third quarter of 1967 - unlike the figures for 1965 and 1966 -
excluded the Vietcong's self-defense forces ''and the President was well aware
of that.''

But, in General Westmoreland's direct testimony more than a week ago, the
general said none of the three figures on the chart - for 1965, 1966 and 1967 -
included the self-defense forces.

Yesterday, Mr. Boies asked the general about that statement. Mr. Boies
apparently expected to catch the witness in a discrepancy and to show, on the
basis of Mr. Rostow's testimony, that General Westmoreland had achieved a
decline in enemy strength from 285,000 to 242,000 between 1966 and 1967 only by
giving the President a series of figures that were not comparable.

Instead, General Westmoreland surprised Mr. Boies by saying that all three
figures on the chart excluded the self-defense forces.

'Didn't Understand the Chart'


''Are you saying that that 285,000 figure excludes the self-defense forces?''
Mr. Boies asked incredulously.

''It does,'' the general said. ''Mr. Rostow made an inaccurate statement. He
didn't understand the chart.''

When General Westmoreland complained that he wasn't being given an opportunity
to explain, Judge Leval interceded.

The witness then said that, because the self-defense forces had been dropped
from the order of battle as of October 1967, his intelligence chief, Maj. Gen.
Phillip B. Davidson Jr., had made a ''retrospective adjustment'' to all the
figures on the chart. And the analysis, he said, had been approved by the
Defense Intelligence Agency, the intelligence arm of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Q. Did General Davidson tell you he had done that?

A. He didn't have to tell me. I knew it.

Q. You didn't do it, sir, so how did you know it?

A. We were briefed on the chart before we went to Washington. The Ambassador
himself - he understood what this was all about.

Well, Mr. Boies asked, how come the figure of 282,452 in the intelligence report
in 1966 was so close to the figure of 285,000 if the former included the self-
defense forces and the latter did not?

A. It was strictly coincidental.

Q. Strictly coincidental?

A. Strictly coincidental.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 28, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE HIGH COST OF BEING A SOLDIER OF CONSCIENCE

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 235 words


To the Editor:


In his Nov. 17 letter on the New York Vietnam Veterans Memorial, Jack
Stillwaggon writes that while ''the servicemen served the public . . . the
resisters and conscientious objectors serve only themselves.'' His distinction
is glib and mistaken.

Motives are surely complex, but tens of thousands of Vietnam-era draft resisters
and conscientious objectors were motivated by the desire to awaken public
outrage against the war and thereby to save not only Vietnamese life, but also
American life, soul and honor.

Many gave up draft deferments (as students, usually) to make a statement of
conscience. Thousands made such decisions in fear and trembling.  Whatever
self-interest may also have been entailed, all had to run the risk of
sacrificing themselves - going to jail, breaking with families, incurring the
wrath of the community, disrupting well-laid plans, fleeing into exile, doing
alternative service - for the chance they might serve the public good of ending
the war. In body and spirit, many suffered immensely.  It has become fashionable
to read the ''Me Generation'' back into the 60's. But one does not respect the
sacrifices of the Vietnam veterans by rewriting history to make it look as if
resistance was a comfortable, self- serving lark.

TODD GITLIN Berkeley, Calif., Nov. 17, 1984

The writer is author of ''The Whole World Is Watching'' (1980).


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 28, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BLIGHTED LIVES IN CANADA: AGENT ORANGE ACCUSED

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1230 words

DATELINE: FREDERICTON, New Brunswick


An awkward amphibious vehicle called a muskeg, used for weed spraying, is
central to this story.

On Aug. 15, an aged muskeg clamored up to the headquarters of the New Brunswick
Electric Power Commission here as a trumpeter played last post, the equivalent
of taps. Its riders taped a notice on the door of the building announcing that
they intended to file a suit expected to ask at least $150 million in damages.

The suit is being filed by men and the families of dead men, 134 in all. The
men, in groups of five per muskeg, sprayed the defoliant Agent Orange to clear
right of ways for power lines for the provincially owned utility from 1955 to
1966.

They say that 74 of 217 sprayers have since died, compared with the 34 who they
say might have been expected to die by natural attrition, and that the substance
contributed to their deaths.

The notice was the first step in filing a suit here and must precede the actual
filing by at least 60 days. The former sprayers say they intend to add the
manufacturers of the chemical as defendants. Each defendant must be notified in
advance.

Suit Planned for Next Year

The men are now planning to file suit early next year, but are willing to
discuss settlement with the chemical companies in December. Their thinking is
that with the current mortality rate, as many as 40 would likely be dead at the
end of a three- to four-year suit.

The leaders say no settlement with the provincial power authority would be
acceptable. The men are most angry at New Brunswick Power because they hold it
directly responsible.

The average age of the dead men was 56 years, compared with a provincial average
of 63, according to the sprayers' leaders. In addition, they say exposure to
Agent Orange has caused health problems ranging from cancer to heart attacks to
arthritis.

Mental problems have been so severe that the men are said by those filing the
suit to have committed suicide at 10 times the provincial rate. Birth defects
are said to be twice as frequent.

The case is attracting national and international attention. The American
lawyers who won the recent $180 million settlement with seven chemical companies
for Vietnam War veterans have offered advice.

''The sprayers' case is tops on the list'' of Canadian environmental battles,
Toby Vigod, a lawyer with the Canadian Environmental Law Association, said. The
organization is planning a drive to raise some of the $190,000 estimated to be
the minimal cost of fighting the case.

95 Studies Under Way

The plaintiffs must prove not only that they were exposed to a particular kind
of dioxin - the killer ingredient in Agent Orange that is 1,000 times more
lethal than cyanide - but also that the exposure years ago is the cause of
deaths and maladies much later.

So far, that has not been conclusively proved in court anywhere, but all the
scientific evidence is not in. Some 95 studies are under way around the world.

Another issue might be the eagerness of lawyers and their clients to cash in.
The lawyers are charging 15 percent of any settlement up to $7 million and 8
percent after that. The two former sprayers who organized the case, both of whom
have chronic health problems, will each get 4.5 percent of any settlment. Each
potential plaintiff could get more than $230,000.

''The timing is rather peculiar,'' said David Young, manager of scientific
affairs for the Dow Chemical Company's Canadian unit, referring to the recent
veterans' settlement in the United States. Dow's official position is that the
men are indeed dead and many are probably suffering, but that the cause cannot
be linked to Agent Orange.

The power commission's position is that the claims are largely unjustified. To
the extent they are valid, it says that they should be addressed through the
workers' compensation board.

How the Story Began


The story began in happier days aboard a muskeg more than 20 years ago. The then
youthful men, pleased to have a summer job in this hardscrabble, forested land,
delighted in spraying the trees and even each other until they were so drenched
they had to wring out their clothes at the end of the day.

The few doubts anyone expressed about his own safety after watching birds die
instantly and trees wilt behind the muskeg less than an hour after being sprayed
were assuaged by foremen who, those filing the suit say, gladly drank the stuff
to show it was harmless. Most, they said, are now dead.

''We'd spray it on ourselves just to cool off,'' said Jerry White, who worked
three summers on a muskeg in the mid-1950's. ''It's pretty hot in the woods.''

But the mixture might have been 5,000 times more powerful than the limited
quantity of similar herbicides still available, according to provincial
authorities. If true - and Dow disputes it - this would mean that, for the most
part, the men were exposed both to far greater quantities and considerably
higher doses than Vietnam veterans.

As a result, Mr. White, who works full-time on the case and is one of the two
men scheduled to receive substantial remuneration in the event of victory,
rejects the idea of settling out of court for money. He says he and the others
are determined to win on principle.

Sprayers Recount Troubles


The former sprayers each have a story to tell.

William Jamieson, 48 years old, who now works in a service station about five
miles west of here, tells of contracting sores, resembling boils, all over his
body during his first two weeks as a muskeg driver in the summer of 1955.
Antibiotics made the sores go away, but in recent years, he said, he has
suffered from severe nervousness, depression, ulcers, arthritis and recurring
skin irritations.

Sharon Munn, 37, says she believes exposure to Agent Orange in 1964 led her
husband, Neil, to suffer at least three heart attacks and lose mental acuity.
''I see him going downhill,'' she said, while he nodded affirmation.

Alfred Cain, 40, worked as a sprayer for six and a half years and, he said, the
inexplicable blisters that appear on his hands from time to time are the least
of his health problems. He says his memory has deteriorated so badly that by 8
P.M. he cannot remember what he ate for dinner three hours earlier. He says he
has not drunk alcohol for 12 years.

Two Studies Rejected


A potential weakness in the former sprayers' case, Dow officials and others
suggest, has been a reluctance on the part of the men to agree to scientific
epidemiological studies of their situation. They have refused to cooperate both
with a provincial inquiry and with an inquiry conducted by the Canadian Public
Health Association, an independent group.

Mr. White explains that he rejected the latter study, estimated to cost $75,000,
because it would nonetheless be financed by the province and the province would
have the right to interpret the findings before releasing them. He says he still
wants an investigation both conducted and financed independently.

''Nothing could be completely independent if the client is the provincial
government,'' he argued. ''Science doesn't operate in a vacuum.''

His opponents counter that the sprayers are more interested in publicity than
scientific truth. ''They seem to prefer to fly blind and have the thing tried in
the media,'' Mr. Young of Dow Chemical said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of defoliants being sprayed to clear brush from power lines

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 28, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND-CBS TRIAL: A RUNNING BATTLE OVER STATISTICS AND CREDIBILITY

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1325 words


Like the Vietnam War itself, the Westmoreland-CBS libel trial has been mired in
a running battle over statistics, particularly with regard to estimates of enemy
strength in South Vietnam in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968.
But this week, perhaps more than at any time during the eight-week- old trial in
Federal Court in Manhattan, the paper war has been moved to the front line in
what appears to be a major - and unanticipated - engagement between Gen. William
C. Westmoreland and David Boies, the CBS lawyer who is cross-examining the
70-year-old general in his $120 million suit against the network.

The latest conflict began Monday and will resume tomorrow, if General
Westmoreland returns to the stand then. The general, who began his testimony on
Nov. 15, complained of back pain Monday night and was excused from testifying
yesterday or today.

Ostensibly, the new conflict revolves around a set of three numbers for enemy
strength that General Westmoreland provided President Johnson in November 1967.
But more than the numbers themselves - how they were arrived at and what they
revealed or obscured - the issue is General Westmoreland's credibility.

To the general, who commanded American troops in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968, the
numbers reflected his command's best estimate of the size of the North
Vietnamese and Vietcong forces in South Vietnam. And if they seemed unusually
low, in relation to other figures gathered previously by the command, that was
only ''coincidence.''

To Mr. Boies, who suggested that the numbers supplied President Johnson were
deliberately misleading, the general's explanation was another obfuscation;
another example of how statistics were manipulated in Saigon to put a better
face on the course of the war.

Contrasting Testimony

Whatever the case, General Westmoreland gave testimony that was in sharp
contrast to the testimony of the first witness on his behalf - Walt W. Rostow,
President Johnson's special assistant for national security affairs. And Mr.
Boies, who on other occasions has snared the general in discrepancies between
his testimony and earlier statements by him, was making the most of the
development.

But whether the new conflict will be resolved for the jury, or the public,
remains to be seen. Perhaps the one person who could do most to support, or
undermine, General Westmoreland's testimony - his former military intelligence
chief, Maj. Gen. Phillip B. Davidson Jr. - has already appeared on the stand,
and was not questioned about the figures that went to President Johnson. It is
considered unlikely that he will be recalled.

Another person who might have helped clarify the matter was Ellsworth Bunker,
the United States Ambassador in Saigon in 1967. But Mr. Bunker died last
September.

General Westmoreland contends CBS defamed him in a 1982 CBS Reports documentary,
''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' by saying that he had deceived the
President and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of the enemy
in South Vietnam in 1967. CBS says the broadcast was true.

The documentary alleged a ''conspiracy'' at the ''highest levels'' of military
intelligence to minimize enemy strength to make it appear that America was
winning the war. A ''tactic'' of General Westmoreland, it said, was to insist,
in mid-1967, on the removal of the Vietcong's self-defense forces from the
official listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle.

Deleted Vietcong Forces

The general has testified that he favored the deletion of the self-defense
forces because they posed no offensive military threat.

In mid-November 1967 General Westmoreland was called home by President Johnson.
He was accompanied to Washington by Ambassador Bunker.

At a White House briefing, the the President was shown three figures that
represented the general's estimate of total enemy strength in South Vietnam for
the third quarters of 1965, 1966 and 1967. The number for 1965 was 207,000; for
1966, 285,000; and for 1967, 242,000.

When Mr. Rostow testified on Oct. 16, he was asked by Mr. Boies whether the
figure of 285,000 for 1966 included the self-defense forces. Mr. Rostow said it
did. And he said it was his ''understanding'' that the figure of 242,000 for
1967 was reached by not counting those units, which, by then, had been removed
from the order of battle. ''The President,'' Mr. Rostow testified, ''was aware
of that.''

General Westmoreland, however, testified on Monday that the self-defense forces
had been taken out of the totals for 1965 and 1966. Added into the figures for
1965 and 1966 was another category of enemy strength - administrative service
troops - that, he said, was not included in the order of battle before 1967.

General Westmoreland said it was all part of a ''retroactive adjustment'' done
by General Davidson before he and Ambassador Bunker left for Washington. Mr.
Rostow, he said, had testified ''inaccurately'' and Mr. Boies simply ''didn't
understand'' the figures.

When Mr. Boies noted that another intelligence estimate made by General
Westmoreland's command in August 1966 placed total enemy strength at 282,452 -
including the self-defense forces - the general said the similarity between that
figure and the figure given President Johnson for 1966 was ''strictly
coincidental.''

At his pre-trial deposition, General Westmoreland said he could not recall ever
discussing enemy strength estimates with President Johnson. General Davidson was
not asked at his deposition, or at the trial, about the figures given Mr.
Johnson because, until General Westmoreland's testimony, lawyers for CBS were
unaware of any supposed involvement by the former military intelligence chief.

Matter of Semantics

While it may be a matter of semantics, the ''administrative service'' forces
that General Westmoreland referred to on the stand appear to be the same forces
as a ''combat support'' category that was, indeed, included in the order of
battle in 1966. General Westmoreland himself, in 1966, mentioned that category
when estimating enemy strength.

Moreover, Mr. Rostow said in his pre-trial deposition that General
Westmoreland's command in 1967 had been unable to perform the kind of
''retrospective'' analysis that General Westmoreland now attributes to General
Davidson.

''You know,'' Mr. Rostow told Mr. Boies in the deposition on Oct. 13, ''they did
not do a retrospective estimate. They said it was impossible.''

Q. MACV (General Westmoreland's command) said it was impossible?

A. MACV said it was impossible.

It was unclear, however, whether Mr. Rostow's statement comported with two
memorandums he wrote President Johnson in November 1967.

In the first, dated Nov. 15, Mr. Rostow said he had urged either the C.I.A. or
the ''intelligence community'' at large to ''do a retrospective estimate,'' at
least with regard to the ''decline'' in guerrilla strength. ''They say they
cannot do it,'' he told the President.

But on Nov. 21 Mr. Rostow advised President Johnson that General Westmoreland's
command was completing a ''retrospective estimate'' of the order of battle,
''including previous underestimate of guerrilla forces.''

Inexplicably General Westmoreland had arrived in Washington with his
''retrospective analysis'' a week before that memo was written. By his own
testimony, General Davidson had briefed him on the figures while he was still in
Saigon.

Whether the conflict over the enemy strength estimates is eventually resolved -
at the trial any more than it was during the war - it serves as an example of
the intricacies confronting a jury that has already had a plethora of
statistical evidence laid before it. Yet in this instance, as in some others
where corroborative evidence is absent, the impression made by a witness may
count for substantially more than old data that is often ambiguous.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             November 28, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'Supergirl' 1st at Box Office

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 191 words

DATELINE: HOLLYWOOD, Nov. 27


For the third consecutive week a newcomer led the 10 top box-office parade as
''Supergirl'' - a woebegone off- shoot of the successful ''Superman'' trilogy -
posted $7.7 million in its first five days.

The busy Thanksgiving weekend, which customarily heralds the holiday box-office
bonanza and frequently accounts for as much as half of a motion picture's
grosses for the year, was not as robust as expected.

''Supergirl,'' starring Helen Slater in the title role, nudged the Vietnam
adventure film ''Missing in Action'' from the top spot to second place.

''Terminator'' was third, while ''Oh, God! You Devil'' ranked fourth. No. 5 was
''Night of the Comet.''

The big surprise came from ''Falling in Love,'' starring two of the screen's
hottest and most respected properties, Robert de Niro and Meryl Streep. It drew
only $2.2 million over the holiday and a five-day total of $3.1 million, failing
to live up to Paramount's expectations. It was No. 6.

No. 7 was ''Just the Way You Are,'' followed by ''Places in the Heart'' and
''Amadeus.'' ''Nightmare on Elm Street'' clung to 10th place in the weekly Daily
Variety listings.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. WILL NOT DRIFT INTO A LATIN WAR, WEINBERGER SAYS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1070 words


Excerpts from speech, page A5.






WASHINGTON, Nov. 28 - Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger said today that
United States military forces would not be drawn gradually into combat in
Central America, but that if forces were committed anywhere it must be with the
clear intention of winning.

Pentagon officials said Mr. Weinberger wanted to assert that any use of military
force would not be indiscriminate and that the Reagan Administration intended to
avoid being dragged into a quagmire in Central America.

Mr. Weinberger, in an address at a National Press Club luncheon meeting, also
suggested that Congressional restraints on presidential applications of military
force should be modified. Pentagon officials said later he referred to the War
Powers Act.



Six Tests for Commitment


In a speech titled ''The Uses of Military Power,'' Mr. Weinberger outlined a set
of six tests, drawing on the lessons of Korea and Vietnam, that he said the
United States would apply when deciding whether to send military forces into
combat abroad.

Mr. Weinberger further cautioned allies of the United States that they must bear
their share of the burden for the common defense. ''Recent history has proven
that we cannot assume unilaterally the role of the world's defender,'' he said.

''We have learned that there are limits to how much of our spirit and blood and
treasure we can afford to forfeit in meeting our responsibility to keep peace
and freedom,'' he said. ''We cannot assume for other sovereign nations the
responsibility to defend their territory, without their strong invitation, when
our freedom is not threatened.''



Discussed Speech With Reagan

The speech appeared to be the clearest enunciation of military policy since
President Reagan was elected in 1980. Pentagon officials said Mr. Weinberger,
who was described as having thought about the speech for several months, wrote
it himself, discussed it with President Reagan, and had it cleared by the
National Security Council two days ago.

They also said Mr. Weinberger gave a copy of the address to Secretary of State
George P. Shultz at breakfast this morning. In the past, Mr. Weinberger and Mr.
Shultz have had differences over policies on national security, with Mr.
Weinberger often urging restraint when Mr. Shultz has argued for the use of
military force.

In his speech, Mr. Weinberger said: ''The President will not allow our military
forces to creep - or be drawn gradually - into a combat role in Central America
or any other place in the world. Indeed, our policy is designed to prevent the
need for direct American involvement.''

In response to a question, however, Mr. Weinberger declined to rule out an
attack on the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua, which the Administration has
accused of aiding a rebellion in El Salvador and possibly becoming a Soviet
surrogate in Central America. He said he would let his text speak for itself.

''The possibility of more extensive Soviet and Soviet-proxy penetration into
this hemisphere in months ahead is something we should recognize,'' Mr.
Weinberger said in his address. ''If this happens, we will clearly need more
economic and military assistance and training to help those who want
democracy.''

He said that the tests he outlined today could, ''if applied carefully, avoid
the danger of this gradualist, incremental approach which almost always means
the use of insufficient force. These tests can help us to avoid being drawn
inexorably into an endless morass, where it is not vital to our national
interest to fight.''

Six Tests Are Listed


In weighing the employment of American forces abroad, Mr. Weinberger said, he
had developed these six tests:


- ''The United States should not commit forces to combat overseas unless the
particular engagement or occasion is deemed vital to our national interest.''


- ''If we decide it is necessary to put combat troops into a given situation, we
should do so wholeheartedly, and with the clear intention of winning.''


- ''We should have clearly defined political and military objectives. We should
know precisely how our forces can accomplish those clearly defined objectives.''


- ''The relationship between our objectives and the forces we have committed,
their size, composition and disposition, must be continually reassessed and
adjusted if necessary.''


- ''Before the U.S. commits combat forces abroad, there must be some reasonable
assurance we will have the support of the American people and their elected
representatives in Congress.''


- ''The commitment of U.S. forces to combat should be a last resort.'' Departing
from his text, Mr. Weinberger added: ''and to be used only when other means have
failed.''

In those tests Mr. Weinberger seemed to echo criteria that military officers
have propounded since the end of the war in Vietnam, where they believe they
fought without a well-defined mission, sufficient forces and the freedom to
employ them properly, or public support.

Defense Department officials said the tests evolved from Mr. Weinberger's
reading of the history of Vietnam and other conflicts, and discussions with Gen.
John W. Vessey, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other senior
military officers.

Mr. Weinberger did not mention by name the War Powers Act, adopted by Congress
in 1973 after the war in Vietnam to restrict the power of the President to
commit American forces to combat without a declaration of war by Congress.

'The Clear Mandate'


But Pentagon officials said Mr. Weinberger had that in mind when he said: ''Once
a decision to employ some degree of force has been made, and the purposes
clarified, our Government must have the clear mandate to carry out, and continue
to carry out, that decision until the purpose has been achieved:''

''The issue of which branch of Government has authority to define that mandate
and make decisions on using force is now being strongly contended,'' he said.
Asked later whether he advocated the repeal of the War Powers Act, Mr.
Weinberger said he would not elaborate.

Pentagon officials, acknowledging that military and civilian officials in the
Defense Department have been chafing under the War Powers Act, said Mr.
Weinberger had encouraged them to speak against it but that this was the first
time that he had done so himself.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BERNARD KALB NAMED TO POST AT STATE DEPT.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 686 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 28


Bernard Kalb, a widely traveled foreign correspondent for television and
newspapers who covered the State Department for the last eight years, was named
today as the department's next spokesman.

According to a statement by Secretary of State George P. Shultz, Mr. Kalb will
have the title of Assistant Secretary of State for Public Affairs. He will
replace John Hughes, who has resigned effective Jan. 1 to return to Cape Cod,
where he is the owner of two newspapers.

This is the first time that a journalist who covered the State Department has
been named as its spokesman. Mr. Kalb, 62 years old, worked there first for CBS
News and after 1980 for NBC News. He was recently made culture and arts
correspondent for NBC News.

He is known to his colleagues as a tireless journalist who has covered wars and
revolutions since the mid- 1950's and has made virtually every overseas trip
with Henry A. Kissinger, Cyrus R. Vance, Edmund S. Muskie, Alexander M. Haig and
Mr. Shultz in their tenures as Secretary of State.

Eyewitness of Evolutions'

''You have a sense of being something of an eyewitness to the evolutions and
eruptions of the decades since World War II,'' he said in an interview today.
''You have a historical memory to call upon and you see the thrust of American
foreign policy and other foreign policy. And it seems to me the ability to punch
up American priorities, cast of characters, issues and so forth are very
valuable in this assignment.''

Mr. Kalb's younger brother, Marvin, is chief diplomatic correspondent of NBC
News. The brothers collaborated on a biography of Mr. Kissinger and on a novel,
''The Last Ambassador,'' about the fall of Saigon to the North Vietnamese.
Bernard Kalb covered the war in Vietnam for many years.

Before he opened a CBS News bureau in Hong Kong in 1962, Mr. Kalb worked for The
New York Times for 16 years, first as a writer for the Times radio station,
WQXR, then as a city reporter, and then as a correspondent in Southeast Asia. He
also worked at the United Nations bureau of The Times.

His first overseas assignment was to accompany Adm. Richard E. Byrd on a mission
to Antarctica in late 1955 and early 1956. During his four months in Antarctica,
he wrote an account of his journey to the tomb of Capt. Robert Falcon Scott, the
British explorer, who died in a blizzard there in 1912. Mr. Kalb mused later
that on some days his most difficult struggle was to find synonyms for ice.

Covered the Rule of Sukarno

Later in 1956, Mr. Kalb was sent to Indonesia for The Times and served there
until 1961, covering the chaotic rule of President Sukarno.

In Indonesia his wife, Phyllis, gave birth to their first daughter, whom they
named, Tanah, the Indonesian word for ''earth.'' ''We wanted a name identified
with the country we loved,'' Mr. Kalb said.

They have three other daughters, Marina, Claudia and Sarinah. The last two were
born in Hong Kong, where he worked from 1962 to 1970 for CBS News.

The son of Max and Bella Kalb, immigrants from Poland and Russia, Mr. Kalb was
born in New York on Feb. 4, 1922. He went to New York public schools and was
graduated from City College of New York in 1942.

He then spent two years in the Army, mostly on an Army paper, the Adakian,
published out of a Quonset hut on Adak in the Aleutian Islands. His editor was
Sgt. Dashiell Hammett, the detective story writer, who was known to his men as
Sam.

In a memoir written in 1977, Mr. Kalb recalled how Hammett worked his staff
through the night monitoring short-wave broadcasts so they could produce a
genuine morning newspaper. He remembered Hammett, a Roman Catholic, peppering
his conversation with Yiddishisms and reading portions of a letter written by
Lillian Hellman, Hammett's lover, on her wartime visits to the Soviet Union.

Near the end of his tenure at The Times, Mr. Kalb received a fellowship from the
Council on Foreign Relations - awarded annually to a foreign correspondent - and
took a leave from the newspaper for a year. He also won an Overseas Press Club
Award for a 1968 documentary on the Vietcong.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: phoo of Bernard Kalb

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM ADDRESS OF WEINBERGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 909 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 28


Following are excerpts from the prepared text of an address by Secretary of
Defense Caspar W. Weinberger to the National Press Club today, as made available
by the Defense Department:


Under what circumstances, and by what means, does a great democracy such as ours
reach the painful decision that the use of military force is necessary to
protect our interests or to carry out our national policy?

Our policy has always been to work hard for peace but to be prepared if war
comes. Because we face a spectrum of threats - from covert aggression, terrorism
and subversion to overt intimidation, to use of brute force - choosing the
appropriate level of our response is difficult. Once a decision to employ some
degree of force has been made, and the purpose clarified, our Government must
have the clear mandate to carry out that decision until the purpose has been
achieved.

The issue of which branch of government has authority to define that mandate and
make decisions on using force is now being strongly contended. Beginning in the
1970's Congress demanded and assumed a far more active role in the making of
foreign policy and in the decision-making process for the employment of military
forces abroad than had been thought appropriate and practical before. As a
result, the centrality of decison-making authority in the executive branch has
been compromised by the legislative branch to an extent that actively interferes
with that process. At the same time, there has not been a corresponding
acceptance of responsibility by Congress for the outcome of decisions concerning
the employment of military forces.

Not Defender of World


Recent history has proven that we cannot assume unilaterally the role of the
world's defender. So while we may and should offer substantial amounts of
economic and military assistance to our allies in their time of need and help
them maintain forces to deter attacks against them - usually we cannot
substitute our troops or our will for theirs.

In those cases where our national interests require us to commit combat forces,
we must never let there be doubt of our resolution. When it is necessary for our
troops to be committed to combat, we must commit them in sufficient numbers and
we must support them as effectively and resolutely as our strength permits. When
we commit our troops to combat we must do so with the sole object of winning.

Once it is clear our troops are required, because our vital interests are at
stake, then we must have the firm national resolve to commit every ounce of
strength necessary to win the fight to achieve our objectives. In Grenada we did
just that.

Just as clearly, there are other situations where United States combat forces
should not be used. I believe the postwar period has taught us several lessons,
and from them I have developed six major tests to be applied when we are
weighing the use of U.S. combat forces abroad.

6 Major Tests


First, the United States should not commit forces to combat overseas unless the
particular engagement or occasion is deemed vital to our national interest or
that of our allies.

Second, if we decide it is necessary to put combat troops into a given
situation, we should do so wholeheartedly and with the clear intention of
winning.

Third, if we do decide to commit forces to combat overseas, we should have
clearly defined political and military objectives. And we should know precisely
how our forces can accomplish those clearly defined objectives. And we should
have and send the forces needed to do just that.

Fourth, the relationship between our objectives and the forces we have committed
- their size, composition and disposition - must be continually reassessed and
adjusted if necessary.

Fifth, before the U.S. commits combat forces abroad, there must be some
reasonable assurance we will have the support of the American people and their
elected representatives in Congress. We cannot fight a battle with the Congress
at home while asking our troops to win a war overseas or, as in the case of
Vietnam, in effect asking our troops not to win but just to be there.

Finally, the commitment of U.S. forces to combat should be a last resort.

Sounding a Caution


These tests I have just mentioned have been phrased negatively for a purpose -
they are intended to sound a note of caution. When we ask our military forces to
risk their very lives in such situations, a note of caution is not only prudent,
it is morally required.

In many situations we may apply these tests and conclude that a combatant role
is not appropriate. Yet no one should interpret what I am saying here today as
an abdication of America's responsibilities - either to its own citizens or to
its allies.

While these tests are drawn from lessons we have learned from the past, they
also can - and should - be applied to the future. The President will not allow
our military forces to creep - or be drawn gradually - into a combat role in
Central America or any other place in the world. And indeed our policy is
designed to prevent the need for direct American involvement. This means we will
need sustained Congressional support to back and give confidence to our friends
in the region.

I believe the tests I have enunciated here today can, if applied carefully,
avoid the danger of this gradualist incremental approach, which almost always
means the use of insufficient force.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Westmoreland Case Set to Resume Today

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 222 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland, the former commander of American forces in
Vietnam, is expected to resume his testimony this morning in his libel trial
against CBS in Federal Court in Manhatttan.

The general's cross-examination was postponed Tuesday morning after the
70-year-old witness complained of back pain. According to Dan M. Burt, Mr.
Westmoreland's lawyer, the general has had recurring back problems for years.

In deference to the general's age and health, Mr. Burt and David Boies, the
lawyer for CBS, agreed some time ago that General Westmoreland would not have to
testify for more than four or five hours a day and could leave the stand if he
were overly tired. General Westmoreland first took the stand Nov. 15.

In his libel suit, General Westmoreland contends that he was defamed by a 1982
CBS Reports documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' CBS says
the broadcast was true.

The documentary alleged a ''conspiracy'' at the ''highest levels'' of military
intelligence to minimize the size and nature of enemy forces in South Vietnam in
the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968.

When the trial resumes, Mr. Boies is expected to continue questioning General
Westmoreland about a series of disputed enemy strength estimates that he
provided President Johnson in November 1967.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              November 29, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
Celebrities at Court

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 115 words


The courtroom drama of Ariel

Sharon's libel suit against Time magazine has drawn a host of celebrity visitors
to the Federal District Court in Manhattan.

Yesterday, the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau, stopped in as
a character witness for Mr. Sharon, Israel's former Defense Minister.

Watching attentively was a man who knew much about this sort of thing: George
Crile, the CBS News producer who is being sued in the same courthouse for his
documentary on Gen. William C. Westmoreland.

The Westmoreland trial had taken the day off. So Mr. Crile dropped by, sitting
on a wooden bench near the back of the courtroom. ''I was just sort of
interested,'' he explained.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
Pete Dawkins Remembers

BYLINE: By George Vecsey

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1072 words


Tomorrow afternoon and evening,

the Army-Navy game and the

Heisman Trophy ceremony will be held a few hours apart. Pete Dawkins, who has
since gone to Oxford, to Vietnam, to the Pentagon and to Wall Street, remembers
his last Army- Navy game and his only Heisman Trophy.

Dawkins is 46 years old now, so poised and so accomplished on the battlefield
and in the classroom that journalists instinctively ask him about high political
plans. Once known as Saint Peter at West Point because of his skills and his
comportment, he is barely a year into civilian life as a securities executive
after retiring as a brigadier general.

He could talk, he says with an impish smile, ''for at least 20 minutes on the
impact of the Reagan tax policy.'' But he knows that, at this time of year,
people want to hear about the day he took the field against Annapolis, with his
Heisman Trophy already won.

This was in 1958. Unbeaten Army was ranked second in the nation, and Dawkins had
already been identified as the Heisman Trophy winner, the best college player in
the land. Now he had to play the one-game season known as the Army-Navy game.

Just before Navy kicked off, Col. Red Blaik told him: ''I don't want you running
it back for a touchdown. I just want to make sure you don't fumble.''

But Dawkins had spent the previous two weeks attending the bonfires and hearing
the cheers, and he knew that ''football is something special at the academies.''

''It's one of the few ways you can actually tell if you succeeded,'' he said the
other day. ''You feel the corps depends on you - maybe more than at other
schools.''

As he fielded the kickoff, he saw a huge opening develop, and ''I had this
vision of running it back for a touchdown.'' He raced for the hole and ran
directly into his center, Bill Rowe, ''and the ball squirted 20 feet into the
air, and Navy took it in for a touchdown.''

Twenty-six years later, Pete Dawkins pauses and says, ''So much for the
short-term benefit of the Heisman Trophy.''


He will talk about the long-term benefits of the Heisman Trophy during the
annual television presentation tomorrow at 7 P.M. on NBC, produced by Bud
Greenspan and Nancy Beffa. The show will come a few hours after the end of the
Army- Navy game, which has been restored to Philadelphia at the dignified hour
of noon.

Army eventually won Dawkins's last game, 22-6, and he accepted a Rhodes
scholarship knowing that three years at Oxford and the mandatory three-year
service hitch (now five) would keep him out of pro football. This was before
Roger Staubach emerged from a five-year Navy hitch and stunned everybody by
becoming the Dallas Cowboys' quarterback.

''I have no regrets,'' Pete Dawkins says, ''but I would have loved to play pro
football.''

When his football peers were becoming ''veterans'' in what the professional
leagues like to refer to as ''wars,'' Dawkins was taking part in the real thing.
He does not need his Ph.D. in international politics from Princeton to know that
''emotionally, the Vietnam War has been our toughest war.''

''It really tore at the fabric of society,'' he says. ''We're only seeing part
of the healing process now. There is a growing perception that, regardless of
your view of the wisdom of it, many served proudly and loyally.''


In Life magazine's issue of April 8,

1966, an article described how

Captain Dawkins, assigned to the First Vietnamese Airborne Battalion, had
learned to speak Vietnamese, ate the pungent food, played the local card games
and had given his guitar to a Vietnamese soldier ''because he plays better than
I do.'' He was decorated 16 times in the Army for service and valor, including
bravery in two tours in Vietnam.

''It was difficult to go back a second time, to carry out what you thought were
your responsibilities, fighting a tough, ugly and dirty war, when you faced
ridicule back home,'' he says. ''It was a very tough time - no pretending it
wasn't. But you kept the sense that you were right, performing a mission you
were given. You recognize you are doing destructive things, but you are doing it
to safeguard a country you think is special.''

Dawkins had finished seventh among a class of 500 at West Point and had been
appointed the senior cadet officer, and the predictions always were that he
would be chief of staff one day. By all appearances, he was still on the fast
track when he chose to retire, at age 45. He cautions people ''not to put too
much in that decision.''

''You only have time to do so many things in life,'' he says, and now he wanted
to try being a civilian.

Today he lives in Manhattan with his wife, Judy, his date for his last Army-Navy
game, who has managed 23 moves since they married. They have two children, and
their 20-year- old son, Sean, plays soccer, not football. Pete Dawkins is a
partner at Shearson Lehman/American Express specializing in financing programs
for local governments.

''We're trying to repair a rusting America,'' he says. ''Going into the 21st
century, we're trying to fix an infrastructure that was built in the 19th
century, allowed to deteriorate in the 20th century.''

He describes advising the Commonwealth of Kentucky to raise fines for
misdemeanors in order to back up a $32 million securities program, ''to make the
guilty parties pay for improvement to 23 county jails.'' He says one heartening
thing about becoming a civilian ''is the mood of optimism - some might call it
jingoism - stemming from the Olympics, and the competence and good intentions of
many local bureaucrats.''

''That's a pejorative word, I know,'' he says. ''Yet I've met a lot of
small-town assessors and clerks who work with a sense of loyalty.''

Asked about rumors that he will seek political office as a Republican in his
home state, Michigan, Dawkins notes that a former astronaut, Jack Lousma, won
the Republican senatorial nomination there this year. (He lost to the Democrat,
Carl Levin.) Dawkins also notes that he has been rumored to be making a future
bid as a Democrat from Virginia, where he has maintained a home since 1970.
That's all he will say.

In another era, Pete Dawkins played halfback and even a little safety. He has
been a soldier and a scholar. Now that he is a civilian, it is not clear whether
he is a Republican or a Democrat. People weren't sure of Dwight D. Eisenhower's
politics when he left the service, either - and Eisenhower never won the
Heisman.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Pete Dawkins

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ AND WEINBERGER: DISPUTING USE OF FORCE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 29


The Secretary of State, George P. Shultz, and the Secretary of Defense, Caspar
W. Weinberger, have long had muted disagreements within the councils of
Government over the uses of military power. The differences have been more
subtle than pronounced and, so far as anyone on the outside has seen, debated in
careful argument rather than explosive dispute.

But those differences, which have just slipped into the open, reveal a curious
reversal in traditional roles, at least as those roles have been generally
perceived over the years. Mr. Shultz, the quiet and cautious leader of the
nation's diplomats, is shown to be more ready to apply the mailed fist than is
Mr. Weinberger, the spirited, quick-witted advocate of the largest peacetime
military buildup in American history.

Taking the long view, Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger appear to have been
grappling with what has been the central issue of American power since the end
of World War II: How does a superpower apply limited military force to achieve
limited national objectives? In stark terms, how does the United States protect
a national interest and not have a conflict escalate into a nuclear war that
could destroy civilized life?

Power and Diplomacy

Last spring, in a speech before the Trilateral Commission, Mr. Shultz made his
point, saying: ''The hard reality is that diplomacy not backed by military
strength is ineffectual. Leverage, as well as good will, is required. Power and
diplomacy are not alternatives. They must go together, or we will accomplish
very little in this world.''

Mr. Weinberger replied Wednesday in an address to the National Press Club. His
aides said he had refrained from giving the speech earlier because he wanted to
keep the issue out of President Reagan's campaign for re-election. The Defense
Secretary, saying he ''intended to sound a note of caution,'' argued that
sending American forces into combat ''should be a last resort, and to be used
only when other means have failed.''

''Employing our forces almost indiscriminately and as a regular and customary
part of our diplomatic efforts would surely plunge us headlong into the sort of
domestic turmoil we experienced during the Vietnam war, without accomplishing
the goal for which we committed our forces,'' he said.

Areas of Agreement

Despite that difference, Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger appear to agree on much
in this issue. They agree that the United States cannot go it alone, that
isolation would do great damage, that Americans would summon up the will to
fight for survival as in World War II. They agree the War Powers Act's limits on
the President should be modified or repealed, and they agree on the military
lessons of Vietnam.

The Secretary of State said, ''Certainly, the United States is not the world's
policeman.'' Mr. Weinberger echoed, ''Recent history has proven that we cannot
assume unilaterally the role of the world's defender.'' (A bit of a play on
words, that last, as Mr. Weinberger's nickname in the Pentagon is ''The Defender
of the Free World'' for his vigorous annual struggle to increase the military
budget.)

Neither is an isolationist, by any means, Mr. Weinberger saying that ''we must
never forget those isolationists in Europe'' who shrugged off Hitler's advances,
and Mr. Shultz asserting ''there is no safety in isolationism.''

On the War Powers Act, passed by Congress in 1973 in the aftermath of Vietnam,
Mr. Shultz said that 60-day deadlines, within which Congress must approve a
Presidential employment of forces or see them withdrawn, ''practically invites
an adversary to wait us out.''

Battles at Home and Abroad

''Our Commander in Chief is locked in battle at home at the same time he is
trying to act effectively abroad,'' Mr. Shultz said. He contended that ''such
constraints on timely action may only invite greater challenges down the road.''

Mr. Weinberger, while not mentioning the War Powers Act by name, said, ''The
centrality of decision- making authority in the executive branch has been
compromised by the legislative branch to an extent that activly interferes with
that decision- making process.''

The lessons of Vietnam have been the topic of intense inquiry in recent years,
with Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger seemingly in basic agreement. Mr. Shultz
said: ''It is often said that the lesson of Vietnam is that the United States
should not engage in military conflict without a clear and precise military
mission, solid public backing, and enough resources to finish the job. This is
undeniably true.''

What It Takes to Win

Mr. Weinberger, in laying out tests to be applied when weighing the dispatch of
American forces to combat, said much the same. But he emphasized employing
enough forces to win, saying, ''If we are unwilling to to commit the forces or
resources necessary to achieve our objectives, we should not commit them at
all.''

It was after that, however, that the two cabinet officers split. Mr. Shultz
asserted: ''There will always be instances that fall short of an all-out
national commitment on the scale of World War II. The need to avoid no- win
situations cannot mean that we turn automatically away from hard- to-win
situations that call for prudent involvement. These will always involve risks,
we will not alway have the luxury of being able to choose the most advantageous
circumstances. And our adversaries can be expected to play rough.''

Mr. Weinberger, on the other hand, contended: ''Policies formed without a clear
understanding of what we hope to achieve would also earn us the scorn of our
troops, who would have an understandable opposition to being used - and I mean
used in every sense of the word - casually and without intent to support them
fully.''

In sum, Mr. Weinberger, after nearly four years in the Pentagon, has embraced
and made his own the thinking of the soldiers on the lessons of Vietnam. The
colonels of today who were captains on the battlefield 15 years ago have said
repeatedly that the United States should have clear objectives, sufficient
forces, public support and the will to win before they are asked to fight again.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos of George P. Shultz and Caspar W. Weinberger

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 52 words


Dispatches from Boston on Sept. 20 and Oct. 30 about the Massachusetts Senate
campaign misstated the role of John F. Kerry, now a Senator- elect, in Vietnam
Veterans Against the War. He was a leader and spokesman of the organization in
the early 1970's, but he was not a founder. The group was formed in 1967.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL DISPUTES QUOTE IN CBS TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1210 words


Gen. William C. Westmoreland and a lawyer for CBS argued yesterday over one of
the most memorable phrases of the Vietnam War, with the lawyer suggesting that
the general had misled Washington into believing there was ''light at the end of
tunnel'' in 1967 and the general saying he had not used that expression.

''I never had quite that degree of optimism,'' General Westmoreland told the
jury at his libel trial against CBS in Federal Court in Manhattan.

But the lawyer, David Boies, showed the witness a Nov. 26, 1967, cable he had
sent during a visit to Washington to his deputy in Saigon, Gen. Creighton W.
Abrams, in which the phrase ''some light at the end of the tunnel'' was
bracketed in quotation marks.

Q. Did you believe that degree of optimism was justified?

A. I certainly did. I felt it was an accurate important portrayal.

General Westmoreland acknowledged, under intense cross-examination, that he had
told President Johnson, the press and others in November 1967 that American
troops were ''grinding down the enemy,'' as the cable also indicated. But he
said he did not intend to convey the impression that ''the war was about to be
over.''

Wide-Ranging Testimony

The general's testimony yesterday ranged over a variety of matters, from when he
learned that North Vietnamese forces were massing for what became the Tet
offensive of January 1968 - Mr. Boies tried to show that it was before General
Westmoreland went to Washington - to the ''kindness'' of Lady Bird Johnson and
what was said at a White House dinner party.

To support his previous testimony that three enemy strength figures he had given
the President in November 1967 were consistent and did not compare ''apples with
oranges with lemons,'' General Westmoreland cited another document from that
period that included the estimates. The document, prepared by intelligence
officers, pointed out - as the general testified on Monday - that the figures
were the result of a ''retrospective analysis.''

But after more than an hour of aggressive questioning, General Westmoreland
conceded that his explanation on Monday of how the specific figures were arrived
at was faulty.

The general, who commanded American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968, had
testified that the figures for 1965 and 1966 were adjusted to include a new
category of enemy ''administrative services'' forces that was not recognized by
his command until 1967. The introduction of that category, he had suggested,
helped to offset the removal from the estimates of a category known as
self-defense forces.

But yesterday, the general agreed that the personnel in the ''administrative
services'' category in early 1967 - totaling 18,953 - had been counted in the
figures for 1965 and 1966 in a category called ''combat support'' forces.

General Westmoreland contends that CBS libeled him in a 1982 CBS Reports
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' by saying that he had
deceived President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and
nature of the enemy in 1967. CBS says the broadcast was true.

The documentary alleged a ''conspiracy'' at the ''highest levels'' of military
intelligence to minimize North Vietnamese and Vietcong strength to make it
appear that America was winning the war. General Westmoreland, it said, imposed
an ''arbitrary'' ceiling of 300,000 on reports of enemy strength, partly by
dropping the self-defense forces from the official military listing of that
strength known as the order of battle.

The 70-year-old retired general has said that he decided to exclude the
part-time hamlet-based forces from the order of battle in mid-1967 because they
did not pose an offensive military threat and it was time to differentiate
between ''the fighters and the nonfighters'' among the enemy.

To win an award in his $120 million suit, General Westmoreland must show that
his reputation was damaged.

Previous Critical Articles

Yesterday afternoon, Mr. Boies sought to contradict the general's earlier
testimony that he had been ''humiliated'' by the documentary and to demonstrate
that the broadcast was no more critical of the plaintiff than articles or
Congressional findings that had preceded it - and about which he had not sued.

Without citing its conclusions, Mr. Boies referred to a House Select Committee
on Intelligence report in 1975 that said Congress and perhaps President Johnson
had been misled about the size of enemy forces in South Vietnam before the Tet
offensive.

The committee hearings, at which General Westmoreland did not testify, stemmed
from an article that year in Harper's magazine, written by Samuel A. Adams, a
former Central Intelligence Agency analyst, and edited by George Crile.

Mr. Crile joined CBS in 1976 and produced the documentary around which this
trial turns. Mr. Adams was a paid consultant for the documentary. Both men -
like Mike Wallace, the broadcast's narrator - are defendants with CBS.

General Westmoreland said he had never read the report of the House committee -
commonly known as the Pike Committee after its chairman, Representative Otis
Pike, Democrat of Suffolk County - but knew that it contained ''critical
statements.'' The report was never issued officially, but a copy was leaked to
The Village Voice and published in its entirety.

The witness also said he had not read Mr. Adams's article in Harper's, which
covered much of the same ground as the CBS documentary, but was aware of it at
the time it appeared.

'Enemy Becoming Weaker'

 Earlier yesterday, Mr. Boies sought to prove that, even while General
Westmoreland was in Washington in mid- to late November 1967 - telling the
President, the Joint Chiefs and Congressional committees that the ''enemy was
becoming weaker,'' as his cable to General Abrams said - he knew that large
units of North Vietnamese troops were moving south toward Vietnam.

The general had testified that he first realized the size of those forces in
late November - yesterday he could not remember exactly when - and that he had
asked the President to send to Vietnam additional units of the 101st Airborne
Brigade.

But Mr. Boies - who has also argued that General Westmoreland's command
''systematically blocked'' reports of high infiltration into South Vietnam as
early as September 1967 - used the Pentagon Papers history of the war to
establish that the bid for more troops was made in September.

 The general told the jury that his request was not tied exclusively to the
intelligence data on North Vietnamese troop movements. He said he had long
anticipated a winter-spring offensive by the enemy in late 1967 and early 1968
and that he wanted to get fresh troops from the United States as early as
possible to conduct their own offensives.

He denied telling a reporter in Washington in November 1967 that ''the enemy was
running out of men'' - except in some provinces of South Vietnam. And he said it
was Henry Cabot Lodge, a former American Ambassador to Saigon, who coined the
expression: ''light at the end of the tunnel.''

''It was not my phrase.'' he said. ''I was optimistic, but I did not forecast
the end of the war, as I have been accused.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: THE JEWS IN CHINA

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 6; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 911 words


THE author's tour of distant cities is an established part of publishing, but
Sidney Shapiro, a Brooklyn-born graduate of St. John's Law School, would seem to
have carried it to extremes. In order to promote his latest book, he has come
all the way from China.

''I've been living there since 1947,'' Mr. Shapiro said recently in New York.
''I learned Chinese at Cornell when I was in the Army and after my discharge I
didn't want to go back to being a lawyer, so I studied more Chinese at Columbia
and Yale, then booked a freighter to China.''

Mr. Shapiro's new book is ''Jews in Old China: Studies by Chinese Scholars,'' to
be published in January by Hippocrene Books but already in many bookstores. Mr.
Shapiro did not actually write the book - it is based on historical material
unearthed by Chinese scholars - but he translated, compiled and edited it. The
book traces Jewish settlement in China to the eighth century B.C.

Whatever else can be said about the spring of 1947, it was not the most idyllic
time to be in China. ''The civil war was going full steam,'' Mr. Shapiro said.
''Shanghai was still unliberated, as we say. I went as a stringer for Variety
because I'd been a kind of theatrical lawyer as a young man and had a duffel bag
full of Army surplus to try to make my fortune. I soon ran out of money and was
compelled to take a job with an American lawyer in Shanghai, H. D. Rogers, a
great lawyer who could shake dice for drinks at the American Club in Shanghai.
He needed somebody like me who could copy forms and draw wills. I became his
junior partner.''

After about a year, Mr. Shapiro married a Chinese drama critic who was involved
with a magazine that, to the distress of the Nationalist Government, advocated
land reform. The two made contact with the Communist underground and took off,
in November 1948, for Peking. Eventually, Mr. Shapiro began work as a translator
of Chinese literature into English for the Foreign Languages Publishing House, a
job he held for 36 years until his recent retirement. ''I must have done well
over a dozen contemporary novels, plus 'Outlaws of the Marsh,' a Chinese classic
published by Indiana University Press in 1980,'' he said. He also translated
''Daughters and Sons,'' published here in 1952, which he describes as ''the
first modern novel out of Mao's China ever to be published in America.''

Mr. Shapiro wrote ''An American in China,'' published by New American Library in
1979, but he had no intention of writing another book. He said he was
''embarrassed'' into writing ''Jews in Old China.''

''People who read my other book or my translations would come to China,'' he
said, ''and they would call on me and say, 'Thirty years in China, you must know
all about the Chinese Jews.' I didn't, so I began reading about it.'' What he
discovered was that all the old published records were by missionaries or
Sinologists, so he got in touch with Chinese scholars throughout the country,
who eventually provided him with the information he sought - most of it from
volumes out of print or published in limited editions.

A Chinese citizen since 1963, Mr. Shapiro has been back to the United States
seven times since 1971 (''I started coming back the minute the Nixon visit was
announced,'' he said), and his wife accompanied him on his last two visits. But
their daughter and granddaughter have never been here.

During the Cultural Revolution, Mrs. Shapiro was held under what her husband
describes as ''a kind of house arrest in some distant place.'' Neither he nor
his daughter, who worked in a paper mill, was harmed, at least not physically.
''My office never stopped working during the revolution,'' he said, ''but we
were putting out the most unmitigated bilge - attacks on Shakespeare and
Beethoven as bourgeoise revisionists. I found that awful, but I couldn't
persuade them not to say it.''

Since the revolution ended, he said, China ''is a delightful place to live.''
But it did not take him long to get back into the rhythms of New York life. ''I
enjoy walking the streets,'' he said, ''but my first day back I couldn't
understand why people were walking so fast. Then I remembered I'm an old New
Yorker, so now I walk fast, too.''

'Letters From Vietnam' To Be Published in May

Next May 7, W. W. Norton will publish ''Dear America: Letters From Vietnam.''
Publication will coincide with the dedication of the New York Vietnam Veterans
Memorial in Lower Manhattan on that day, and will also coincide with the 10th
anniversary of the end of the Vietnam War. According to Donald S. Lamm, chairman
and president of Norton, the 300-page hard-cover book will contain excerpts from
about 200 letters, which are still being gathered by the New York Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Commission. Excerpts, including letters, poems and petitions
from New Yorkers who served in Vietnam, will be etched onto a translucent glass
wall, 70 feet long and 14 feet high.

The commission has already received many letters from Vietnam veterans and their
families, but it will consider additional letters for inclusion on the wall or
for the book if they are received by early next month. It asks that photocopies
of correspondence be sent to Vietnam Letters, 110 Church Street, New York, N.Y.
10007.

Mr. Lamm said that royalties from the book will go to the commission, as will
most of Norton's profits on the book, and that money will be earmarked for a
jobs program for Vietnam veterans.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STEPHEN YOUNG DIES; SERVED TWO TERMS IN SENATE FROM OHIO

BYLINE: By SUSAN F. RASKY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 44, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 290 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1


Stephen M. Young, a former Democratic Senator from Ohio known for his pugnacious
behavior, died of a blood disorder today at the Washington Home Hospice. He was
95 years old.

Mr. Young was elected to the Senate in 1958 after serving eight years in the
House of Representatives. He retired in 1970 at the age of 80, saying the time
had come to pass the opportunity to serve to a younger man.

In a long and colorful political career that began in 1912, Mr. Young made his
mark by gleefully hurling epithets at his critics and heaping scorn on
Government bureaucracy.

''Buster, your insults show that you are the east end of a horse going west,''
he wrote to one irate constituent. He labeled a group of American Legionnaires
''puffed-up patriots and publicity-seeking professional veterans,'' and once
declared, ''The Agency for International Development must have far in excess of
the ususal quota of dimwits.''

A member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, Mr. Young dubbed the Vietnam
War ''Lyndon's folly'' long before the phrase became fashionable among President
Johnson's critics. After a 1968 meeting with Nguyen Cao Ky, then the Vice
President of South Vietnam, Mr. Young pronounced Mr. Ky ''an abominable
fellow.''

Mr. Young was a veteran of both World Wars and received the Bronze Star in World
War II, but the military was one of his favorite targets. He once said his
Senate vote for a limited nuclear test ban treaty was the most important of his
career.

Mr. Young served in the Ohio General Assembly from 1913 to 1917, and was elected
to Congress in 1932, 1934, 1940 and 1948.

Mr. Young is survived by two daughters, five granddaughters and five
great-grandchildren. His second wife, Rachel, died in 1982.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
SHORT ON TALK, BIG AT THE BOX OFFICE

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section 2; Page 17, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words


Chuck Norris, Arnold Schwarzenegger, Charles Bronson: not everyone's idea of
perfect party guests but nonetheless deserving of attention and even respect,
since together they control such a formidable share of the movie market. Only
last week, Mr. Norris's ''Missing in Action'' and Mr. Schwarzenegger's
''Terminator'' were being advertised as the nation's ''New no. 1 hit!'' and
''The N1 movie in the U.S.A.,'' respectively. And ''The Evil That Men Do,'' the
latest from Mr. Bronson, made a comparable splash several months earlier.

The success of this triumvirate is greeted in some quarters by indifference,
even scorn. For all the many filmgoers who would not, even at gunpoint, watch a
Bronson or a Schwarzenegger epic, there are even greater numbers who could not
pick out Mr. Norris from a lineup of fortyish blond tennis pros. Surely Mr.
Norris, who spent many years as a karate instructor (and enjoyed a reign as
world karate champion) before launching his film career, is the most
underrecognized movie star in America, if not the most underrated.

Empirical evidence, in the form of millions of ticket-buying patrons, tells us
that Mr. Norris unquestionably has his appeal. (When persuading a producer to
back his debut feature, ''Good Guys Wear Black,'' Mr. Norris is quoted as having
made an irresistible numerical argument. ''There's four million karate people in
America,'' said he. ''They all know who I am. And if only half of them go to the
movie, that's a $6 million gross on a $1 million budget.'' He was right about
everything except the gross, which proved three times what he had estimated.)
But explaining that appeal isn't easy. Certainly much of it is nonverbal, as is
Mr. Bronson's and Mr. Schwarzenegger's. Each of them says so little in their
latest films that their collective dialogue wouldn't be enough to keep Clint
Eastwood going through one of his.



Mr. Eastwood started out in the same tight- lipped action genre as his current
disciples, who also owe noticeable debts to strong, silent types like Steve
McQueen and John Wayne. Mr. McQueen reportedly advised Mr. Norris that he had
spoken too much in his first film, telling him ''Too much dialogue. Let the
character actors lay out the plot. Then, when there's something important to
say, you say it and people will listen.'' However, Mr. Eastwood has long since
made the leap out of the B-movie chasm in which his successors still toil.
''Tightrope,'' his most recent effort, attributed complex feelings to its hero
and made some effort to understand and explain them. This sort of pussyfooting
is complete anathema to everything B-moviedom stands for.

What the Messrs. Norris, Schwarzenegger and Bronson offer audiences is the
opportunity for utterly uncomplicated visceral response, often to
political-sounding issues. It is no accident that ''Missing in Action'' concerns
itself with prisoners of war in Vietnam, or ''The Terminator'' with a nuclear
holocaust or ''The Evil That Men Do'' with human rights violations. Mr. Bronson,
whose concern with the latter issue comes awfully late in a career of
unadulterated mayhem, has understood since ''Death Wish'' the expediency of
using explosive subject matter (in that case, rape and murder) to whet an
audience's appetite for revenge. Mr. Norris and Mr. Schwarzenegger, on the other
hand, in their current films appear to be using similar tactics in a much less
cynical way.

Unlike ''Uncommon Valor,'' another vehement action film about a scheme to rescue
missing American soldiers, ''Missing in Action'' wastes neither time nor words
on veterans' complex feelings about Vietnam, or the war's effects on their
families. Instead, it begins as an unabashed shoot- 'em-up, with Mr. Norris, as
an Army colonel, blasting his way through the jungle. Most of his men disappear
during the battle, after which the colonel is seen back home, brooding about
their fate. A little later, he embarks on his own private rescue mission and
returns to Vietnam. The rest of the film is distinguished by its vigorous action
sequences, its unequivocal depiction of the Vietnamese as shifty-eyed villains,
and an ending in which Mr. Norris's bravado is allowed to show up the weak-kneed
foreign policy of the United States Government.



Presumptuous and overbearing as this may sound, it doesn't play that way; in
fact, the bashfulness with which Mr. Norris approaches such issues is a large
part of his charm. Only with the greatest reluctance does he hurt anyone, albeit
also with the greatest finesse. His singlemindedness is so great that he makes a
point of not noticing the nude barroom dancers who, in a movie like this,
constitute an obligatory bit of atmosphere. And when a female co-star, enlisted
in a plot to fool Vietnamese officials by pretending to be in bed with Mr.
Norris, tries to pique his genuine interest in such activities, Mr. Norris
stares blankly into space. Audiences seem to love his imperviousness even more
than his righteous rage.

Of course, no one's self-sufficiency can match Mr. Schwarzenegger's in ''The
Terminator,'' which casts him as a post-holocaust robot capable of repairing his
own physical equipment. Mr. Schwarzenegger, in preferring the villainous title
role to the leading man's heroic part originally offered him, opted for a much
steelier character than the grunting lunkheads he had previously played. The
change is strategic, since it presents Mr. Schwarzenegger as a figure of pure
menace rather than one meant to invite understanding or sympathy. In addition to
its lively and intricate plot, which has the Terminator returning from the year
2029 as a hit-man making a mysterious effort to change the future, the film owes
much of its success to the star's sheer inexorability. Mr. Schwarzenegger's
relentlessness here is matched only by his cautionary import as a harbinger of
what a post-nuclear future might bring.

It's true that both Mr. Norris and Mr. Schwarzenegger have a long way to go
before they graduate from the ranks of exploitation films to anything
above-ground. But both ''Missing in Action'' and ''The Terminator'' are
significant improvements over what, in each star's career, has come before. Mr.
Schwarzenegger may be ready to treat his own hulking strangeness as his most
marketable asset, instead of an obstacle to roles that revolve around sex
appeal. And Mr. Norris, such a quiet firebrand and so sheepishly sincere, has
moved well beyond the all-karate crowd.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TO PROTECT THE WORLD'S WEAK AGAINST THE STRONG

SECTION: Section 4; Page 24, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 522 words


To the Editor:


In his Nov. 15 column, ''Rights for Terrorists?'', William Safire described two
international treaties, added to the four Geneva Conventions of 1949, as
enhancing international terrorism. He referred to Protocol I, dealing with the
protection of victims of international armed conflicts, and to Protocol II,
concerning conflicts of a noninternational nature.

As a representative of a state party to these treaties and host to the
conference that adopted them, I would like to comment on their significance.

Humanitarian principles are as old as civilization. But only since the adoption
of the Geneva Convention of 1864 and the conventions of the International Peace
Conference that began at The Hague in 1899 have there been systematic efforts to
''civilize'' warfare. Protocols I and II, adopted in 1977 after four years of
negotiations, are the most recent of these.

The Geneva Conventions of 1949, based on the experiences of World War II, solved
some of the problems raised by wars of a conventional nature between
industrialized countries, but not those linked with new types of armed conflicts
- half-internal, half-international - taking place mostly in the third world
today.

The two protocols, particularly the blurred definition of international armed
conflicts in Protocol I, reflect a complex political and military reality. Their
main provisions are a compromise between the legitimate security requirements of
states, diverse ideologies and different historical experiences that very often
converge on the battlefield. Article 44 of Protocol I, for example, on
combatants and prisoners of war, referred to by Mr. Safire, has been strongly
supported by the United States because of its Vietnam experience.

It can be argued that the new provisions of Protocol I, on defining armed
conflicts, may serve as an admonition to states to apply the law of armed
conflicts to a much larger extent than many have been willing to do.

However, no provision of the two protocols can be construed as a recognition of
terrorism or terrorist methods as a means of legitimate warfare. None of the
participating states would have accepted such an interpretation. No state could
ever grant terrorists legal protection under the protocols. On the contrary, the
protocols prohibit acts of terrorism as a violation of international law.

The new rules - particularly those on the protection of civilians, of wounded,
of sick and shipwrecked or prisoners of war and on methods and means of warfare
- are far reaching and will help lessen the number of victims or alleviate their
fate.

Their adoption by consensus in 1977 by more than 100 states would not have been
possible had the states not been convinced of their urgent necessity. Every
compromise, of course, has its weaknesses, but what is at stake in the two
protocols is the protection without discrimination of the victims of wars - of
the weakest against the strongest - on as universal a basis as possible.

(Ambassador) F. POMETTA Permanent Observer of Switzerland to the United Nations
New York, Nov. 20, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AN AGE-OLD (BUT STILL COMMON) HORROR

BYLINE: By EDWARD SCHUMACHER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 937 words

DATELINE: MADRID


His eyes still bleed. In September, the young leftist activist said,
paramilitary police officers placed caps on his eyeballs and rhythmically tapped
them with a metal hammer. His captors also prodded his tongue with live electric
wires, put him through mock executions and held his head under water in a game
they called ''the submarine,'' he said. The prisoner was released several weeks
ago after a judge and doctors intervened, corroborating much of his story. It
happened not in some infamous dictatorship, but in democratic and generally
enlightened Spain. The victim was a suspected Basque terrorist.

According to Amnesty International, which won the Nobel Prize in 1977 for
keeping track of human rights violations, one-third of the world's countries
have tortured or cruelly treated prisoners in the last four years. The accused
violators, almost all of which deny the allegations, range across the political
spectrum from the Soviet Union to Chile, from Uganda to Vietnam.

Some countries have added new methods to the ancient techniques of beatings,
dripping water, stretching on the rack, and hanging prisoners by their arms,
feet or other extremities. This makes torture harder to detect. Doctors and
medical technicians in the interrogation centers of Chile's secret police
reportedly monitor victims to insure that just the right amount of electric
shock is administered without stopping the heart or leaving skin marks. The
Chilean Medical Society is investigating. The Syrians have perfected the ''black
slave,'' an electrical apparatus that inserts a heated metal skewer into the
victim's body, according to survivors. In Guatamala, torture victims have
reported nearly suffocating when inner tubes stuffed with quicklime were pulled
over their heads. Prisoners in Rwanda have been held for more than a year in
''cachets noirs,'' cells devoid of light. The Russians have abused prisoners of
conscience in mental hospitals, forcibly administering pain-causing and
disorienting drugs, Amnesty has reported.  Graham Greene once wrote that only
the lower class was liable to torture in Latin America, but today, distinctions
of class, age and sex have broken down everywhere. Children have reportedly been
tortured in El Salvador. In Iran, children are forced to witness the torture of
their mothers, according to Amnesty. Women in many countries have been
especially brutalized. ''The horror. Oh, the horror,'' said Ernesto Sabato, a
novelist and head of an offical Argentine commission investigating the
disappearances of thousands of people under military dictatorship in the 1970's.
He has had to review hundreds of macabre torture tales.

Most torturing is done secretly, often by a grim subclass of torturers who are
themselves sometimes victims of a sort. They are often fanatical believers or
psychologically deranged, specially trained, and motivated by privileges and
brainwashing and, eventually, by fear of retribution, according to the few
available studies. In Argentina, some former torturers have gone to the Sabato
commission seeking absolution. Ideology becomes meaningless, some have
testified, as violence takes hold like a disease and becomes an end in itself.
This may partly explain why torture, once started by police forces, often
becomes institutionalized and difficult for governments to control. In Spain,
for example, nine years after the death of Francisco Franco, torture is
apparently rare. But the Socialist Government of Felipe Gonzalez has yet to
totally end the dictator's police practices.

The Terrorist RationaleTorture as a method of intimidation, punishment or
interrogation may be as ancient as recorded civilization. But more recently,
urban terrorism such as the French experienced in Algiers in the 1950's has
sometimes given torture a measure of popular support; People justify it as
necessary to combat an elusive enemy. Most Argentines in the 1970's closed their
ears to the screams emanating from more than 200 torture cells, many in
residential neighborhoods. An unintended effect was to undermine respect for
law. Also, the methods often did not work: Investigators for the Sabato
Commission found that much of the evidence obtained by torture was wrong,
offered by victims desperate to end the ordeal. Medical investigators elsewhere
have found that torture victims often hallucinate.

Many human rights activists are urging governments to vote for a United Nations
convention that would outlaw all torture and police abuses. But while the
convention would likely have moral weight, its practical effects might be
limited. The United Nations and regional organizations such as the Organization
of African Unity already have human rights committees, but these are often
political, rather than human rights, battlegrounds. Countries that are active
members of the third world majority (Cuba, for example) are rarely called upon
to answer charges of human rights violations in these committees.

The most effective weapon against torture has been pressure at home, notably by
governments and courts willing to crack down on security forces. Under Brazil's
military Government, torture largely ended in the 1970's after pressure by that
country's powerful Catholic Church. Public outcries in Britain and finally,
complaints by police surgeons, led the British Government in 1979 to
dramatically alter its practices of interrogating prisoners in Northern Ireland.

Where violations persist, Amnesty said in a report, ''what is lacking is the
political will of governments to stop torturing people. It is as simple and as
difficult as that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of clinic in Copenhagen for torture victims from other countries

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WEINBERGER'S WAR GUIDE: FOLLOW THE DIRECT ROUTE

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Hardly a year has gone by since the end of World War II that Americans have not
struggled with the issue of when and how to use military force. Last week,
Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger entered the fray, arguing that the
standard should be: Be prepared to fight virtually everywhere, but then decide
either to win or, failing that, to get out or stay out in the first place.

This was to be Mr. Weinberger's defense doctrine for the 1980's, the guide for
the use of American military force on which more than a trillion dollars will be
spent in the next four years. Extreme caution in making commitments, but once
committed, go all out to win, nothing short of unconditional surrender.
Grenadas, yes, but no more Vietnams or Koreas, no more limited wars for limited
ends.

The Secretary's was a classic statement of the traditional military point of
view - black and white, win or lose - as against the blurred and gray world of
the diplomat.

But were the guidelines he offered clear and practical, and how did they fit
with the exigencies of diplomacy? These were among the questions in the wake of
Mr. Weinberger's address to the National Press Club on Wednesday.

He had little to say about ends in that speech. Only get involved militarily if
the interests are ''vital'' and then, only as ''a last resort,'' he stated.

It was almost as if he were saying that judgments about means should determine
ends. Thus, if it were determined that the United States was not prepared to use
the necessary force to win in any given situation, better to disentangle or not
get started.

He did not deal with whether commitment to Korea or Vietnam was good or bad.
What was wrong was the ''gradualist incremental approach,'' he said, seeming to
imply the errors were not going to the Yalu river border to defeat North Korea
and China and not bombing North Vietnam to kingdom come.

How did Mr. Weinberger apply this to the immediate case in point, Central
America?

His text did not suggest whether he thought it would be right or wrong to use
force there. But he was quite clear about the means: ''The President will not
allow our military forces to creep - or be drawn gradually - into a combat role
in Central America or any other place in the world.''

To make his points, Mr. Weinberger set up two adversaries. First, there was a
Congress he labelled ''isolationist,'' and which he charged was unwilling to
fight anywhere. Then, there were the ''theorists,'' taken by everyone to be
Secretary of State George P. Shultz and his diplomats, who he accused of being
too eager to use force almost everywhere for fuzzy diplomatic objectives.

The Congressional target was not surprising. The State Department target was. It
brought into the open a long-festering dispute between the two men. Mr. Shultz
has been in the vanguard of arguing to use American military might in Grenada,
Lebanon, and generally against terrorists and states sponsoring terrorism. Mr.
Weinberger and the Joint Chiefs of Staff have been reluctant in each case. Mr.
Shultz prevailed in Grenada and Lebanon, and it remains to be seen how President
Reagan will decide to respond to future terrorist attacks.

But Mr. Weinberger has not given up the battle. ''Employing our forces almost
indiscriminately and as a regular and customary part of our diplomatic
efforts,'' he said, ''would surely plunge us headlong into the sort of domestic
turmoil we experienced during the Vietnam war, without accomplishing the goal
for which we committed our forces.'' Was Mr. Weinberger suggesting that force
not be used as an instrument of diplomacy?  Is the United States to refrain from
sending Awacs radar control aircraft to Saudi Arabia to send a signal to Iran or
making a similar gesture of support for Egypt to deter Libya?  Is the United
States to forswear naval and military exercises in the Caribbean to affect the
attitudes of Cuba and Nicaragua toward negotiations unless the Administration is
prepared to use all-out force against these countries?  Mr. Weinberger's aides
say that their boss supported all of these actions. He just wanted to make sure
that each was not the first step on the slippery slope to gradualism.  The
question remains, who is to say where any given step might lead in a dynamic
situation? As Mr. Weinberger himself stated in his guidelines: ''Conditions and
objectives invariably change during the course of a conflict.'' The relationship
between objectives and forces, he stated, ''must be continually reassessed.''

He also says decisions on the use of force depend on domestic backing. ''Before
the U.S. commits combat forces abroad, there must be some reasonable assurance
we will have the support of the American people and their elected
representatives in Congress,'' he stated in the speech. But at the same time, he
condemned Congress and implied that laws such as the War Powers Act - by which
Congress is empowered to end American combat involvement after 60 days simply by
not voting to extend that involvement - only get in the way of responsible
executive action.

In the case of Lebanon, Congress voted under the War Powers Act to leave the
marines in Lebanon for 18 months. That was a mandate. Support for it began to
wane in Congress only after it seemed that the original peacekeeping mission of
the marines was unattainable.

By Mr. Weinberger's analysis, such a shift was justified. He himself said in the
speech that once the peacekeeping mission could ''not be realized,'' Mr. Reagan
''properly withdrew forces equipped only for peacekeeping.''

It would seem that most things ''depend,'' as a senior American diplomat
commented after the speech. The guidelines offered by Mr. Weinberger were
welcomed by an American military corps long frustrated by being asked to fight
wars short of victory and by the twilight zone of diplomacy.

But even a number of military men said later in the week that they realized that
what the Defense Secretary was doing was laying down warnings rather than
formulating a new defense doctrine.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger; photo of U.S. troops
landing in Grenada in 1983

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Notable Paperbacks

SECTION: Section 7; Page 74, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2128 words


This selective list of paperbacks was chosen from the New & Noteworthy column
since the Christmas issue of 1983. It includes autobiography, biography,
letters, plays, novels, stories, diaries, memoirs, essays, history, social
science and poetry.

AND THEN WE HEARD THE THUNDER.  By John Oliver Killens. (Howard University.
$6.95.) An affecting novel about a black soldier and his outfit in World War II
from Fort Dix, N.J., to the South Pacific.

THE ARAB-ISRAELI WARS: War and Peace in the Middle East.  By Chaim Herzog.
(Vintage. $8.95.) A candid survey by the President of Israel of military
conflicts from 1948 to the 1982 invasion of Lebanon.

ASIAN AMERICAN LITERATURE: An Introduction to the Writings and Their Social
Context.  By Elaine H. Kim. (Temple University. $12.95.) Writings by Japanese,
Philippine, Korean and Chinese authors and analyses of their perceptions of
America.

BARTLEBY IN MANHATTAN: And Other Essays.  By Elizabeth Hardwick. (Vintage.
$6.95.) Topical essays written between 1962 and 1982, reflecting the author's
penchant for opulent effects.

BECOMING A HEROINE: Reading About Women in

Novels.  By Rachel M. Brownstein. (Penguin. $7.95.) An ingenious examination of
how literary conventions determine images of women in and out of literature,
with an emphasis on the novels of Jane Austen, Henry James, George Meredith and
Virginia Woolf.

BLACK WOMEN WRITERS AT WORK.  Edited by Claudia Tate. (Continuum. $8.95.)
Fourteen prominent authors discuss their race, their sex and the style and
vision of their work.

BLUE HIGHWAYS: A Journey Into America.  By William Least Heat Moon.
(Fawcett/Crest. $3.95.) The lively, untypical adventures of an American Indian
traveling along America's back roads.

THE BRIDGE ON THE DRINA.  By Ivo Andric. Translated by Lovett F. Edwards.
(University of Chicago. $8.95.) The 1961 Nobel Prize-winner in Literature's
story of a 16th-century bridge and how it affected Serbian men and women.

CATHEDRAL.  By Raymond Carver. (Vintage. $4.95.) Short stories set in depressed,
semi-industrial towns with characters who are commonplace loners struggling for
speech.

CHINABOUND: A Fifty-Year Memoir.  By John King Fairbank.
(Bessie/Harper/Colophon. $10.) The China expert's detailed memoir touches on
personal as well as political matters.

THE CANNIBAL GALAXY.  By Cynthia Ozick. (Dutton. $7.95.) A novel about a Jewish
refugee who establishes a school in middle America where traditional Jewish and
modern European cultures are brought together.

CHILDREN OF WAR.  By Roger Rosenblatt. (Anchor Press. $7.95.) A Time magazine
writer interviews children in war zones to ascertain the impact of war on their
psychological development.

CHRONICLE OF A DEATH FORETOLD.  By Gabriel Garcia Marquez. Translated by Gregory
Rabassa. (Ballantine. $3.50.) Set in a small Caribbean town, this metaphysical
murder mystery reconstructs events leading to the death of a rich man.

A COLDER EYE: The Modern Irish Writers.  By Hugh Kenner. A lively and informal
evocation of the personalities who made the Irish literary renaissance in the
early part of this century.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF JEAN STAFFORD.

 (Dutton/Obelisk. $10.95.) Thirty brilliant stories written over a quarter of a
century.

COMPANY K.  By William March. (Arbor House. $7.95.) Each of the 113 officers and
enlisted men of Company K contributes, round robin, to a rich novel on World War
I.

THE CRISIS OF THE NEGRO INTELLECTUAL.  By Harold Cruse. (Quill. $10.95.) How
black intellectuals ''failed black people'' by ignoring black history and by
being unable to combine their nationalism with current political and economic
movements.

DISPATCHES.  By Michael Herr. (Avon. $3.95.) A correspondent's book on the
Vietnam War; one of the best.

DOROTHEA LANGE: Photographs of a Lifetime.

 (Aperture. $25.) Well-reproduced photographs - with reminiscences - by the
famous Depression years photographer with the humanist eye.

THE FEUD.  By Thomas Berger. (Delta/Seymour Lawrence. $7.95.) The question of
whether a hardware store customer should get rid of his cigar provokes a
gigantic disaster in this endearing and surprising novel.

THE FREE STATE.  By V. S. Naipaul. (Vintage. $4.95.) This collection of
splendidly written stories, travel diary fragments and a short novel won
England's Booker Prize.

A GATHERING OF OLD MEN.  By Ernest J. Gaines. (Vintage. $3.95.) A novel in which
nearly 20 black men and a white woman all claim to have committed a murder,
hoping to protect the guilty person.

IN SEARCH OF ENEMIES: A C.I.A. Story.  By John Stockwell. (Norton. $7.95.) An
account of the author's 12 years in the Central Intelligence Agency and of a
C.I.A.- fueled war in southwest Africa.

IRONWEED.  By William Kennedy. (Penguin. $5.95.) The 1984 Pulitzer Prize-winning
novel of life among derelicts and street gangs in Albany and of a minor criminal
who seeks regeneration through grace.

LET THE TRUMPET SOUND: The Life of Martin Lu

ther King Jr.  By Stephen B. Oates. (NAL/Plume. $8.95.) The most comprehensive
biography of the late civil rights leader yet published.

LISTENING TO AMERICA: An Illustrated History of

Words and Phrases From Our Lively and Splendid

Past.  By Stuart Berg Flexner. (Simon & Schuster. $13.95.) A large, well-indexed
book with photographs, drawings and advertisements showing how society changed
old words and created new ones.

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL.  By John le Carre. (Bantam. $3.95.) In a thriller with
a strong moral focus, an English actress and an Israeli intelligence officer
become intricately involved with Palestinian terrorists.



A MAN AND TWO WOMEN.(Simon & Schuster. $8.95.) By Doris Lessing. Short stories,
set in England and South Africa, on sexual and romantic involvements.



THE MEDIA MONOPOLY.  By Ben H. Bagdikian. (Beacon. $8.95.) About the 50
corporations that own most daily newspapers, magazines, radio and television
stations, book companies and movie studios.



THE MOONFLOWER VINE.  By Jetta Carleton. (Bantam. $3.95.) A 1962 novel about a
Missouri farm family whose women characters are conspicuously feminine -
realized from the inside out, through a woman's eyes.



A MOVING TARGET.  By William Golding. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $7.95.) A
nonfiction collection by the 1983 Nobel Prize winner in Literature that includes
notable pieces on writing novels.



MURDER FOR PLEASURE: The Life and Times

of the Detective Story.  By Howard Haycraft. (Carroll & Graf. $10.95.) The first
American historical analysis of detective stories and rules of the genre.



NEGRO: An Anthology.  Edited by Nancy Cunard. (Ungar. $19.95.) This 1934 work
attempted to cover practically every aspect of black life - history, the arts,
law, racial justice and education.



NOTES OF A NATIVE SON.  By James Baldwin. (Beacon. $6.95.) His first book of
essays - on Harlem, the protest novel, the black press and the movie ''Carmen
Jones'' - revealed James Baldwin's mastery of writing.



THE OXFORD-DUDEN PICTORIAL ENGLISH

DICTIONARY.  (Oxford. $12.95.) Some 28,000 illustrations and 820 pages in this
show-and-tell dictionary that gives the names of things and their constituent
parts.



THE OXFORD SHAKESPEARE.  Principal editor, Stanley Wells. (Oxford.) The first
five titles in a project to update Shakespearean scholarship connected with the
plays: ''The Taming of the Shrew,'' ''Julius Caesar,'' ''Henry V,'' ''Titus
Andronicus'' and ''Troilus and Cressida.'' (''Titus Andronicus,'' $7.95; the
rest, $6.95 each.)



OUR HOUSE IN THE LAST WORLD.  By Oscar Hijuelos. (Washington Square. $3.95.) A
virtuoso piece of fiction about the members of a Cuban family that emigrated to
New York in 1944, their confusion and how their younger son sorts it all out.



PECKINPAH: A Portrait in Montage.  By Garner Simmons. (University of Texas.
$8.95.) A biographical study of Sam Peckinpah, the director of westerns like
''The Wild Bunch'' and ''Ride the High Country,'' whose individualistic style on
the screen and off has both helped and harmed his career.



PRAISESONG FOR THE WIDOW.  By Paule Marshall. (Dutton/Obelisk. $6.95.) A moving
novel about the stages of a black woman's journey toward understanding her true
self.



PRIZE STORIES 1984: The O. Henry Awards.

 Edited by William Abrahams. (Doubleday. $8.95.) The 64th annual collection
includes 20 stories.



RATNER'S STAR.  By Don DeLillo. (Vintage. $7.95.) A satirical work by an author
who is smart, observant, fluent, a brilliant mimic and an ingenious architect of
storytelling.



READ ALL ABOUT IT! The Collected Adventures

of a Maverick Reporter.  By Sidney Zion. (Berkley. $9.95.) Articles on the
Pentagon Papers, Supreme Court politics, the Middle East, sports and music, by a
United States prosecutor turned reporter.



THE RANDOM HOUSE BOOK OF TWENTIETH

CENTURY FRENCH POETRY: With Translations

by American and British Poets.  Edited by Paul Auster. (Vintage. $11.95.) Some
50 French poets rendered into English by American and English poets. A bilingual
edition.



THE ROSENBERG FILE: A Search for the Truth.  By Ronald Radosh and Joyce Milton.
(Vintage. $8.95.) An examination of the trial of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg who
were executed in 1953 for conspiracy to commit espionage.



SHIP OF FOOLS.  By Katherine Anne Porter. (Atlantic/Little, Brown. $7.95.) The
short-story writer's only full-length novel, based on a 15th-century allegory of
good and evil.



THE SOCIAL TRANSFORMATION OF AMER

ICAN MEDICINE.  By Paul Starr. (Basic Books. $11.95.) A Pulitzer Prize-winning
description of the evolution of America's health care system and how doctors
took control of it.



THE SOUND OF THE CITY: The Rise of Rock and

Roll.  By Charles Gillett. (Pantheon. $7.95.) A richly detailed history of the
changes in rock-and-roll from rhythm and blues to British rock.



TERRA NOSTRA. By Carlos Fuentes. Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $13.50.) A major novel by the Mexican writer that mingles epic,
history and vision.





 THE TWENTIETH CENTURY: A People's Histo



ry.  By Howard Zinn. (Harper & Row. $5.95.) The distinctive experiences of
women, Indians, blacks, workers and others traditionally neglected by historical
scholarhsip.



TWO SERIOUS LADIES.  By Jane Bowles. (Dutton, $7.95.) The story of the decline
into debauchery of two staid women written by a writer's writer with an
underground reputation.



THE UNPOSSESSED.  By Tess Slesinger. (Feminist Press. $8.95.) An outstanding
novel of the 1930's that pictured Great Depression radical chic and the habitues
of New York's literary parties.



TO ABSENT FRIENDS FROM RED SMITH.

 (NAL/ Plume. $8.95.) A collection of columns and essays, written between 1946
and 1981 by the late New York Times sports columnist, in The Times and
elsewhere.



WE LOVE GLENDA SO MUCH and A CHANGE OF

LIGHT.  By Julio Cortazar. Translated by Gregory Rabassa. (Aventura/Vintage.
$8.95.) Two short story collections now in a single volume conveying
triumphantly the rich language that has become the signature of Latin American
writers.



WHO WAS WHO IN THE GREEK WORLD: 776

B.C.-30 B.C., and WHO WAS WHO IN THE ROMAN

WORLD.  Edited By Diana Bower. (Pocket Books. $8.95 each.) Lucid, brief and
accurate entries bringing to life the people who shaped Western civilization
from the eighth century B.C. to A.D. 476 and the collapse of Rome.



WINTER'S TALE.  By Mark Helprin. (Pocket Books. $4.50.) A novel that pursues
nourishing truths through its focus on a series of heroic lives, principally
that of Peter Lake - an orphan, burglar, lover, idealist and first-class
mechanic.



THE WITNESS OF POETRY.  By Czeslaw Milosz. (Harvard University. $3.95.) A
brooding essay by the 1980 Nobel Prize-winning Polish poet on the division
between Eastern European and Western poets.





 WORKING: People Talk About What They Do All

Day and How They Feel About What They Do.  By Studs Terkel. (Pantheon. $7.95.)
The recorded comments of more than 100 men and women bore into what is deepest
and most intimate in so many people's lives - work, the individual's firmest
connection with reality.



A WORLD OF STRANGERS.  By Nadine Gordimer. (Penguin. $6.95.) An ''intensely
alive'' novel in which an Englishman moves to South Africa and threads his way
through the white and black worlds of Johannesburg.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

EDITOR'S CHOICE: THE BEST BOOKS OF 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2403 words


Fifteen books have been chosen by the editors of The Book Review as the best of
1984 - six fiction, nine not. The fact that three of the six chosen as the best
fiction were written by a South African, a Peruvian and a Czechoslovak emigre
living in Paris makes a point. The editors agreed that the list of American (or,
indeed, English) fiction from which nominees could be drawn was not as strong as
the list of obvious nominees from works by foreign authors that were published
this year in the United States.

Of the American fiction chosen, two books are collections of stories, both by
well-established authors, one of them a Nobel Prize winner in literature, and a
third is a first novel by an author previously best known as a short-story
writer. Two other first novels - Frederick Barthelme's ''Second Marriage'' and
Jay McInerney's ''Bright Lights, Big City'' - narrowly missed making the list.

Books on this year's nonfiction list elude categories. It is possible to say
there are four biographies, two histories (coincidentally, both by Yale
historians), a two- volume set of literary criticism and two books on
international affairs by journalists. But two of the biographies are also
autobiographical, and one of those can be read as searing commentary on American
justice and society, while a third biography is also a probing critical essay.
Both journalists' books can be read as history and will certainly contribute to
more scholarly histories in the future, and the two volumes on Japanese
literature constitute a cultural history of Japan for 100 years.

As usual, the descriptions of the books on this 17th annual list of the year's
best were drawn from reviews that have appeared in these pages since the
previous Christmas issue. On page 22 another list begins, of notable books of
the year. None of the 15 best books of the year are included in that list.

THE BOURGEOIS EXPERIENCE Victoria to Freud.  Volume One: Education of the
Senses.  By Peter Gay.  Oxford University Press.

In the first of what Peter Gay promises will be at least five volumes of
''history informed by psychoanalysis,'' facades are ripped away from the proper
homes of the Victorian middle class to reveal fascinating sexual lives upstairs
and down. People who were skeptical about Victorian virtue right along might
have suspected all this, but Mr. Gay has ransacked diaries, letters, court
files, medical logs, and books and read between the lines to find evidence for
this entertaining and illuminating history. He sometimes expresses wonder at how
little our forebears knew about sex as they started out in life, but he makes a
powerful case that they learned quickly how to get in on the action.

BROTHERS AND KEEPERS By John Edgar Wideman.  Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

John Edgar Wideman is a former Rhodes Scholar, a teacher of literature and the
author of six novels. His brother, Robert, 10 years younger, is in a
Pennsylvania prison serving a life sentence for murder. In this harrowing and
eloquent book, the older brother sets out to explore the poor black environment
of their youth to find how they turned out so different. His search leads him to
the discovery of what an extraordinarily perceptive man his younger brother has
become; the speech and presence of Robert Wideman in this book are
unforgettable. But it also leads the author to rediscover the depths of racial
prejudice and the ways society has of degrading and finally forgetting those it
finds troublesome. Robert Wideman emerges as a man who knows who he is, but his
older brother is not sure of himself now, and his doubts give rise to brooding,
brilliant monologues about his own motives and feelings.

DAWN TO THE WEST Japanese Literature in the Modern Era.  By Donald Keene.  Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.

Donald Keene, the Columbia University expert on Japanese literature, is no
stranger in Japan. These two massive volumes, essays on every aspect of Japanese
writing since 1868, were translated into Japanese and published in Tokyo for
scholars and students at the same time they appeared here. There is no
comparable one-man treatment of Japanese literature in any language. Mr. Keene
has mastered Japanese literary culture from inside and delivered it up in
concrete, detailed accounts of a huge array of novels, stories, poetry, drama
and criticism, all done in an easy style and his own independent voice.
Eventually he will cover all of Japanese literature.

DEADLY GAMBITS The Reagan Administration and the Stalemate in Nuclear Arms
Control.  By Strobe Talbott.  Alfred A. Knopf.

The goal of arms-control negotiators in the Reagan Administration may not be
reduction in nuclear weapons or even American nuclear superiority over the
Soviet Union. From the account of the inside maneuvering over arms control given
by Strobe Talbott, the biggest prize in the exhausting infighting among
Government agencies, principally the State and Defense Departments, seems to be
simply Presidential preference for one side or the other. Behind his vivid
presentation of the backbiting, backstabbing world of Washington politics, there
is a somber lesson about what happens to nuclear arms control and foreign policy
when the interest of the President is concentrated not on the substance of the
matter but on what sounds good to Americans.

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES By Saul Bellow.  Harper & Row.

They are not precisely confessional, but the five recent stories in this
collection are filled with more real people than anything else the Nobel Prize
winner has written. There is rich laughter here and many sympathetic characters.
Saul Bellow's own voice is clearly heard in most of them; he has leveled the
maze and laid out all the clues to his lifetime enterprise, and a very
intellectual project it is. But if it is tempting to read the stories as the
closest we are likely to get to an autobiography from Bellow - an assortment of
friends and relatives of the author from more than 60 years are transformed into
fictional characters - that temptation should be given into carefully. For the
ideas in the stories really add up to a reprise of Western intellectual
civilization.

IN HER OWN RIGHT The Life of Elizabeth Cady Stanton.  By Elisabeth Griffith.

This year's Presidential campaign, with Representative Geraldine Ferraro on a
national ticket, would have warmed Elizabeth Cady Stanton's heart. Up to a
point. Stanton undoubtedly would have felt the woman should have been at the top
of the ticket, not second on it. In popular history and belief, Susan B. Anthony
has long been seen as the principal 19th-century women's leader. But Elisabeth
Griffith's well-rounded biography of Stanton makes a compelling case that she
was at least the equal of Anthony and in most respects a good deal more radical.
Her vigor, warmth and cantankerous humor come out strongly in this biography,
and the battles she fought are fought again in a new and sympathetic light.

LIFE & TIMES OF MICHAEL K By J. M. Coetzee.  Viking.

It is South Africa, certainly. Michael K, who knows only what is emotional and
obvious and has no capacity for abstractions or philosophy, is a victim of a
cruel society, certainly. The official country is at war with a large part of
its own people, certainly. Yet these certainties, added up, make up but a small
part of the great story that emerges from J. M. Coetzee's short tale, in which
small moral disclosures pile up from page to page until the book becomes an
overwhelming indictment of the self-deceptions of human stupidity. Michael K is
a man whose only sustenance, ''the bread of freedom,'' in the end cannot be
found. As in his earlier ''Waiting for the Barbarians,'' Mr. Coetzee proves
himself an absolute master of moral fiction.

LIVES OF THE POETS Six Stories and a Novella.  By E. L. Doctorow.  Random House.

In E. L. Doctorow's sixth and subtlest work of fiction, half a dozen short
stories are drawn together by a final novella that reveals the life and soul of
the (fictional) writer of the stories and a great deal about the predicaments of
modern man. In the light of the novella, passion and idealism surprisingly
appear in the writer, whose own experiences among the culturati of New York echo
those of the characters he has created in the stories. The many ironies created
by Mr. Doctorow's reflexive method cut through laughter, grief, outrage and
cynicism and lay open the heart of a man hungering for seriousness in a world
that feeds mostly on cruelty and frivolity.

MACHINE DREAMS By Jayne Anne Phillips.  Seymour Lawrence/E. P. Dutton.

The machine dreams are nightmares that pass from father to son and then, after
both are dead, to daughter in this complex first novel in which family legends
rise to the level of myths. The machines belong mainly to wars, the one the
father survived and the one the son did not, but they are also the kinds of
vehicles a deus ex machina rides. In this case, the reference is ironic, since
the god never rescues the actors from fate. Their concerns are familiar, and the
novel's thrilling shocks arise from ordinary moments that suddenly burst with
deep meaning we had not anticipated.

THE MEMORY PALACE OF MATTEO RICCI By Jonathan Spence.Viking.

How does Jonathan Spence do it? A few years ago in ''The Gate of Heavenly
Peace,'' he appeared to write about a handful of Chinese writers and delivered a
whole revolution into his readers' imaginations. This time he builds on a little
treatise on mnemonic arts written by a l6th-century Jesuit missionary and
conjures up Ming-dynasty China and Europe during the Counter-Reformation. Here
are Matteo Ricci, who went to China on his mission just 400 years ago, and the
Emperor Wanli, along with flights of Oriental bureaucrats, scholars and artists
and cohorts of cardinals, Vatican bureaucrats and European thinkers - all come
robustly to life. They have never looked better. Mr. Spence is also a fine
teacher; one leaves this crowd with more than a suspicion that in 400 years of
intellectual and technological progress, we may have traded a richness of mind
and memory for cold, spare rationalism.

THE QUALITY OF MERCY Cambodia, Holocaust and Modern Conscience.  By William
Shawcross.  Simon & Schuster.

From 1978 to 1980 Cambodia was the center stage of human horror, as the Khmer
Rouge warred against their former allies, the Communists of Vietnam. Press
reports told of the appalling starvation of the Cambodians. The British
journalist William Shawcross looks closely at how people and international
agencies responded to the crisis. Almost everyone but the International
Committee of the Red Cross comes out as self-aggrandizing, misguided or
incompetent in this telling, moving account. But what brought such a large world
response to the crisis in the first place? In chapters that are bound to remain
controversial for many years, Mr. Shawcross argues that, in just the right
circumstances at just the right time, the world was suddenly reminded of the
Holocaust of the Jews in Europe under the Nazis, and people responded as much to
their memories as to what they knew of Cambodia.

THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING By Milan Kundera.  Harper & Row.

With cunning, wit and elegiac sadness, Milan Kundera, the celebrated
Czechoslovak emigre writer, expresses the trap the world has become in this
relentless novel about four people who are born of images in Mr. Kundera's mind
- a doctor and his dedicated wife and a frivolous, seductive woman painter and
her good, patient lover. The stories of this quartet, all of whom die or fade
from the book, are engrossing enough. But this writer's real business is to find
images for the disastrous history of his country in his lifetime. He uses the
four pitilessly, setting each pair against the other as opposites in every way,
to describe a world in which choice is exhausted and people simply cannot find a
way to express their humanity.

WALT WHITMAN The Making of the Poet.  By Paul Zweig.  Basic Books.

Paul Zweig, who died earlier this year, has made the first successful attempt to
show the origins of ''Leaves of Grass'' and the poet who suddenly appeared in
that 1855 volume and immediately became the ancestor of countless American
voices. Using every scrap Whitman left, the testimony of hundreds of
contemporaries, and newspapers and other publications of the age, Zweig is able
to trace the growth of Whitman's conviction that he had a calling to become the
orator of the American people. He recreates a whole culture and then
convincingly presents the absorption of that culture into one fascinating,
powerful poet.

THE WAR OF THE END OF THE WORLD By Mario Vargas Llosa.  Farrar, Straus & Giroux.

Revolution is not all it is cracked up to be. Mario Vargas Llosa's novel, based
on a real millenarian uprising in northern Brazil in the 19th century, is such a
powerful tale of adventure, peopled by such resplendent and horrifying
characters, that it needs no moral - but it is hard to avoid that one. The
revolutionary sect he creates seems to spring naturally from the basic tenets of
Christianity and humanity's shared longing for freedom, but it becomes the enemy
of order and the church, and it consumes itself. The passionate eloquence of the
Peruvian novelist drives his story through history and across the world, but his
own faith in reason is as clear as his vision of the rarity of individual
freedom in a world threatened by the sleep of moral imagination.

WITH A DAUGHTER'S EYE A Memoir of Margaret Mead and Gregory Bateson.  By Mary
Catherine Bateson.  William Morrow & Company.

There is no biography quite like this one of Margaret Mead by her daughter.
First, Mead, who had hundreds of close personal friends and did not want any of
them to share that friendship with one another, is difficult to nail down. Also,
Miss Bateson spends a good deal of her vivid narrative on her father, Gregory
Bateson, like Mead and Miss Bateson herself a noted anthropologist, so her book
is really about her relationships with two people. The result is not only a
biography of Mead and Bateson but a warm story of growing up with two brilliant
eccentrics and coming out of the experience a wise and strong person. The book
is unique in that the author is as memorable in it as its twin subjects.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:

The publisher of ''In Her Own Right: The Life of Elizabeth Cady Stanton'' by
Elisabeth Griffith was omitted from The Book Review's list of the best books of
1984 (Dec. 2).  It is Oxford University Press.

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 2, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

NOTABLE BOOKS OF THE YEAR

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 9184 words


This list has been selected from titles reviewed since the Christmas Issue of
December 1983. It only suggests high points in the main fields of reader
interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings. Quoted
comments are from The Book Review.

Autobiography and Biography

THE AMERICAN POPE: The Life and Times of Francis Cardinal Spellman.  By John
Cooney. (Times Books. $19.95.) ''A gossipy, iconoclastic and absorbing
biography'' of the controversial prelate.

AUDEN IN LOVE.  By Dorothy J. Farnan. (Simon & Schuster. $17.95.) The story of
the poet's ''marriage'' to Chester Kallman, which ''vividly evokes the world of
bohemian New York in the 1940's.''

AUSTIN AND MABEL: The Amherst Affair & Love Letters of Austin Dickinson and
Mabel Loomis Todd.  Edited by Polly Longsworth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$24.95.) Annotated correspondence recording a long love affair between Emily
Dickinson's married brother and the wife of one of the Dickinsons' neighbors.

BEGIN: The Haunted Prophet.  By Eric Silver. (Random House. $17.95.) A balanced
life of the Polish refugee from the Nazis who joined one of the most radical
Zionist organizations in Palestine and became its most hunted operator, and who
eventually rose through Israeli politics to become the sixth - and very
controversial - prime minister of his nation.

BLACK APOLLO OF SCIENCE: The Life of Ernest

Everett Just.  By Kenneth R. Manning (Oxford. $29.95.) This biography of Ernest
Everett Just (1883-1941) stresses the ''interplay of Just's genius and dreams
with a racist but dynamic society.''

CHILDHOOD.  By Nathalie Sarraute. (George Braziller. $14.95.) Written as
Nathalie Sarraute entered her 80's, these ''beautifully paced'' vignettes
recount her early years before World War I.

COPLAND: 1900 Through 1942.  By Aaron Copland and Vivian Perlis. (Marek/St.
Martin's. $24.95.) The first volume of the autobiography of the composer Leonard
Bernstein called ''the best we've got, you know.''

DEEP SONG: The Dance Story of Martha Graham. By Ernestine Stodelle. (Schirmer
Books/Macmillan. $25.95.) Chronicling ''Miss Graham's 'creative achievement'
rather than her life story,'' the author ''explains how an entire new art form -
modern dance - became identified with its dominant pioneering figure.''

DIANE ARBUS.  By Patricia Bosworth. (Knopf. $17.95.) ''Diligent reporting,
enhanced by a good deal of insight into Arbus's fragile psyche, makes this a
very readable'' biography of the photographer, who commited suicide in 1971.

DISCLOSING THE PAST.  By Mary Leakey. (Doubleday. $15.95.) This autobiography of
the respected paleoanthropologist ''is a candid look back at a life of science''
which is ''all the more welcome for the author's accustomed reticence.''

DOS PASSOS . By Virginia Spence Carr. (Doubleday. $24.95) A ''stylishly written,
fact-crammed book'' tracing the sources of Dos Passos's pessimism and his
conversion to conservatism in his later years.

DOSTOEVSKY: The Years of Ordeal 1850-1859.  By Joseph Frank. (Princeton. $25.)
Drawing on previously neglected Russian sources, ''Mr. Frank offers fresh
materials about Dostoevsky's intellectual and literary development'' in the
decade of his imprisonment and exile in Siberia.

DUSE.  By William Weaver. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $19.95.) The life and
times of ''the first great modern actress,'' whose acting was the source of the
Stanislavsky System and a contrast to the theatrical artifice of her
contemporary, Sarah Bernhardt.

D. W. GRIFFITH: An American Life.  By Richard Schickel. (Simon & Schuster.
$24.95.) ''A definitive biography'' of the pioneer film maker which ''presents
Griffith with all his faults. Yet the man who emerges wins our sympathy and
compassion.''

EISENHOWER. Volume Two. The President.  By Stephen E. Ambrose. (Simon &
Schuster. $24.95.) Covering the years from 1953 to 1961, this volume establishes
Eisenhower as ''a dedicated peace maker'' and ''a good man to depend on in a
crisis.''

ENCOUNTERS WITH VERDI.  Edited by Marcello Conati. Translated by Richard Stokes.
(Cornell. $25.) ''An extraordinary anthology of reminiscences (about the
composer) by . . . journalists, musicians, impresarios or chance
acquaintances.''

FINDING THE CENTER: Two Narratives.  By V. S. Naipaul. (Knopf. $13.95.) Essays -
in autobiography and about a visit to the Ivory Coast - by a man who has
''remained as open-hearted as any writer to the actual sight of poverty, of
stunted hopes and blighted opportunities.''

FROST: A Literary Life Reconsidered.By William H. Pritchard. (Oxford. $15.95.)
''A compact, sympathetic account of Frost's life as a poet, one that puts the
biographical emphasis where it belongs, on Frost's tenacious and powerful art.''
%
GALINA: A Russian Story.  By Galina Vishnevskaya. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
$19.95.) Miss Vishnevskaya, the soprano, gives us a ''candid, often devastating
depiction of cultural life in postwar Russia.''

H. G. WELLS: Aspects of a Life.  By Anthony West. (Random House. $22.95.) A
''highly personal, curiously constructed'' book by the son Wells had with
Rebecca West, who recreates his parents' origins and youth but betrays a
profound grievance against his mother in this ''powerful if perverse document.''


HOME BEFORE DARK.  By Susan Cheever. (Houghton Mifflin. $15.95.) John Cheever's
daughter has written an ''intimate, deeply felt and often harrowing memoir'' of
her father.

AN INTERRUPTED LIFE: The Diaries of Etty Hillesum, 1941-1943.  Introduced by J.
G. Gaarlandt. Translated by Arno Pomerans. (Pantheon. $12.95.) Written in
Holland between 1941 and 1943 by a victim of the Nazis, these diaries ''offer a
story of spiritual growth (that) is in all ways unique. . . . It disturbs our
notions of political resistance and physical survival.''

INTIMATE MEMOIRS: Including Marie-Jo's Book.  By Georges Simenon. Translated by
Harold J. Salemson. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $22.95.) Revealing, sometimes
painful reminiscences of the French author of 220 novels and romancer of almost
as many women.

JAMES AGEE.  By Laurence Bergreen. (Dutton, $20.) A well-researched but
controversial biography of the Southern poet, critic and script writer who
became a cult figure. The author ''vaguely'' subscribes to the idea of Agee as a
''doomed saint'' and sees his fiction as ''virtual autobiography.''

JED HARRIS: The Curse of Genius.  By Martin Gottfried. (Little, Brown. $19.95.)
''The first serious biography'' of the difficult and troubled ''maverick''
Broadway producer and director whose name is known for such outstanding
productions as ''The Front Page'' and ''Our Town.''

JOSEPHINE HERBST.  By Elinor Langer. (Atlantic/Little Brown, $19.95.) This
''dramatically revealing biography'' of the American novelist who in the 1930's
was ranked with Hemingway and Dos Passos gives new, startling views of Herbst
and her contemporaries.

THE KENNEDYS: An American Dream.By Peter Collier and David Horowitz. (Summit.
$20.95.) A controversial ''full-faced family portrait'' that strips ''the layers
of myth from the Kennedy family history.''

THE LEDGE BETWEEN THE STREAMS.By Ved Mehta. (Norton. $17.50.) In another volume
of his continuing autobiography, Ved Mehta, ''through the realities of an
unusual little boy and his family,'' recreates the meaning of the summer of 1947
when the Indian subcontinent was divided into India and Pakistan.

THE LETTERS OF JEAN RHYS.  Edited by Francis Wyndham and Diana Melly. (Viking.
$22.50.) Letters ''that register admirably, in all its exhaustion and all its
nobility, the long line of slowly clarifying thought that justifies a writer's
life.''

LIFE AND DEATH ON 10 WEST.  By Eric Lax. (Times Books. $14.95.) The story of one
woman's struggle against leukemia, told ''with considerable power and
compassion,'' and accurately conveying ''the medical science involved.''

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF COTTON MATHER.  By Kenneth Silverman. (Harper & Row.
$29.95.) The first comprehensive biography of ''the archetypal Puritan'' divine,
this ''remarkable'' book will tell the reader ''all he need know'' about the
events and personalities in it ''without interrupting the flow'' of the
narrative.

LOVE, ANARCHY, AND EMMA GOLDMAN.  By Candace Falk. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
$25.) This biography of the anarchist and advocate of free love leaves an
impression ''of a courageous, if difficult, woman'' who wrote, ''I have no right
to speak of Freedom when I myself have become an abject slave in my love.''

MATISSE.  By Pierre Schneider. Translated by Michael Taylor and Bridget Strevens
Romer. (Rizzoli. $95.) This book ''tells us more about Matisse the man'' than
any other, and more about his work, plus a great deal about the world, history,
philosophy and culture.

MAYOR.  By Edward I. Koch with William Rauch. (Simon & Schuster. $17.95.) An
entertaining, outspoken best seller by New York City's Mayor on local and
national politicians and his own record.

MRS. PAT: The Life and Letters of Mrs. Patrick Campbell.  By Margot Peters.
(Knopf. $22.95.) A solid biography of the famous and flamboyant English actress
who enjoyed her greatest success as the most celebrated Eliza in Shaw's
''Pygmalion.''

A NIGHTMARE OF REASON: A Life of Franz Kafka.  By Ernst Pawel. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $25.50.) A ''superlative'' biography that refuses to ''reduce the
fiction (of Kafka) to the life.''

NO BELLS ON SUNDAY: The Rachel Roberts Journals.  Edited and with a documentary
biography by Alexander Walker. (Harper & Row. $16.50.) For three years before
her death by suicide, the award-winning actress kept a secret journal, a ''sad
book from which are missing her charm, effervescence and humor.''

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS.  By Eudora Welty. (Harvard. $10.) An account of the
author's earliest years in Mississippi, when she remembers listening for stories
(different from listening to them).

PAULA MODERSOHN-BECKER: The Letters and Journals.  Edited by G"unter Busch and
Liselotte von Reinken. (Taplinger. $29.95.) The papers of the German painter
(1876-1907) who at great personal cost tried to accommodate her life as a woman
with her art.



PETER HALL'S DIARIES: The Story of a Dramatic Battle.  Edited by John Goodwin.
(Harper & Row. $25.) The 1973-79 diaries of Sir Peter Hall, who succeeded
Laurence Olivier as head of Britain's National Theater, offer all the
traditional ingredients of drama - ''ambition, paranoia and hatred, intrigue and
betrayal, and a protagonist who, by his own confession, was driven to the brink
of madness by all the pressures.''

SLINGS AND ARROWS: Theater in My Life.By Robert Lewis. (Stein & Day. $18.95.)
This autobiography is a ''delightful, anecdotal theatrical memoir'' by the
well-known director.

SOLZHENITSYN.  By Michael Scammell. (Norton. $29.95.) This vast, well-written
book deals with ''war, revolution, prison camps, Khrushchev's literary politics
and Solzhenitsyn's eventual exile in the West.''

STENGEL: His Life and Times.  By Robert W. Creamer. (Simon & Schuster. $16.95.)
This ''excellent'' biography of the great Yankee manager ''makes us realize just
how much we miss him . . . throughout the world of sports and indeed in public
life generally.''

THE TRUE ADVENTURES OF JOHN STEINBECK, WRITER.  By Jackson L. Benson. (Viking.
$35.) A biography that chronicles ''in total detail and accessible, solid prose
the life and times of a writer who, as Mr. Benson emphasizes, never (until the
end) lost faith in writing as his all-compelling calling.''

THE TRUTH THAT KILLED.  By Georgi Markov. Translated by Liliana Brisby. (Ticknor
& Fields, $15.95.) This ''informative and penetrating'' memoir, by a Bulgarian
writer who defected to England and was murdered in 1978, stresses the ''utter
emptiness of the Communist faith.''

AN UNCOMMON MAN: The Triumph of Herbert Hoover.  By Richard Norton Smith. (Simon
& Schuster. $22.95.) ''An uncommonly objective biography'' that reveals Hoover
as ''a man of principle'' whose inflexibility was his undoing.

A VERY PRIVATE EYE: An Autobiography in Diaries and Letters.  By Barbara Pym.
Edited by Hazel Holt and Hilary Pym. (Dutton. $19.95.) A subtle autobiographical
composite in which Pym, ''one of the most restrained of modern English
novelists,'' reveals an ''emotionally unrestrained'' side of her personality.

WAR IN VAL D'ORCIA 1943- 44: A Diary.  By Iris Origo. (Godine. Cloth. $14.95.
Paper. $8.95.) This ''look into the daily life of noncombatant villagers'' in
Italy documents a ''frequently overlooked'' aspect of World War II.

WHAT'S TO BECOME OF THE BOY? Or, Something to Do With Books.  By Heinrich B"oll.
(Knopf. $11.95.) A ''charming memoir'' by the distinguished German writer of his
years in secondary school from 1933 to 1937.

WINSTON S. CHURCHILL: Volume Six. Finest Hour 1939- 1941.  By Martin Gilbert.
(Houghton Mifflin. $40.) The Oxford historian Martin Gilbert continues the
monumental biography begun by Churchill's son Randolph. This is the most
exciting volume to date.

 Children's Books

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK.  By Dr. Seuss. (Random House. $6.95.) (Ages 4 and up.) A
bleak picture and verse vision of a mounting battle between the Yooks and the
Zooks that resembles the international arms race.

DOWNTOWN.  By Norma Fox Mazer. (William Morrow. Cloth, $10. Avon/Flare. Paper,
$2.50.) (Ages 12 and up.) Pete Greenwood's left-wing parents went underground,
and he has been raised by his uncle. Now his mother turns herself in. A
sympathetic novel.

I WALK AND READ.  By Tana Hoban. (Greenwillow. $10.50.) (Ages 3 to 5.) A
stunning book of color photography showing language in urban situations - key
words like WALK, WET PAINT, PHONE.

THE IRON LION.  By Peter Dickinson. Illustrated by Pauline Baynes.
(Bedrick/Blackie. $10.95.) (Age 7 to 12.) A lighthearted fable about an
impoverished prince, Mustapha, who woos the emperor's daughter, Yasmin. The
witty illustrations are a cross between medieval illumination and Persian
miniatures.

JONAH AND THE GREAT FISH.  Written and illustrated by Warwick Hutton. (Atheneum.
$12.95.) (Ages 4 to 7.) A haunting retelling of the story of Jonah with a spare
text and 15 watercolor illustrations of ''startling resonance, texture and
conviction.''

THE MOVES MAKE THE MAN.  By Bruce Brooks. (Harper & Row. $13.50.) (Ages 12 and
up.) A fine first novel, featuring Jerome Foxworthy, a perceptive black
adolescent living in North Carolina in the 1950's.

ONE-EYED CAT.  By Paula Fox. (Bradbury Press. $11.95) (Ages 10 and up.) A fine
novel about an introspective 11-year- old boy and the festering of a lie.

RAMONA FOREVER.By Beverly Cleary. Illustrated by Alan Tiegreen. (Morrow. $9.25.)
(Ages 8 to 12.) In this, the seventh book about her plausible, gently comic
adventures, Ramona Quimby, now 9 years old, is growing up.

STORIES FOR CHILDREN. By Isaac Bashevis Singer. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$13.95.) (Ages 8 to 12.) A collection of stories, many about the relations
between innocence and experience, by the Nobel Prize winner.

WHERE THE RIVER BEGINS.  Written and illustrated by Thomas Locker. (Dial Books.
$15.) (Ages 5 and up.) Two boys and their grandfather follow a river from its
mouth to its source in a series of timeless and evocative paintings in the style
of the Hudson River school.

Crime

ALWAYS A BODY TO TRADE.  By K. C. Constantine. (Godine. $12.95.) An innocent new
mayor interferes with Mario Balzic, the no-nonsense police chief of K. C.
Constantine's fictional coal town of Rockport, Pa.

BLUNT DARTS.  By J. F. Healy. (Walker, $12.95.) John Francis Cuddy, Boston
private eye and man's man, looks for an uncooperative judge's missing son. Good
writing and impeccable plotting transcend the cliches in one of the best first
mysteries of 1984.

COOL RUNNINGS.  By Richard Hoyt. (Viking, $15.95.) A surrealistic melange that
does for espionage and terrorism what Joseph Heller's ''Catch-22'' did for war.
This is a book that defies any category, but it is brilliant, sensitive and
altogether unusual.

FIREFLY GADROON.  By Jonathan Gash. (St. Martin's, $11.95.) The eighth adventure
of Lovejoy, the seedy British antique dealer. A friend is murdered, and Lovejoy
metes out his own kind of justice. Along the way, the reader will learn arcane
things about antiques.

METZGER'S DOG.  By Thomas Perry. (Scribners. $14.95.) The very funny, sharply
written story of Chinese Gordon. Stealing $1 million worth of cocaine from a
university laboratory, he also walks off with some C.I.A. information.

STRIKE THREE YOU'RE DEAD.  By R. D. Rosen. (Walker, $12.50.) Murder takes place
in the locker room of a major league baseball club. A veteran outfielder puts
things together, almost getting killed in a hair- raising denouement. This is a
superb first novel.

TEXAS STATION.  By Christopher Leach. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.) An
evangelist who wants a wooden cross to carry and the carpenter of a small Texas
town join investigative forces in a virtuoso work with religious implications.

 Current Affairs & Social Comment

ABORTION AND THE POLITICS OF MOTHERHOOD.  By Kristin Luker. (California.
$14.95.) A ''lucid, fair-minded and convincing'' analysis of the abortion debate
by a sociologist who traces its origins in the medical community and explores
the differences between the two classes of women now mainly ranged on opposite
sides.

CITIES AND THE WEALTH OF NATIONS: Principles of Economic Life.  By Jane Jacobs.
(Random House. $17.95.) A ''learned, iconoclastic and exciting study'' arguing
that national policies everywhere distort the growth of cities and that
''nation- states, whatever their ideology, are incompetent vehicles for creating
wealth or distributing it fairly.''

ENDLESS WAR: How We Got Involved in Central America - and What Can Be Done.  By
James Chace. (Vintage Books. $3.95.) ''A commendably concise, intelligent and
realistic essay . . . on past, present and future (United States) policy toward
Central America.''

FEMININITY.  By Susan Brownmiller. (Linden/ Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) In this
''illuminating and informative'' book, the author of ''Against Our Will'' traces
''the understanding of gender difference to its origins in childhood.''

THE FILE.  By Penn Kimball. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.) Penn Kimball's
chance discovery that he was considered ''a definite security risk'' prompted
this ''eloquent and troubling book'' about Governmental security checks and
their effect on the lives and careers of loyal citizens.

''THE GOOD WAR'': An Oral History of World War Two.  By Studs Terkel. (Pantheon.
$19.95.) The author has captured ''an especially broad and impressive chorus of
voices on his tape recorder'' and produced ''a portrait of a national experience
drawn in the words of the men and women who lived it.''

HOLLYWOOD DYNASTIES.  By Stephen Farber and Marc Green. (Delilah/Putnam.
$16.95.) The lives and loves of the Mayers, Selznicks, and others, illuminating
the disparity between their private lives and the celluloid worlds they created.


IN THE FREUD ARCHIVES.  By Janet Malcolm. (Knopf. $11.95.) An exuberant and
insightful account of the battle between Freudian traditionalists and two
eccentric outriders in the world of psychoanalysis over access to and control of
the Freud archives.

MISS MANNERS' GUIDE TO REARING PERFECT CHILDREN.  By Judith Martin. (Atheneum.
$19.95.) With ''arch wit,'' Judith Martin offers ''sustained defense of
etiquette as both pragmatic and honorable.''

MODERN MEAT.  By Orville Schell. (Random House. $17.95.) This account of the
production of the meat we eat is ''a pleasure to read, a model of the
journalist's craft.''

THE NAKED PUBLIC SQUARE: Religion and Democracy in America.  By Richard John
Neuhaus. (Eerdmans. $16.95.) A cogent discourse on the emergence of the ''new
Christian right'' by a Lutheran pastor, who was once a leftist activist and now
advocates putting God back in politics.

THE NEW AMERICAN POVERTY.  By Michael Harrington. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
$17.95.) This sequel to Mr. Harrington's seminal work, ''The Other America,'' is
a penetrating critique of the War on Poverty, which the earlier book inspired.

PAYBACK.  By Joe Klein. (Knopf. $17.95.) When the Iran hostages came home, a
Vietnam veteran went berserk, reportedly because he felt neglected. This is his
story, and that of four of his wartime buddies.

THE REIGN OF THE AYATOLLAHS: Iran and the Islamic Revolution.  By Shaul Bakhash.
(Basic. $18.95.) An account of ''one of the world's major revolutions'' which
tells us ''who did what to whom with what effect from the perspective of Iranian
domestic politics.''

RELIGION IN THE SECULAR CITY: Toward a Postmodern Theology.  By Harvey Cox.
(Simon & Schuster. $16.95.) The theologian who in ''The Secular City'' (1965)
saw the modern world as a vehicle of God's grace, now sees the resurgence of
traditional religions as a revolt against that world.

RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams.  By David K. Shipler. (Times Books.
$17.95.) This ''observant and beautifully written journalistic account'' of the
author's tour of duty in Moscow as correspondent for The New York Times focuses
on the widespread loss of hope and faith among Russians.

WEAPONS AND HOPE.  By Freeman Dyson. (Harper & Row. $17.95.) ''An excellent
layman's guide to the problems and concepts of nuclear deterrence (that) talks a
good deal of sense about that most misunderstood and complicated problem, 'arms
races,' '' written by a physicist.

Essays & Criticism

AN AMERICAN PROCESSION.  By Alfred Kazin. (Knopf. $18.95.) An assessment of
those authors between 1830 and 1930, from Emerson to F. Scott Fitzgerald, who
created the notion of American selfhood - ''individualism carried nearly to an
ultimate.''

BLACK WOMEN WRITERS (1950-1980): A Critical Evaluation.  Edited by Mari Evans.
(Anchor/Doubleday. $22.95.) ''A generous sampler'' of comments by two
generations of black women writers on their craft.

EDGAR ALLAN POE: ESSAYS AND REVIEWS.  Edited by G. R. Thompson. (Library of
America. $27.50.) Volume II of a comprehensive and authoritative edition of
Poe's works that includes a massive selection of the writer's influential
critical writings and other journalism not readily available until now.

ENGLISH POETRY 1900-1950: An Assessment.  By C. H. Sisson. (Carcanet. $21.) An
unorthodox personal survey that may annoy some because of its assessments but is
nevertheless ''quirky and interesting.''

EVE: The History of an Idea.  By John A. Phillips. (Harper & Row. $12.95.) A
historical study of the figure of Eve that ''interweaves the familiar and
archetypal with the bizarre and mysterious'' in an effort ''to convey both the
historical and spiritual truth'' of the ''mother of all living.''

HOME SWEET HOME: My Canadian Album.  By Mordecai Richler. (Knopf. $16.95.) In
this collection of occasional pieces Mordecai Richler shows he can be ''Canada's
Sinclair Lewis, guffawing with despairing scorn at the Babbittry and boosterism
of a new and uncertain society.''

THE LAND OF ULRO.  By Czeslaw Milosz. Translated by Louis Iribarne. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $17.95.) Personal essays by the Nobel Prize-winning poet that
leave ''a trail of clues about salient features of a complex personality.''

PARTNERS.  By Veronica Geng. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) There are 29 pieces in this
''intelligent, contemporary, witty'' collection by a humorous and ''devastating
witness to present- day mores.''

REQUIRED WRITING: Miscellaneous Pieces 1955-1982.  By Philip Larkin. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $9.95.) Reviews, lectures, essays and interviews by the
distinguished English poet on a wide variety of subjects from politics to Thomas
Hardy and American jazz.

WHERE NIGHTS ARE LONGEST: Travels by Car Through Western Russia.  By Colin
Thubron. (Random House. $16.95.) A ''provocative and absorbing'' account of a
two-and-a-half month automobile tour of the Soviet Union by a ''subtle and
humane'' writer who captures ''the fleeting words and gestures that define a
culture.''

 Fiction

ACQUAINTED WITH THE NIGHT: And Other Stories.  By Lynne Sharon Schwartz. (Harper
& Row. $13.95.) Urbane, sophisticated stories about loss and the elusiveness of
human relationships.

ALICE AT 80.  By David R. Slavitt. (Doubleday. $14.95.) Mixing fact with
fiction, this novel asks and attempts to answer the question, what role did the
erotic play in the friendship between the real Alice and Charles Lutwidge
Dodgson, who turned her into fiction?

THE BALLAD OF TYPHOID MARY.  By J. F. Federspiel. (Dutton. $12.95.) The Swiss
author's ironic re-creation of the life and times of Typhoid Mary (1854?-1938),
the immigrant cook who spread typhoid fever.

THE BEST OF MODERN HUMOR.  Edited by Mordecai Richler. (Knopf. $17.95.) ''The
most definitive-looking roundup of literary American humor'' since E. B. and
Katherine S. White's ''Subtreasury of American Humor,'' published in 1941.

BLOOD OF REQUITED LOVE.  By Manuel Puig. Translated by Jan L. Grayson.
(Aventura/ Vintage Books. $7.95) The novel's protagonist is ''a sad sack, an
object lesson in macho narcissism'' in the unexotic setting of suburban Rio.

BLOW YOUR HOUSE DOWN. By Pat Barker. (Putnam. $13.95.) A novel told from the
point of view of ''victims and potential victims.'' Mrs. Barker ''is able to
make us see her characters from within, as they see themselves, and thereby
reveals the full individuality and humanity of women.''

BRIGHT LIGHTS, BIG CITY.  By Jay McInerney. (Vintage. $5.95.) A fast-paced first
novel about a young man about New York, and what a New York it is! ''Mr.
McInerney's strong suit is humor,'' and to ''all the zaniness'' of the antics of
his strange but recognizable characters he ''brings a strong sense for big city
sights.''

BUDDING PROSPECTS: A Pastoral.  By T. Coraghessan Boyle. (Viking. $16.95.) This
second novel, about growing marijuana in California, is ''lusty in every sense
of the word, healthy, invigorating and strong.''

THE BURN.  By Vassily Aksyonov. Translated by Michael Glenny. (Random House.
$18.95.) ''A dissonant requiem for the hopeful Soviet generation of the 60's,''
this masterwork by an emigre novelist ''illuminates the daily material and
spiritual experience of Russian life today as authoritatively as Gogol's 'Dead
Souls' etched its essential idiocy under Czar Nicholas I.''

CATHERINE, HER BOOK.  By John Wheatcroft. (Cornwall. $13.95.) An ingenious and
impassioned retelling, with the Gothic coloring deepened, of Emily Bront"e's
''Wuthering Heights.''

THE CEREMONY: And Other Stories.  By Weldon Kees. Edited by Dana Gioia.
(Graywolf. $14.) Fourteen stories, set primarily in mid-America during the
1930's, by a writer with a ''distinctive voice'' who stopped writing in 1945 and
worked as a film maker until his disappearance and presumed suicide in 1955.

CIVIL WARS.  By Rosellen Brown. (Knopf. $16.95.) A husband and wife, she a New
York civil rights activist and he a Southern convert to the cause, are the last
whites left in a Jackson, Miss., neighborhood in 1978 and have to face the fact
that the movement has moved beyond them.

THE COLLECTED PROSE. By Elizabeth Bishop. Edited and introduced by Robert
Giroux. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $17.50.) ''Lively, rueful, endlessly
observant'' memoirs and stories by ''one of our greatest poets,'' who died in
1979.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF COLETTE.  Edited and introduced by Robert Phelps.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $19.95.) One hundred stories by the French writer, 25
of which have never appeared in English before.

DEMOCRACY.  By Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster. $13.95.) A ''murder without a
mystery,'' this novel is ''deeply mysterious, cryptic, enigmatic, like a tarot
pack or most of Joan Didion's work.''

DIFFICULT LOVES.  By Italo Calvino. Translated by William Weaver. (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.) ''A beautifully translated collection of early
stories'' that shows ''quirkiness and grace'' in the writing, originality of
imagination, ''occasional incandescence of vision and a certain lovable
nuttiness.''

EDISTO.  By Padgett Powell. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $11.95.) A ''sparkling''
first novel told by a 12-year-old South Carolina boy ''dying'' into a new life
of pubescence who has questions ''about the life to come - values, politics,
economics, race relations, sex.''

EMPIRE OF THE SUN.  By J. G. Ballard. (Simon & Schuster. $16.95) ''A searing and
frightening tale of wartime China.'' Mr. Ballard's semiautobiographical boy hero
grows up and learns hard lessons of life in Japanese concentration camps.

THE ENGINEER OF HUMAN SOULS: An Entertainment on the Old Themes of Life, Women,
Fate, Dreams, the Working Class, Secret Agents, Love and Death.  By Josef
Skvorecky. Translated by Paul Wilson. (Knopf. $17.95.) A passionate novel by a
Czechoslovak writer now living in Canada, reflecting his experiences of two
worlds - ''the tragi-farcical world of the police state . . . and the
prosperous, shallow world without history'' to which he escaped.

FAMILY DANCING.  By David Leavitt. (Knopf. $13.95.) The 23- year-old author of
these short stories displays ''a genius for empathy'' and ''captures as few
writers can the self-preserving distance between even the most intimate parents
and children.''

A FANATIC HEART.By Edna O'Brien. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $17.95.) In these
collected stories, the Irish writer Edna O'Brien ''combines the Romantic's
passionate feeling for language and the material world with the classicist's
unerring sense of form. Each of her stories is shaped into a complete and
satisfying whole.''

THE FETISHIST.  By Michel Tournier. Translated by Barbara Wright. (Doubleday.
$13.95.) Haunting stories by the noted French novelist that ''reintroduce into
the commonplace the troubling and revelatory dimension of myth.''

FLY AWAY HOME.  By Marge Piercy (Summit. $16.95.) ''A romance with a social
conscience, a tale of love, betrayal and revenge set against a backdrop of
sterile suburbs, confrontational politics, the evils of gentrification and . . .
arson as a slum- clearance tool.''

FLYING TO NOWHERE.  By John Fuller. (Braziller. $10.95.) An amazingly compact,
rich and disturbing murder mystery set in a medieval monastery.

FOREIGN AFFAIRS.  By Alison Lurie. (Random House. $15.95.) An intelligent novel
about an aging American professor of English and other characters who fall in
and out of love in London.

THE FOREVER STREET.  By Frederic Morton. (Doubleday. $16.95.) A family novel set
in Vienna and told in ''a prose as much nourished by Bible stories as by
Nabokov.''

FRAGMENTS.  By Jack Fuller. (Morrow. $12.95.) A deeply reflective novel about
the Vietnam War and the friendship of two soldiers facing death.

FREE AGENTS.  By Max Apple. (Harper & Row. $14.50.) In this collection of
stories, Max Apple shows he ''knows the truth about difficult things,'' is
''willing to try most anything'' and is ''honest about emotion.''

GILGAMESH THE KING.  By Robert Silverberg. (Arbor House. $16.95) This novel is a
''sensitive, intuitive'' retelling of the famous Sumerian epic about a restless
king who sets out in search of immortality.

GOD KNOWS.  By Joseph Heller. (Knopf. $16.95) A very contemporary rendition of
what Joseph Heller's rambunctious King David himself calls ''the best story in
the Bible.''

A HANDBOOK FOR VISITORS FROM OUTER SPACE.  By Kathryn Kramer. (Knopf. $15.95.)
Myth and madness, the familiar and fantastic, are combined in this ''strange and
wonderful'' first novel, which ''seethes with energy, humor and moral
indignation.''

HARLAND'S HALF ACRE.  By David Malouf. (Knopf. $13.95) A painter and his agent
are the main characters in this novel, which is also about Australia, its roots
in the Old World and its indigenous culture.

A HOUSE IN THE COUNTRY. By Jose Donoso. Translated by David Pritchard and
Suzanne Jill Levine. (Knopf. $16.95.) The Chilean novelist's lush, surreal tale,
set in an unnamed South American country, is about a wealthy, decadent family on
a rural estate, surrounded by cannibals.

HUMORS OF BLOOD & SKIN: A John Hawkes Reader.  (New Directions. $22.50.)
Excerpts from the author's novels, plus four short fictions and a work in
progress, each with a commentary by Mr. Hawkes, who ''has always striven to
achieve an autonomy of imagination.'' After reading all his work, one realizes
that ''one has thought, mostly, about the marvelous prose.''

IMAGINARY MAGNITUDE. By Stanislaw Lem. Translated by Marc E. Heine. (Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich. $15.95.) This is a collection of imaginary introductions to a
book by the Pole who has been hailed as the world's greatest writer of science
fiction.

IN ANOTHER COUNTRY.  By Susan Kenney. (Viking. $13.95.) Composed of six
interlocking, occasionally overlapping stories, this distinguished novel cuts
through the pain of illness and death to derive joy from the sturdiness and
resolve of its characters.

IT WAS GONNA BE LIKE PARIS.  By Emily Listfield. (Dial. $7.95.) A weirdly
original first novel of coming of age, set in the New York tenements of the
1980's.

JULY 7TH.  By Jill McCorkle. (Algonquin Books. $17.95.) This writer's second
novel is ''a book bighearted enough to embrace a whole small town.''

THE LADIES.  By Doris Grumbach. (Dutton. $14.95) A novel that reworks the lives
of Lady Eleanor Butler and Sarah Ponsonby, 18th-century bluestockings who
preferred each other's company to that of men.

LAST DAYS: Stories.  By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton. $15.95.) ''One of our most
audaciously talented writers'' displays ''the uncanny ability to penetrate
different states of consciousness'' in a new collection of 11 stories.

A LATE DIVORCE.  By A. B. Yehoshua. Translated by Hillel Halkin. (Doubleday.
$16.95.) The Israeli writer's family saga of marital calamity, generational
estrangement and sexual malaise in a society either at war or between wars.

LEAVING THE LAND.  By Douglas Unger. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) ''At its best, this
fine first novel,'' which is about family farming giving way to corporate
farming and agribusiness, ''courts comparison with Willa Cather's 'O Pioneers!'
''

THE LIFE AND LOVES OF A SHE-DEVIL.  By Fay Weldon. (Pantheon. $13.95.) A
housewife burdened with an unprepossessing appearance, an unfaithful husband,
childern, and pets and in- laws takes revenge ''as far as it will go.''

LINCOLN.  By Gore Vidal. (Random House. $19.95.) ''An intelligent, lucid and
highly informative transcript of (an era), never less than workmanlike . . . and
often extremely compelling.''

MISS PEABODY'S INHERITANCE.  By Elizabeth Jolley. (Viking. $13.95.) The
Australian novelist's neat turn on feminism is also an exploration of the bond
between readers and writers and ''a canny reminder that fantasy may be the last
redoubt of freedom.''

MR. SCOBIE'S RIDDLE.By Elizabeth Jolley. (Viking. $5.95.) ''A satire of great
verve and acerbity, set amid the horrors of the grotesquely squalid and
oppressive nursing home of St. Christopher and St. Jude, a king of geriatric
Dotheboys Hall'' in Australia.

MODUS VIVENDI.  By Deidre Levinson. (Viking. $13.95.) A novel of contemporary
people transformed by the author's learning and style into ''something as harsh
and implacable as an Iclandic saga.''

MYSTERIES OF WINTER THURN.  By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton. $16.95.) On the one
hand, a pastiche of the 19th-century thriller, complete with hellish spectacles
and romantic hero; on the other, a philosophical investigation of the nature of
mystery.

1982 JANINE.  By Alasdair Gray. (Viking. $16.95) This novel by a Scottish writer
has ''a verbal energy, an intensity of vision, that has been missing from the
English novel since D. H. Lawrence.'' Its richness and ''the pleasures of its
language and form are sufficient affirmation, a real message of hope.''

ON THE YANKEE STATION.  By William Boyd. (Morrow. $12.95.) Fifteen stories
written ''in the Evelyn Waugh-Kingsley Amis social-satirical tradition'' that
demonstrate the English author's skillful narrative style and ''great powers of
witty invention.''

THE ONLY PROBLEM.  By Muriel Spark. (Putnam. $14.95.) A rich Canadian expatriate
working on a monograph about Job must face the ''existential distress'' of
questions posed by the death of his wife in the English author's ''disturbing
and exhilarating'' novel.

PITCH DARK.  By Renata Adler. (Knopf. $12.95.) An old- fashioned love story
involving an affair between a journalist and a married man told in the
fragmented, ''discontinuous first- person narrative'' established in the
author's previous novel.

SECOND MARRIAGE.  By Frederick Barthelme. (Simon & Schuster. $15.95.) This first
novel probes the shifting relationships of a man and his first and second wives,
set against ''a thoroughly recognizable contemporary urban America, a world of
surfaces.''

SHAME.  By Salman Rushdie. (Knopf. $13.95.) The Indian Moslem author's ''modern
fairy tale'' or political allegory, set in a country that is ''not quite
Pakistan,'' explores the nature of shame and honor.

SLOW LEARNER: Early Stories.  By Thomas Pynchon. (Little, Brown. $14.95.) Five
early works, four written while Mr. Pynchon was a student at Cornell, the fifth
in 1964 after the publication of his first novel, ''V.'' His valuable
introduction contains ''the reflections of a writer looking back over ground
traveled, and a very engaging informal history'' of the 1950's.

SOMETHING OUT THERE.  By Nadine Gordimer. (Viking. $15.95.) This ''distinguished
collection'' - a novella and nine short stories - focuses on the themes of
betrayal and the threat of terrorists. It reminds us that in South Africa ''it
is reality that they fear, and the something out there is the future.''

STOLEN STORIES.  By Steve Katz. (Fiction Collective. $12.95.) Experimental short
stories ''full of insane, impeccable logic . . . absolutely worthy of Kafka.''

STONES FOR IBARRA.  By Harriet Doerr. (Viking. $14.95.) An outstanding first
novel, by a 73-year-old woman, about an American couple living in a remote
Mexican village.

THE SUCCESSION: A Novel of Elizabeth and James.  By George Garrett. (Doubleday.
$17.95.) Mr. Garrett has created a ''subtle, complex meditation on the poetry of
time'' in what is much more than a historical novel.

SUPERIOR WOMEN.  By Alice Adams. (Knopf. $16.95.) A novel about ''the severity
of America's class system and the futility of outsiders' dreams,'' brought home
in the stories of five Radcliffe women.

TESTING THE CURRENT.  By William McPherson. (Simon & Schuster. $15.95.) An
intelligent and powerful story of family, childhood and memory set in the Middle
West just before World War II.

TIRANT LO BLANC.  By Joanot Martorell and Marti Joan de Galba. Translated and
introduced by David H. Rosenthal. (Schocken. $21.95.) The first translation into
English of a ''fine and exciting'' adventure novel first published in Catalan in
1490. It was praised by Don Quixote's curate as ''the best book of its kind in
the world.''

 TOUGH GUYS DON'T DANCE.  By Norman Mailer. (Random House. $16.95.) A murder
mystery of sorts, set in Provincetown, Mass., that offers a warmly imagined
relationship between the protagonist and his father and ''vivid descriptions of
town and beach and a few good jokes'' but ''is less a work of relaxed skill than
a mechanical assertion of Mailer's will.''

THE TWO OF US.  By Nora Johnson. (Simon & Schuster. $15.95.) A tale of identical
twin girls who grow up to lead very different lives, become alienated from each
other and are eventually reconciled.

 WATERLAND.  By Graham Swift. (Poseidon. $15.95.) What enchants in this novel
set in a ''fairy-tale place,'' the fens of England, is its ''core of feelings
touched through the juxtaposition of modern conveniences with those yellow ears
of barley and that journey to Wash Fen.''

WHITE JAZZ.  By Charles Newman. (Dial/ Doubleday. $7.95.) Not much happens in
this expressionistic novel about a man whose ''job is manning a video display
terminal'' and who spends his nights ''cruising for women'' at a disco. But
''this emptiness, this pointlessness is part of Mr. Newman's point.''

WILD BERRIES.  By Yevgeny Yevtushenko. Translated by Antonia W, Bouis. (Morrow.
$15.95.) A ''faithful, deft translation'' of the Russian poet's first novel, in
which a writer contends with official censorship and the repression of his
artistic vision.

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK.  By John Updike. (Knopf. $15.95.) In this quirky and
charming novel, three modern witches, all divorced women, give John Updike a
chance to explore ''that persistent American male fantasy'' - being a woman -
but he also plumbs a much deeper pool of human puzzlement and obsession.

History

ANDREW JACKSON AND THE COURSE OF AMERICAN DEMOCRACY, 1833-1845.  By Robert V.
Remini. (Harper & Row. $27.95.) The third and final volume of the life of Andrew
Jackson is ''a wonderful portrait, rich in detail, of a fascinating and
important man and an authoritative, if somewhat partisan, account of his role in
American history.''

THE BLOOD OF HIS SERVANTS.  By Malcolm C. MacPherson. (Times Books. $16.95.)
From the literature of the Holocaust, this is ''a bona-fide thriller'' - the
''real-life, detailed drama of the obsessive pursuit of one man by another.''

BLOODS: An Oral History of the Vietnam War.  By Wallace Terry. (Random House.
$17.95.) An account of the black experience in Vietnam in the words of those who
lived through it.

CHANGES IN THE LAND: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of New England.  By
William Cronon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $15.95.) Winner of the Francis Parkman
Prize in American history, this is a ''fresh, ingenious, compelling and
altogether important'' account of how native Americans and European colonists
changed the ecology of a region forever.

THE CHRONICLE OF THE LODZ GHETTO, 1941-1944.  Edited by Lucjan Dobroszycki.
Translated by Richard Lourie, Joachim Neugroschel and others. (Yale. $35.) These
''dreadful pages, where anecdotes are juxtaposed with unspeakable facts,'' were
written and compiled by both qualified scholars and witnesses to events in the
second largest Polish ghetto.

CHURCHILL & ROOSEVELT: THE COMPLETE CORRESPONDENCE.  Edited by Warren F.
Kimball. (Princeton. $125; $150 after Dec. 3l.) ''The three vast volumes read
like a skillful and compelling history of World War II - as indeed they are.''

THE CRUCIBLE OF RACE: Black-White Relations in the American South Since
Emancipation.  By Joel Williamson. (Oxford. $25.) Mr. Williamson treats racial
atrocities in the South ''as widely accepted rites of racial self-preservation
acted out by normal men and women.''

THE DISCOVERERS.By Daniel Boorstin. (Random House. $25.) A sweeping narrative of
major discoveries in science, geography, medicine and thought, among other
areas, that becomes an inspiring essay on ''the collective mind of man at
work.''

THE FATEFUL ALLIANCE: France, Russia, and the Coming of the First World War.  By
George F. Kennan. (Pantheon. $19.95.) Mr. Kennan's book is not ''merely another
work of diplomatic history, but ''a plea for the great powers to conduct their
external policies in as wise, cautious and unprejudiced manner as humanly
possible.''

THE GREAT CAT MASSACRE: And Other Episodes in French Cultural History.  By
Robert Darnton. (Basic Books. $17.95.) A collection of six essays on the ''ways
of thinking in 18th- century France - not what people thought, but how they
thought.''

THE GREAT DEPRESSION: America, 1929-1941.  By Robert S. McElvaine. (Times Books.
$19.95.) Although the author ''covers familiar ground, this eclectic book is
still the handiest one-volume survey of the Depression since William E.
Leuchtenburg's incisive 'Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal.' ''

THE HEYDAY OF AMERICAN COMMUNISM: The Depression Decade.  By Harvey Klehr.
(Basic Books. $26.50.) Although this ''tightly written and neatly organized''
book is ''about Communists in the 1930's, it is in a broader sense the recurrent
story of the self-righteous sectarian who confuses his faith with his church and
the church with the priesthood.''

THE HIGH WALLS OF JERUSALEM: A History of the Balfour Declaration and the
British Mandate for Pales tine.  By Ronald Sanders. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
$24.95.) The ''dramatic and moving'' story, ''with a wonderfully rich cast of
characters,'' of the Balfour Declaration (1917), which declared Britain's
support for a Jewish national home in Palestine.

HISTORICAL ATLAS OF THE IDEA OF POVERTY: England in the Early In dustrial Age.
By Gertrude Himmelfarb. (Knopf. $25.) In this first of two volumes, the author's
''history of the idea of poverty is a search to extract that idea from the
social milieus and the entire literature of the period - from popular movements,
economic treatises, novels, legislative controversies and more.''

IN EXILE FROM THE LAND OF SNOWS.  By John F. Avedon. (Knopf. $18.95.) This
''respectable history reaches back 1,500 years'' to tell Tibet's story but
concentrates on the period from 1950 to the present and the Chinese invasion and
occupation.

ISRAEL IN THE MIND OF AMERICA.  By Peter Grose. (Knopf. $17.95.) A lively
history of more than three centuries of Jewish-American politics and diplomacy
by the director of Middle Eastern Studies for the Council on Foreign Relations.

THE MARCH OF FOLLY: From Troy to Vietnam.  By Barbara W. Tuchman. (Knopf.
$18.95.) ''A moral essay on the crimes and follies of governments and the
misfortunes the governed suffer in consequence.''

 THE MIRROR MAKERS: A History of American Advertising and Its Creators.  By
Stephen Fox. (Morrow. $17.95.) ''A fascinating account of what may well be this
country's most characteristic institution.''

MONTE CASSINO.  By David Hapgood and David Richardson. (Congdon & Weed. $17.95.)
The story, carefully reconstructed from the testimony of survivors, of ''the
bitter fight for the key German defensive position south of Rome'' and the
American bombing of the ancient abbey on Monte Cassino in 1944.

THE NUREMBERG TRIAL.  By Ann Tusa and John Tusa. (Atheneum. $22.95.) The trial
of the Nazi war criminals, bringing to life ''not only the trial itself but each
of the scores of principal characters.''

OVERLORD: D-Day and the Battle for Normandy. By Max Hastings. (Simon & Schuster.
$17.95.) This history ''very accurately catches the heroism and desperation of
the Allied invasion of France'' in 1944.

PASSAGE THROUGH EL DORADO: Traveling the World's Last Great Wilderness.  By
Jonathan Kandell. (Morrow. $15.95.) A history of the various attempts, past and
present, to exploit and develop the Amazon Valley, the earth's largest and
biologically most complex wilderness.

THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE WORLD: Volume Three of Civilization and Capitalism:
l5th-18th Century.  By Fernand Braudel. (Harper & Row. $35.) ''The capstone of
an unusually productive life,'' this final volume of Mr. Braudel's trilogy
emphasizes ''the cumulative weight of the human past.''

THE ROAD TO REDEMPTION: Southern Politics, 1869-1879.  By Michael Perman.
(University of North Carolina Press, $29.50.) A fresh interpretation of the
failure of the North to impose its will on the South following the Civil War
that focuses on the Southern Democratic Party, rather than the National
Government, and diminishes the role of the racial issue in Reconstruction
politics.

ROUSSEAU: Dreamer of Democracy.  By James Miller. (Yale. $25.) Through a
discussion of Rousseau's life and works, Mr. Miller seeks ''to restore something
of the vitality of the idea of democracy itself.''

SECRET AGENDA: Watergate, Deep Throat and the CIA. By Jim Hougan. (Random House.
$19.95.) The book, ''a bold imagining of what Watergate was all about,'' argues
that the Central Intelligence Agency was probably behind the scenes in the
break-in.

WHO SPOKE UP? AmericanProtest Against the War in Vietnam 1963-1975.  By Nancy
Zaroulis and Gerald Sullivan. (Doubleday. $18.95.) This ''comprehensive history
of one of the most controversial aspects of the Vietnam period, the antiwar
movement'' is ''an extraordinarily detailed record, a group portrait of sorts,
of a whole generation.''

 Poetry

THE BEST HOUR OF THE NIGHT.  By Louis Simpson. (Ticknor & Fields. $12.95.)
Compassionate poems filled with ''difficult, equalizing wisdom'' and ''healing
insights'' into lives of ordinary, discontented people.

CHILDREN IN EXILE.  By James Fenton. (Random House. $11.95.) The English poet's
new collection ''is one of the most impressive books by a younger poet to appear
on either side of the Atlantic in years. . . . His most impressive achievement
is the sustained beauty and intelligence of his versatility.''

A HAPPY CHILDHOOD.By William Matthews. (Atlantic/ Little Brown. $12.95.) The
poems in this ''elegant lexicon of the narrative traps we set for ourselves . .
. restore some sense of mystery and play to Freud's explanations and challenge
the easy fictions people make of them. . . . The pleasure of the collection lies
in its counterpoint of assurance and irrationality.''

HISTORY OF MY HEART.  By Robert Pinsky. (Ecco. $12.50.) This new volume of poems
tends to narrative and portraits of the poet's friends and family. ''Mr. Pinsky
has a rare gift for action, character and atmosphere clearly and buoyantly
proportioned.''

THE LIGHT HOLDS.  By Harvey Shapiro. (Wesleyan University. $16.) New poems of
''an urban poet'' whose ''tone is one of leveling with the reader, or merely
talking to the self, with a candor that conveys the blunt truths of the interior
life as well as the world observed.''

MAKING CERTAIN IT GOES ON: The Collected Poems of Richard Hugo.  (Norton. $25.)
The poems of the ''preeminent poet of western America,'' who died two years ago,
''tell the tale of the American search for identity from the underbelly. . . .
(He) earned the right to look any man in the face.''

MERMAIDS IN THE BASEMENT: Poems for Women.  By Carolyn Kizer. (Copper Canyon.
$14.) Collected and new poems by a woman who was writing about women's concerns
long before the movement began, ''spitting it all out,'' and continues to do so.
''Much of the pilgrimage of these poems move from reiteration of griefs to the
good grace of letting go.'' They are remarkable for their good humor.

SWEENEY ASTRAY: A Version From the Irish.  By Seamus Heaney. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $13.95.) ''An exhilarating version of this most unusual story poem,'' a
medieval prose and verse work in which the legendary Sweeney, driven mad by a
curse, makes magnificent poems of personal pain and of praise for the wonders of
nature and the beauty of Ireland.

 Science Fiction

THE CRUCIBLE OF TIME.  By John Brunner. (Del Rey/Ballantine. $2.95.) John
Brunner is interested in science and technology as survival tactics. By
inventing a planetary ecology that periodically self-destructs, he finds drama -
and melodrama - in the struggle of intelligent beings to master their
environment.

THE FLIGHT OF THE DRAGONFLY.  By Robert L. Forward. (Timescape/Pocket Books.
$15.95.) Terrestrial explorers come to a world that is totally liquid, the
occupants of which have brains but no other rigidly defined organs and are given
to mathematical speculation, surfing the waves of their world and carefree sex.

HELLICONIA SPRING . By Brian W. Aldiss. (Berkley. $6.95.) The first volume in
the most ambitious sf series in years. Mr. Aldiss writes of a clash between two
sentient species for dominance in an odd but brilliantly realized evolutionary
setting.

HELLICONIA SUMMER.  By Brian W. Aldiss. (Atheneum. $6.95.) The evolutionary pace
quickens as Helliconia, the planet with the very long seasons, spins into its
''dog days'' and the battle for dominance moves to the cultural arena.

 JOB: A Comedy of Justice.  By Robert A. Heinlein. (Del Rey/ Ballantine.
$16.95.) In Mr. Heinlein's gloss on the biblical Book of Job, his hero is
shunted back and forth between parallel but extremely different universes as a
supreme test of his spirit. ''Mr. Heinlein has chosen to confront head-on the
question posed by the original story: why do bad things happen to good people?''


 Science & Social Science

ATOMS OF SILENCE: An Exploration of Cosmic Evolution.  By Hubert Reeves.
Translated by Ruth A. Lewis and John S. Lewis. (M.I.T. $14.95.) A very readable
theory tracing ''the history of everything from the galaxies to the electrons
streaming through the human brain.''

THE COEVOLUTION OF CLIMATE AND LIFE.  By Stephen H. Schneider and Randi Londer.
(Sierra Club. $25.) A fascinating attempt to establish the true nature of the
relationship between life and the climate, written for the layman.

THE FACTS OF LIFE.  By Jonathan Miller and David Pelham. (Viking. $18.95.) ''A
fascinating and artistically-done'' pop-up book about human generation that is
''not only beautiful to look at but will be of enormous interest and value to
anyone between 5 and 90, or anyone who is interested in the facts of life.''

THE MINIMAL SELF: Psychic Survival in Troubled Times.  By Christopher Lasch.
(Norton. $16.95.) ''There is much wisdom in Mr. Lasch's psychological
reflections, even if one remains unconvinced by his technophobia and the
unrelieved negativism of his diagnosis of our time.''

SCIENCE AND GENDER: A Critique of Biology and Its Theories on Women.  By Ruth
Bleier. (Pergamon. $12.50.) A feminist critique of biological determinism that
sketches in the positive contributions of the feminist outlook.

THREE DEGREES ABOVE ZERO: Bell Labs in the Information Age.  By Jeremy
Bernstein. (Scribner's. $17.95.) An admiring look at Bell Labs, which in 1981
boasted 25,000 employees, a budget of $1.63 billion and a half- century record
of scientific achievement, including seven Nobel prizes.

WHEN THE MIND HEARS: A History of the Deaf.  By Harlan Lane. (Random House.
$24.95.) This history of the controversy between the sign and oral schools
''reads like a suspense novel.'' The good characters tried ''to grant the deaf
full rights,'' while the villains are those who denied the deaf ''a language
suited to their needs.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition and December
9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
 In the list of Notable Books of the Year in The Book Review of Dec. 2, the
citation of ''Paula Modersohn-Becker: The Letters and Journals'' omitted the
names of the editors and translators of the American edition. They are Arthur S.
Wensinger and Carole Clew Hoey.

In assembling the list of Notable Books of the Year, "Margaret Mead: A Life" by
Jane Howard (Simon & Schuster, $17.95) was inadvertently omitted in the
Christmas Books issue Dec. 2.  The biography is "an excellent journalistic
account" of the life of the anthropologist, gathered not only from the record,
but more important, from perceptive interviews of a large number of people who
knew Mead in many different surroundings.

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
ONLY THE 'FUN' WARS

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 732 words


WASHINGTON In a carefully reasoned, timely and

occasionally eloquent address to

the National Press Club last week, the United States' Secretary of Defense
unintentionally laid out the case for slashing our defense budget.

Read the speech; it expresses the world according to the most Vietnam-
traumatized elements in the Pentagon, put forward by an intelligent and
articulate Cabinet officer who has been savagely caricatured in this space as
''Viscount Weinberger of Grenada.''

To oversimplify for reasons of space and purposes of demolition, Secretary
Weinberger's stunning doctrine suggests that we take a poll before we pull a
trigger. No more unpopular wars - if the public won't hold a big parade to send
us off, we're not going.

And no more of the ''gradualist incremental approach,'' goes this Pentagon
ultimatum - if we can't win in a week by pulverizing the place, it's not worth
jeopardizing our men's lives or all the expensive equipment. Finally, our
interest must be ''vital'' - we fire only when we see the reds of their eyes.

The military mind has been brought to this surly, don't-call-us-
until-you're-ready-to-abdicate-to-us philosophy by a series of military
failures.

In Vietnam, our top brass underestimated the scope and stamina of the guerrilla
challenge, as the Westmoreland trial is drearily proving. In Iran, the
management consultants with stars on their epaulettes cravenly approved the
aborting of a crucial mission at Desert One because a sixth helicopter was
unavailable. In Lebanon, the Pentagon's assigned mission to establish a military
presence was defeated by a truck bomb when our commanders failed in their simple
task of securing the base perimeter.

No wonder the epitome of a military operation in the mind of Pentagonians has
become Grenada, the quick crushing of a lightly armed gang of thugs by a huge
task force operating in the dark for a few weeks. Oh, what a lovely war.

Secretary Weinberger's purpose in enunciating the doctrine of only-fun- wars is
to undermine Secretary of State George Shultz's position in the battle for
President Reagan's strategic soul. Mr. Shultz has been putting forward the more
traditional, less simplistic theory that power and diplomacy must be used in
tandem if we are to stop the erosion of our national interests.

The Pentagonians err first on their popularity requirement: They cannot demand
that the public give them an irrevocable letter of credit before undertaking a
military operation. Public support must be earned; if military bungling loses
it, the fault is the bungling and not the public patience.

Second, the notion that the U.S. can never threaten to undertake limited
military action is absurd; the ''gradualist incremental approach,'' a phrase as
redundant as some of our weapon systems, may be just the ticket in some
situations. ''Enough and on time'' does not mean ''all or nothing.''

Third, we cannot always wait to apply military strength, or to be visibly ready
to do so, until the very life of our country is threatened. The new Weinberger
''vital interest'' criterion is suitable for Switzerland, but not for a
superpower. The Department of Defense does not exist solely for defending a
fortress; it is part of America's commitment to preserve order in the world.

Whence comes this reluctance of the military to pose a credible threat except in
the most no-risk, high-applause border clashes? Probably the self-defense of
Defense: ''It's like a hospital that does not want to admit patients,'' says
strategist Edward Luttwak. ''Some hospital administrators want the perfect state
of maximum readiness, and patients make a mess.''

The most staggering part of the hunker-down, lash-out doctrine is its moral
blindness. Does the rightness of a cause count for nothing in America's decision
to exert force in helping people defend their freedom?

We have never fought only on the proposition that our fight would be quick and
bloodless. If good odds for success were our only criterion, the Union should
have let the South secede after Fredericksburg. Our tradition has been to accept
risks for a just cause.

If the threat of the use of American power is to become as constrained and
self-denying as Secretary Weinberger says it should be, then we are wasting a
hundred billion dollars a year on force we will never apply. Without the will,
of what use is the muscle?B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LIBEL TRIALS ARE NOT WON BY GOOD FAITH ALONE

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 196 words


To the Editor:


As an attorney who has done a fair amount of work in the libel field, I read
with interest William Safire's column on the Ariel Sharon and Gen. William
Westmoreland cases (Nov. 19). Mr. Safire contends that just as an attorney or a
physician will not be held liable for actions taken in ''good faith,'' neither
should journalists. This argument is based on an erroneous premise.

All the good intentions in the world will not protect the lawyer or doctor who
acts negligently (i.e., one who fails to exercise reasonable care). On the other
hand, in libel suits brought by ''public figures'' such as General Westmoreland
or Mr. Sharon, the defendants will

not

 be liable even if they are proved negligent. Under the Times v. Sullivan
standard, public figures must prove that defendants acted with knowledge of
falsity or with reckless disregard of truth or falsity.  Those who feel that the
legal pendulum has swung too far in favor of the media in libel cases do indeed
want to put journalists on a par with doctors, lawyers and all other
professionals, by holding them accountable for negligence.

MARTIN STEIN New York, Nov. 19, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHAN WAR: THE RUSSIAN PUBLIC IS STILL A BELIEVER

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Dec. 2


When Pvt. Aleksandr Pankratov died last June in Afghanistan defending his Soviet
comrades from an insurgent ambush, his father's grief was mixed with pride.

''He died fulfilling his internationalist duty on Afghan soil,'' the father
wrote to the army newspaper, Krasnaya Zvezda. ''Now it is my greatest wish to
serve out my son's remaining year, to complete his military duty to his
homeland.''

As the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan drags toward its fifth anniversary this
month, it is clear that the war is not resulting in the domestic backlash that
the Vietnam War stirred in the United States. In talks with people around
Moscow, both young and old, no sign emerges of a discontent that could force
Kremlin leaders to bring the boys home soon.

''I don't know if you would call this a popular war,'' a Moscow scholar said
privately. ''But certainly it is not an unpopular war. People just don't worry
that much about it. I don't know of any sort of protest, public or private.''

Commenting on newspaper reports like the one in Krasnaya Zvezda, in which
Russian soldiers are portrayed as selflessly helping defend Afghanistan from
American-inspired aggression, he said, ''I don't know if the stories they tell
are actually true ones or not, but they seem to fit the mood of the public.''

'We'll Show Them'


The scholar's own teen-age son, who is in his last year of high school, said
none of his draft-age friends opposed the war. ''More or less, it's a popular
war,'' he said. ''People say: 'Aha, the Americans wanted to grab Afghanistan.
We'll show them.' ''

Some of his friends plan to volunteer for service in Afghanistan, he said.

But his father, like some American parents during the Vietnam War, is hoping
that his son will be able to avoid his ''internationalist duty'' with a medical
deferment.

Ever since the Soviet Union sent troops across its southern border into
Afghanistan just after Christmas in December 1979, it has portrayed the action
as a rescue mission on behalf of a pro-Soviet Government under siege by what it
calls counterrevolutionaries.

It blames meddling by the United States, Pakistan, China and Saudi Arabia for
the continued conflict and has managed to draw parallels for its own citizens
between the Afghan war and the Russian defense of its homeland against Nazi
invaders in World War II.

''This is why Russia wins its wars,'' the scholar said. ''People defend the
Russian land. And in this they are ready to undergo any hardship, any loss.''

Preparing Public for a Long War


In recent weeks the Soviet press has been addressing this attitude in articles
that appear to be preparing readers for a prolonged war. Because of stepped- up
interference by the backers of Afghan resistance bands, the press is saying,
there is not yet any light at the end of the Afghan tunnel.

A recent article in the Government newspaper Izvestia put it this way: ''The
reasons for Afghanistan's invitation of a limited Soviet contingent would
disappear if all forms of aggression against that country were halted and a
guarantee given that it would not be resumed.''

The sooner this aggression ends, the paper said, the sooner there can be some
agreement about the removal of Soviet troops.

''However,'' it said, ''judging by the current attitudes of Washington and
Islamabad toward the political regulation of the situation around Afghanistan,
war against Afghanistan is more dear to them than peace in Southeast Asia.''

10,000 Casualties 'Not Very Large'


The Russians publish no figures on their deployments in Afghanistan, but most
Western estimates reach upward of 100,000 Soviet troops in that country.
Casualty estimates vary, but tend to be in the neighborhood of 10,000 killed in
the last five years.

''This is not a very large number for our country,'' a Communist Party member
said. ''That is the number who died in just one day during World War II. There
is not the feeling we had then of every family losing someone.''

Nevertheless, the Soviet press, which in the past has confined itself to
describing good works performed by troops in Afghanistan, has in recent months
begun to depict Soviet soldiers in combat, suffering casualties, dying and
winning medals.

Western military analysts in Moscow say this shift could reflect a feeling that
the harsh side of war cannot be entirely avoided, or could be a result of
pressure by the military for more recognition of its deeds.

Reporting on the Fighting


These reports still refrain from describing any planned or aggressive Soviet
military action, and they depict casualties as occurring in ambushes of truck
convoys, in the clearing of mines or in helicopters ferrying supplies.

The story of a young paratrooper, Nikolai Chepik, which was told in the party
newspaper Pravda, combines some of the main elements of the picture being
presented of the Afghan war: the savagery of the enemy, the parallels with the
bravery of Russian troops who defended the motherland in World War II, the
defensive nature of Soviet engagements, the suggestion that the attackers are
based outside Afghanistan.

In the words of a comrade, this is what happened to Nikolai Chepik:

''The bandits were wreaking havoc in the west. They robbed and killed everyone
who supported the people's Government. They cut off the hands of the
schoolchildren. They burned down a school, letting no one escape. You know these
things well from the last war. Now we in the young generation are witnessing
these things for ourselves. The bandits fell on us suddenly, at dawn early in
February. Things went badly for us. Nikolai himself was badly wounded. He
collected the remaining grenades, and when they surrounded him, he set them all
off. With his dear life he saved his comrades and annihilated more than 30
bandits who had come over the mountains onto Afghan territory.''

The Russian as Hero


Meanwhile, the press continues to depict a country following in the
revolutionary footsteps of its Russian brothers, learning to bake Russian pies
and to play volleyball, and naming its children after Russian heroes. The
Russian soldiers are portrayed as building schools, digging wells and bringing
electric light for the first time to backward villages.

On a recent television program, a colonel told of showing villagers a film about
Lenin. ''A fire burned in their eyes,'' he said. ''They listened with attention
and joy. They were full of questions: Who was Lenin? How did we set up our
revolution? How did we overcome our opponents?''

A Moscow novelist said this vision of a primitive people learning civilized ways
is one aspect of the Afghan situation that is readily accepted by Russians. ''We
see how poor the Afghans are, how dirty,'' he said. ''Our boys give them pieces
of sugar, and they have never seen sugar before. We are bringing them a better
way of life.''

A Major Difference


These reports illustrate what both Westerners and Russians see as a major
difference domestically between the Vietnam and Afghan conflicts.

''This is a system where mass information is completely controlled,'' said a
Soviet historian, speaking privately. ''They can present exactly the picture
they want to, to accomplish their needs. In this way, the average Russian knows
nothing of Afghanistan. If the war came into their living rooms on television,
we would have something entirely different.''

Since the war is not affecting the daily lives of Russians or being forced on
their attention by television, there is little ground for opposition here.

As the novelist put it: ''In general, the Soviet people are very obedient. They
listen to what they are told, and they believe it.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soldiers

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ARGUMENTS OF WESTMORELAND TRIAL RESEMBLE SOME KEY DISPUTES IN 1960'S

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1524 words


The key, and disputed, arguments in Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel suit
against CBS, in which the general may finish testifying today, bear a strong
resemblance to some of the key disputes among American officials in the 1960's
about how the Vietnam War could best be prosecuted.  While those arguments are
not easy to summarize briefly, one school of thought seemed to believe the war
could be won by killing people and another school believed it would be more
useful to influence people - as well as killing some of the most intractable
enemy.

The evidence in the general's $120 million suit against the network, arising
from a 1982 documentary titled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' is
in less dispute than the arguments. General Westmoreland and witnesses friendly
to him do not deny that when information came to light in 1967 that the numbers
of Communist homeguard, hamlet militia had been seriously underestimated, these
groups were excluded from a military accounting system of enemy strength that
had previously included them.

The CBS documentary called this a ''deception,'' of President Johnson and other
superiors, and the retired general says such language defamed him.



Counting Enemy Strength


General Westmoreland has contended during a week of testimony that he had little
choice but to change the method of counting enemy strength. He argues that
excluding the ''self-defense and secret self-defense'' Communist units from the
order of battle, which the military accounting system is officially called, made
it more meaningful and honest. He also says that to permit a raw addition of the
new numbers to the order of battle would mislead and alarm the American press
and public with an impression that enemy strength was increasing after he had
indicated it was slowly beginning to level off and decrease.

The CBS broadcast and the mountain of declassified documents obtained by
attorneys show that some of General Westmoreland's professional intelligence
officers, as well as some Central Intelligence Agency analysts, believed that
the self-defense forces and local Communist political structure were an
''integral'' part of the enemy strength and should be counted and included in
the order of battle.

There is a parallel between all this and debates two decades ago about the
conduct of the war.

Back then General Westmoreland preferred to employ United States troops mainly
in a battle of attrition against ''main force'' North Vietnamese Army units and
high quality Vietcong guerrillas, leaving so- called pacification of the
population and countryside primarily to South Vietnamese units and American
officials passionately interested in the inexact art of counterinsurgency
warfare.

Control of the Hamlets


Such officials, exemplfied by John Paul Vann, perhaps the most admired of the
counterinsurgency thinkers, believed that to dry up the sea in which the
hardcore guerrillas swam it was necessary to regain control of South Vietnam's
hamlets, and that to do so the local Vietcong organization had to be converted,
eliminated or rendered harmless. Maj. Gen. Nguyen Duc Thang, the Vietnamese
pacification chief, strongly agreed.

General Westmoreland has testified that he paid no attention to intelligence
about the self-defense forces as long as the estimated total was a ''static''
number, but decided to purge them from the order of battle when the estimates
sharply increased.

''We are not fighting those people; they are basically civilians,'' the general
testified, adding they were ''very inconsequential,'' poorly armed and had
''practically no military capability of consequence.''

The general's experience of four- and-one-half years in the war makes him a
powerful witness. However, not everyone agreed with his analysis then.

In a then secret message in 1967, Mr. Westmoreland's military chief of staff,
Maj. Gen. Walter T. Kerwin Jr., told troop commanders: ''Mines and booby traps
continue to cause a significant portion of our friendly casualties. In 1966
approximately one-third of friendly casualties were caused by this means and it
appears that this casualty level will continue for 1967.'' The main body of
General Kerwin's message instructed units on procedures to reduce the number of
''dud'' American artillery shells and bombs. Various kinds of Vietcong units
showed great ingenuity in converting such duds, and captured hand grenades, into
booby traps.

Casualties Laid to Civilians

No one in the 1960's would have contended that all such booby traps were
prepared and laid by hamlet irregulars. However, many American officials and
soldiers believed that many were.

Frustration about the difficulty of distinguishing between harmless and hostile
civilians played a major role in the war. The March 1968 massacre of civilians
by a unit of the Americal Division at the hamlet of My Lai was attributed, in
part, by some participants to anger that casualties from booby traps and sniping
mounted for months while American soldiers seldom saw an actual enemy soldier.

That the political and irregular militia units were deemed by some officials to
have some value was shown by the devotion of substantial assets in manpower and
money to the ''Phoenix'' program meant to neutralize them by covert actions in
contested or Vietcong hamlets.

On the other hand, it is equally true that some officers and officials in the
1960's tended to agree with the view expressed this month in court by witnesses
for the plaintiff. The United States Marines, who predominated militarily in the
northernmost portion of South Vietnam, initiated a program of ''combined action
platoons,'' in which small combined units of Marines and Vietnamese troops
sought to pacify rural hamlets, with as little violence as possible.

In general, United States Army officers did not regard the Marine approach as
useful or sound, and the Marines were eventually discouraged from pursuing the
course.

Mr. Vann and General Thang tried to encourage government hamlet chiefs to sleep
in their own hamlets because many preferred the security of small military
outposts. To those who occasionally accompanied the officials on such hamlet
sleepouts, the experience could be mentally and physically harrowing. Vietcong
milita sometimes had to share guns, but they had guns.

Restraints on Westmoreland


Another interesting aspect of the nine-week libel trial - which may continue
into February - is that it recalls and, in some cases, illuminates historical
features of the war.

One of these is what officials, who operated behind a somewhat opaque and rosy
screen, themselves believed they were accomplishing or could reasonably expect
to accomplish. Another is the restraints under which General Westmoreland had to
operate, but which in some cases he seems to have willingly accepted.

The general testified that in April 1967 he told President Johnson and other
high civil officials that he wanted more troops on the principle of
''reinforcing success.'' He took to Washington with him two proposals. One
called the ''optimum'' force augmentation called for 200,000 more troops. The
second, described as a ''minimum essential force,'' called for 100,000
reinforcements.

General Westmoreland's testimony is that he told the policy makers that with the
larger force he could bring the war to ''some kind of conclusion'' - defined as
forcing Hanoi to negotiate peace - in three years, and the smaller one would
prolong the war for five years. Whether much of Congress or the public
contemplated that much prolongation of combat as likely is open to debate.

'Essential Minimum Force'


Later in Saigon, the general said, he suggested to Secretary of Defense Robert
S. McNamara a more politically palatable ''modified, essential minimum force,''
which would provide 80,000 more troops. General Westmoreland said he believed
that by hiring Vietnamese civilians to do logistic chores and adding combat
units to existing formations he could get the same fighting power with ''less
overhead.''

Mr. McNamara accepted the proposal, apparently with great relief.

''Mr. McNamara came from American business,'' the general testified, ''and he
was very statistically oriented. He was very anxious to fight this war as
efficiently as possible. I have heard him say he wanted to end the war without
having great stockpiles of material as we had in World War II.''

But, having testified frequently about the progress he believed had been made by
1967 and that he anticipated in future years, General Westmoreland told the jury
that the North Vietnamese ''always'' had the capability of reinforcing their
forces in the South, ''and the President certainly knew that.''

Such lengthy testimony has, therefore, left at least some ambiguity as to when,
if ever, officials believed the war could be ended successfully and how best to
reach that goal. The present trial will decide the libel question, but is no
more likely to settle these questions than did the spirited arguments of the
1960's.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 3, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NBC MINI-SERIES BASED ON 'THE SUN ALSO RISES'

BYLINE: Stephen Farber

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1055 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 3


A grieving Jake Barnes attends the funeral of a prostitute he had visited
several times before being wounded and rendered impotent in World War I. Pedro
Romero, the handsome young Spanish bull fighter, uses his sword to murder a
vindictive count who has threatened the life of Lady Brett Ashley. Jake's best
friend, Bill Gorton, takes an airplane, goes up on a daredevil flight and
crashes to his death.

These scenes are among the dramatic climaxes in the four-hour mini- series,
''The Sun Also Rises,'' which will be broadcast on NBC on Dec. 9 and 10, with
Jane Seymour starring as Lady Brett and Hart Bochner as Jake. Not one of the
scenes - or anything remotely resembling them - can be found in the Ernest
Hemingway novel on which the mini-series is based.

''There are a lot of corpses in the mini-series that are not in the book,'' said
Zeljko Ivanek, the young actor who plays Bill Gorton. Robert L. Joseph, who
wrote the screenplay and produced the mini-series, defends these changes as
necessary in adapting the novel for a dramatic medium, but he is bracing himself
for attacks by the Hemingway scholars.

Another person who defends the adaptation - at least in principle - is Charles
Scribner 3d, executive vice president of Charles Scribner's Sons, which
published the novel in 1926 and is issuing a new paperback edition in
conjunction with the film. Mr. Scribner has not seen the entire mini- series,
but he viewed excerpts at a recent NBC press conference.



'I Have No Objection to Changes'

''If it makes for a more effective dramatization I have no objection to changes
in the novel,'' Mr. Scribner said. ''I would rather have an effective
dramatization than a pedantically faithful version that will discourage people
from reading the book. Verdi's 'Otello' takes great liberties with Shakespeare's
play, but it works in a different medium.''

''The Sun Also Rises'' was filmed once before, by 20th Century Fox, in 1957;
that version starred Tyrone Power as Jake and Ava Gardner as Brett. Only a few
changes were made in that version. As Mr. Joseph pointed out, ''they never
identified Robert Cohn as a Jew; they referred to him as a New Yorker.''
Otherwise the film followed the novel's episodic structure quite closely, yet
the finished film - an expensive box office failure - was attacked by most
critics as a leaden effort.

When NBC decided to make a new version of ''The Sun Also Rises,'' the network
entered into a partnership with Fox, which still owned the rights to the novel.
Susan Baerwald, vice president of mini-series and novels for television at NBC,
had been interested in doing a mini-series about the ''lost generation'' in
Paris of the 1920's. ''I felt that era was relevant to the post-Vietnam era as
well,'' Miss Baerwald said. ''I knew it was a little too PBS-y a subject for a
network series, but we decided maybe we could do it through an adaptation of
'The Sun Also Rises.'' '

To adapt the novel, NBC turned to Mr. Joseph, who had written two other recent
mini-series for the network - ''World War III'' and an adaptation of Sidney
Sheldon's ''Rage of Angels.'' He had also lived in Paris during the 1950's and
had met Hemingway on a number of occasions.

Mr. Joseph said radical surgery was required to bring Hemingway to television.
He considered the novel ''impressionistic'' rather than dramatic. One of the
things he did was to fill in more about the war's impact on the characters. The
mini-series opens with battle scenes and incorporates explicit reminders of the
war throughout the rest of the story. ''When Hemingway wrote the book,'' Mr.
Joseph argued, ''he didn't have to do much on the ambiance of the war because
the streets of Paris were still littered with refugees from World War I.''



The Count Is Chief Villain

Among his other major changes was beefing up the character of the Count - a
minor figure in the novel - to make him the chief villain of the piece; jilted
by Lady Brett, he becomes her stalking nemesis. NBC liked the idea of expanding
the count's role because, as Miss Barewald said, ''it provided a very strong
jeopardy line.''

Cast as the Count, Leonard Nimoy looked on the role as ''an interesting
extension of Hemingway's character.''

''I would hope that at the very least our version is better than the Fox film,''
Mr. Nimoy said. ''If someone asked me to do a remake of 'The Treasure of the
Sierra Madre,' I would decline. But we don't have a definitive 'Sun Also Rises'
on film.''

Another significant alteration was in the character of Bill Gorton, whose death
- which did not occur in the novel - provides the emotional climax of the
mini-series. ''The character of Bill is very vague in the book,'' Mr. Joseph
said. ''If you dig deeply, you come to the conclusion that Bill is a kid who
died in spirit during the war and became a kind of living ghost. I feel the
character in our film is still Hemingway's Bill Gordon, but I fulfilled him. I
suppose some people would say that's presumption on my part. But if you're not
going to push a book a little further, why do an adaptation? You might as well
just film Emlyn Williams reading the novel from a lectern.''



'Dangers of Adaptation'

Mr. Ivanek defends some of the changes in the conception of his character and
questions others. ''There is a scene where Bill tells a long story about his
experiencs in the war,'' Mr. Ivanek said. ''That isn't in the book, but it does
clarify some of the pain that the character lives with. On the other hand, I
think Bill's final scene in the hospital is overwritten. I understand the basic
thrust to make the material active rather than passive, but I don't always agree
with the changes. One of the dangers of adaptation is trying to do too much to
make sure everything is understood. Sometimes you can underestimate the
audience's ability to get it.''

Mr. Ivanek and others involved in making the mini-series do believe that the
television film can provide a service in reawakening interest in Hemingway. Mr.
Scribner said that after ''The Forsyte Saga'' was broadcast on PBS, the company
reissued the novel, and it became a paperback best-seller. ''Even if the
mini-series comes in last in the ratings,'' Mr. Joseph added, ''15 to 25 million
people will see it, and some of them may even buy the book.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Leonard Nimoy and Jane Seymour in roles

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND TESTIFIES JOHNSON WANTED DATA

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1267 words


A. FARBER

Gen. William C. Westmoreland denied yesterday that his superiors directly
''pressured'' him in 1967 to show that the war in Vietnam was being won, but he
said President Johnson wanted ''hard facts'' illustrating such progress.

He also said, under cross-examination during his libel suit against CBS in
Federal District Court in Manhattan, that he disagreed with or couldn't recall
reading a number of books and newspaper and magazine articles that criticized
his performance as commander of American forces in Vietnam between 1964 and
1968.

As the general's testimony nears a close, lawyers for CBS are trying to
demonstrate that, whatever the network said about him on the 1982 CBS Reports
documentary that prompted his $120 million suit, General Westmoreland's
reputation was already so tarnished that he cannot now claim damages.

Yesterday, David Boies, the principal lawyer for CBS, asked the general whether
he was aware in 1967 of any pressure or request from his ''chain of command,
from the Joint Chiefs, the Secretary of Defense, up to the White House, to show
progress in winning the war.''

''I was unaware of any pressure,'' the witness told Mr. Boies. ''I would have
resented pressure in that regard. But I was aware, primarily through the
Ambassador in Saigon, that Mr. Johnson and his Administration were convinced
that we were making substantial progress in Vietnam and he wanted to get hard
facts so that that progress would be recognized.

''But it didn't come to me directly,'' General Westmoreland said. ''It was
through the Ambassador, who was in touch with the State Department and the White
House. They thought credit should be given where credit was due.'' The United
States Ambassador to South Vietnam at that time was Ellsworth Bunker.

Mr. Boies had the general read an exchange from his pre-trial deposition, in
which he had been asked the following:

Q. So, it's your testimony that you never got the word or the ''impression'' -
the term that you've used a number of times before - that the President wanted,
as you put it, to present evidence that you were winning the war. Never got that
impression?

A. I never got that impression.  Now others may have, but I tried to stay out of
the political channel. I mean, after all, there was an Ambassador in Saigon.''

''Do you have any reason to change that testimony now?'' Mr. Boies asked
yesterday.

''I do not,'' said General Westmoreland.

The general contends in his suit that the CBS documentary, ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' defamed him by saying that he had deceived the
President and the Joint Chiefs about the size and nature of enemy forces in
Vietnam in the year before the Tet offensive of 1968. CBS argues that the
broadcast was true.

The documentary said, as part of an effort to show that the United States and
its allies were winning the war, that General Westmoreland imposed an
''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy size and deleted the
Vietcong's self-defense units from the official listing of military strength
known as the order of battle.

The general reiterated yesterday that he did not set any limit on enemy strength
reports.

''To impose a ceiling that would disregard intelligence that contravenes such a
ceiling would definitely be improper,'' he said. ''Certainly, there was no
ceiling. I couldn't have cared less whether there was a few more of this or a
few less of that.''

Removal of Units Defended


Earlier, he had said that he removed the part-time, hamlet-based self-defense
units from the order of battle in 1967 because they had no offensive military
capability and because the release of new data indicating these forces had been
considerably underestimated in the past would have suggested that the strength
of the enemy's real ''fighters'' was greater than he believed it was.

The general said yesterday that he ''felt very strongly'' that the higher
statistics on the self-defense forces ''could be and probably would be
misunderstood by people unfamiliar with intelligence and the components of the
order of battle.''

Q. Did those people include your chain of command?

A. Well, it didn't include Admiral Sharp, because he was at the briefing (on the
figures). It could have been misunderstood, but only temporarily, by the
chairman of the Joint Chiefs, who did not follow such detail. But it would have
been explained to him.

Adm. Ulysses S. Grant Sharp, the commander of American forces in the Pacific,
was General Westmoreland's immediate military superior.

When Mr. Boies asked General Westmoreland whether his military and civilian
superiors were interested only in ''evidence of hard, honest facts,'' the
general replied:

''Well, they certainly weren't looking for anything else.''

Q. And you knew that, sir?

A. Well, sure.

Although General Westmoreland said he could not recall mentioning to his
superiors the ''political and public relations'' problem posed by the higher
estimates for the self-defense forces, he conceded that it was a ''concern'' in
Washington and elsewhere.

Through a variety of materials published in 1967 and afterward, Mr. Boies sought
to show that General Westmoreland's optimism about the course of the war before
the Tet offensive was at best misplaced and at worst intentionally deceptive.

For example, Mr. Boies introduced excerpts from a 1976 book by Nguyen Cao Ky,
the Vice President of South Vietnam in late 1967, that said the general ''must
have known all about the strength of the impending attack'' that became the 1968
Tet offensive.

''I am convinced the White House did not, but that was for a very good reason,''
Mr. Ky wrote. ''It was clear that some of the American leaders in Saigon
deliberately issued a string of lies to the White House, in an effort to
maintain the impression that the Americans were getting on top of the
Vietcong.''

Mr. Ky said it took some years before ''this squalid deception'' was uncovered
by Samuel A. Adams, a former analyst for the Central Intelligence Agency.

Mr. Adams, who later became a paid consultant to CBS on its documentary and is
now a defendant in this case, also figured in some of the other materials cited
yesterday, as well as last Thursday, by Mr. Boies.

Among these was a 1976 report of a House Select Committee on Intelligence that
examined the Vietnam order of battle dispute after Mr. Adams wrote an article
about it in Harper's magazine in 1975. Mr. Adams was a major witness during the
hearings that year, and his remarks were featured prominently in various
articles Mr. Boies introduced yesterday.

The committee found that the dispute over enemy strength figures in Vietnam in
1967 ''created false perceptions of the enemy U.S. forces faced, and prevented
measurement of changes over time. Second, pressure from policy-making officials
to produce positive intelligence indicators re-inforced erroneous assessments of
allied progress and enemy capabilities.''

The committee also said that, in retrospect, enemy ''irregular'' forces,
including self-defense units that set some mines and booby traps, were
''increasingly responsible'' for American casualties before the Tet offensive.

General Westmoreland said yesterday that he was not called to testify before the
committee. But, in response to an inquiry from one of its members, he sent a
letter in December 1975 denying ''that there was an effort by military
intelligence to deliberately downgrade estimates of Vietcong strength in order
to portray the VC as weaker than they really were.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
In the Nixonian Hand

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and David W. Dunlap

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 245 words


On Vietnam: ''While negotiations are in progress with hope for success,'' the
outline reads, ''will withhold comment as to how I would settle.''

''If we had not made mistakes war would be over,'' concludes Richard M. Nixon,
in an extraordinary handwritten outline of his 1968 campaign for President.
Dated July 7, it was sent to a prominent California Republican who is a friend
of Mr. Nixon and is now active in the Reagan Administration, according to
Charles Hamilton, the autograph expert.

Through Mr. Hamilton, the Californian, who wishes to remain anonymous, has sold
the six-page document to Malcolm S. Forbes for $32,000. ''I don't think anything
else has exceeded it in value for a 20th-century letter,'' said Mr. Hamilton,
who has been an autograph dealer for 60 years.

Besides Vietnam, the outline touches on these issues:


- Foreign aid: ''Too many countries, too many projects, too many personnel.''


- Middle East: ''Enlist Soviet - diplomatically.''


- Gun control: ''States should pass laws. A crime to have a gun sans a
license.''

The letter is part of Mr. Forbes's collection of Presidential autographs, which
Mr. Hamilton calls ''the finest Washingtons, Jeffersons, Lincolns, the finest of
everything.'' It will be displayed with other Forbes collections - of toy
soldiers, paintings and Faberge objects - on the ground floor of the Forbes
Magazine Building at 60 Fifth Avenue, near 13th Street, according to Malcolm S.
Forbes Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 4, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

PLAYERS;
A HEISMAN WINNER IN A MORE INNOCENT TIME

BYLINE: By Malcolm Moran

SECTION: Section B; Page 13, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 777 words


Mr. Inside left his home in San Antonio yesterday morning to return to the
Downtown Athletic Club, the place where he received a trophy nearly 39 years
ago. Felix (Doc) Blanchard, the Army fullback who became the 11th recipient of
the Heisman Memorial Trophy, planned to return to the 50th presentation on
Thursday night. He will listen to Doug Flutie, the Boston College quarterback,
become the owner of the same trophy that sits in a den in San Antonio.

''Mine is growing every day,'' Blanchard said.

The official word that he had won the trophy came in a somewhat different method
than the national television production last Saturday that ended with an
announcement, a handshake and a very few hurried words from the latest winner.
''I got a telegram,'' Blanchard said. ''It said, 'You've been selected to win
the Heisman Trophy. Please wire collect.' ''

Even in its formative years, the trophy had become a big deal. Not quite that
big - the award ceremony was delayed nearly a month to avoid a conflict with the
examination schedule at West Point - but significant enough that Blanchard was
allowed to attend. At the end of the 1945 season, his junior season, Blanchard
had been named the outstanding player of the year by the Maxwell Club of
Philadelphia, by Walter Camp, and had also been named the first football player
to receive the Sullivan Award for amateur athletes. ''In those days, they
wouldn't let you leave West Point to go down and receive them,'' Blanchard said.

But he made the trip to New York for the Heisman dinner that night, when the
crowd of 500 included West Point brass, and Blanchard's mother and sister. A
year later, when Glenn Davis, Mr. Outside, became the 12th Heisman winner after
their senior season, there were questions about their possible futures in
professional football, and the once-in- a-lifetime opportunity of having rival
leagues bidding big money for their services.


On Thursday, when many of the previous 49 winners will watch Flutie, there will
be more dinnertime talk of pro football and the bidding between leagues.
''Talking about money and getting money is two different things,'' Doc Blanchard
said, and laughed.

By the end of their college careers in 1946, the Touchdown Twins faced the
possibility that the bidding between the National Football League and the All-
America Conference would provide a financial foundation for the rest of their
lives. ''We wanted to play in the pros for one year,'' Blanchard remembered,
''just to make some money.''

Flutie's obstacle to professional success is the preference among much of the
pro football establishment that their quarterbacks be considerably taller than 5
feet 9 3/4 inches. Blanchard's obstacle was considerably more formidable. His
hopes for a chance to play professionally centered on an appeal to the War
Department to extend the customary two-month academic leave to four months upon
his graduation in 1947, which would enable him to play one pro season.

That January, the Brooklyn Dodgers of the A.A.C. traded their rights to deal
with Blanchard to the San Francisco 49ers, who had already gained the rights to
sign Davis. Anthony Morabito, the president of the 49ers, was quoted as saying
that although his team had lost $100,000 in 1946, its first year of operation,
the 49ers were prepared to ''go the limit'' in an attempt to outbid the
Pittsburgh Steelers of the N.F.L. for the two Army backs.

The War Department denied the proposal. ''They didn't think it was a very good
idea,'' Blanchard said. ''I really think that most people thought it was a
reasonable request, but some of the politicians made some bad noises about it. I
gathered that the pressures forced them to say no.''


His missed opportunity could not change what had already happened; the three
undefeated seasons, the 1,908 yards and 38 touchdowns. He entered the Air Force
for a career that included a tour of duty as a fighter-bomber pilot for 84
combat missions over North Vietnam. He coached at West Point and the Air Force
Academy. For six years he has lived in San Antonio, where he first met his wife,
Jody. ''I'm just learning how to play golf,'' he said.

His return to New York will add more perspective to his Heisman experience.
''I've been trying to sit down and think about what it means to me,'' he said.
''I think it really is more meaningful to me now. At 21, you're kind of all
mixed up, I guess. It's the culmination of a lot of things - ideals and goals
that you set for yourself and tried to reach. When I first started playing ball,
my dream was to be an all-American. Way back then, the Heisman was just getting
cranked up.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Felix Blanchard

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 5, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DOWSING FOR FUN, PROFIT AND COUNTRY

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


To the Editor:


I read with considerable interest ''Witching Water in the North Country'' (news
article, Nov. 17). As a member of the American Society of Dowsers, I am always
glad to see news items on this subject. However, the article contained at least
two misconceptions.  The first is that only a few people are able to dowse. Most
people can do so, in varying degrees, after being taught how. The American
Society of Dowsers holds a dowsing school each September at its headquarters in
Danville, Vt. Some people are more adept at the ''art'' than others and practice
is a prerequisite to the highest level of performance.

The second misconception is that one can dowse only with a forked stick. I was
first taught using two L-shape rods made of heavy metal wire. Later, I graduated
to a Y-shape rod made of plastic. I have a friend who brings an iron yoke from a
maple sledge to dowsers' meetings as a gag. When you dowse with this heavy
contraption, it nearly pulls you off your feet when you locate a vein of water.

During the Vietnam War, the Marines used L-shape rods to locate enemy bunkers
and ammunition caches. Utility companies frequently use them to locate
underground pipes.

As the article says, there are a multitude of theories about what makes dowsing
work. So far, no one has been able to produce a provable explanation.

M. SANFORD WEIL JR.  Northampton, Mass., Nov. 17, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 5, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PAUL NITZE TAKES A STAND IN CBS TRIAL

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1308 words


A. FARBER

Paul N. Nitze, a former Deputy Secretary of Defense, testified yesterday that he
told the producer of a disputed CBS documentary that he did not believe Gen.
William C. Westmoreland would have engaged in a conspiracy to deceive his
superiors about enemy troop strength.

Mr. Nitze, who is now the chief United States negotiator with the Soviet Union
in talks on limitation of intermediate-range nuclear weapons, appeared in
Federal District Court in Manhattan as the 16th witness for General Westmoreland
in his $120 million libel suit against CBS.

The suit stems from a January 1982 CBS Reports documentary, ''The Uncounted
Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' The broadcast, produced by George Crile, alleged a
''conspiracy'' at the ''highest levels'' of military intelligence to ''suppress
and alter critical intelligence on the enemy'' in the year before the Tet
offensive of January 1968.

The purpose of the ''conspiracy,'' according to the documentary, was to minimize
North Vietnamese and Vietcong strength to show that America was winning the war
in Vietnam. It said that General Westmoreland, the commander of American forces
in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968, imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on
reports of enemy size, partly by dropping the Vietcong's self-defense forces
from the official listing of enemy strength known as the order of battle.

'Difficult to Be Certain'


Mr. Nitze - who was Secretary of the Navy between 1963 and June 1967 and Deputy
Secretary of Defense from then until January 1969 - testified yesterday that he
had told Mr. Crile in August 1981 that ''it was extremely difficult to be
certain about intelligence estimates in a war of that complexity.''

He also recalled telling the producer that he had known General Westmoreland
since the general was superintendent at West Point between 1960 and 1963, and
that he was ''confident'' the general ''could not have been engaged in any kind
of operation to deceive the President or his advisers in Washington.''

Because of a scheduling conflict, General Westmoreland's testimony, which began
on Nov. 15, was interrupted to permit Mr. Nitze to testify.

David Boies, the lawyer for CBS, ended his cross-examination of General
Westmoreland by pointing to an exchange of cables in April and May 1968 between
the witness and Gen. Earle G. Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

The cables showed that after the Tet offensive, when the Central Intelligence
Agency wanted to double the estimate of enemy strength to a total ranging from
480,000 to 615,000, General Westmoreland continued to argue that it was ''not
possible'' to accurately count the self-defense forces and that publication of
any ''inflated'' numbers for them was ''contrary to the national interest.''

In one cable, General Westmoreland mentioned that a Colonel Dac - who he said
yesterday was then the highest- ranking defector from the North Vietnamese Army
- had told American intelligence officers that he ''did not believe that anyone
in the VC hierarchy could provide a good estimate of the number of self-defense
personnel.''

When General Wheeler indicated that President Johnson wanted an estimate of the
enemy's ''so-called insurgency base,'' General Westmoreland replied that a 1966
figure of 150,000 for the self-defense forces was ''harmless enough'' in the
context of other relatively low estimates agreed on by the intelligence
community in late 1967.

Mr. Boies - apparently to show that CBS may not have all the documents it needs
for its defense - also introduced a cable that General Westmoreland sent General
Wheeler on April 27, 1968, in which he said he had ''destroyed all copies'' of a
previous message ''and request that you do likewise.''

The general said he did not know why the April 27 cable had been sent or what
earlier message it referred to.

At another stage, General Westmoreland appeared to be embarrassed by a
discrepancy between testimony he had given on Nov. 21 and statements he was now
giving.

It began when Dan M. Burt, the general's lawyer, sought to introduce a May 19,
1967, memorandum found in Department of the Army files only last week - a
document that, unless General Westmoreland could identify it, might not be
received into evidence.

The two-page memorandum lent support to the general's often-repeated contention
that he wanted the self-defense and other enemy ''irregular'' forces analyzed in
1967 to identify which were armed, and that he had not secreted a study then
that showed the size of these forces to be higher than previously thought.

When General Westmoreland told the jury yesterday that he ordinarily read
memorandums of this kind when he was the commander in Vietnam, Mr. Boies noted
that, on Nov. 21, he testified that he did not read them regularly. ''I didn't
read documents or memoranda that were not necessary for the conduct of my
business,'' the general had said.

Now, General Westmoreland said, ''I was definitely in error'' on Nov. 21. ''I
didn't concentrate on the importance of the question.''

Eventually, Judge Pierre N. Leval allowed introduction of the memorandum, which
contained a scrawled note that General Westmoreland said was in his handwriting.

Mr. Nitze testified that he knew Mr. Crile because the producer had been married
to Anne Patten, the daughter of William Patten, a diplomat whom Mr. Nitze had
known since college at Harvard. Mr. Crile is now divorced from Miss Patten, who
is also the daughter of Susan Mary Alsop.

In August 1981, the former Defense Department official said in a low, measured
voice, Mr. Crile came to see him at his summer home in Northeast Harbor, Me.,
and told him of the project he was then in the midst of preparing for CBS. Mr.
Nitze said he could not recall the conversation ''verbatim'' but remembered its
substance.

''My recollection is that he described it as a program in which he would
demonstrate that there was great uncertainty, in fact, error in the figures
which had been prepared as to enemy strength in Vietnam,'' Mr. Nitze said. ''And
that he had evidence that these figures, in fact, had been put together in a way
in which, in a conspiracy to influence or deceive the President and/ or his
advisers in Washington.''

Mr. Nitze said he told Mr. Crile that he wasn't surprised that people had
differed sharply over enemy strength estimates - in a war that he recalled
saying was part conventional, part terrorist, part psychological and part
political. But he advised Mr. Crile, he added, that he had ''deep knowledge'' of
General Westmoreland's character and he didn't believe the general could have
been associated with the sort of conspiracy the producer was talking about.

On cross-examination, Mr. Boies tried to show that Mr. Nitze's memory of the
meeting with Mr. Crile was so ''vague'' that, during his deposition only a month
ago, Mr. Nitze was uncertain of where it had taken place.

Mr. Nitze said he had been uncertain not of the site of the meeting, but what
had initiated it.

Mr. Boies, in an effort to show the value of the self-defense forces to the
Vietcong, noted that Mr. Nitze had said in his deposition that those units were
responsible for terrorism. And now Mr. Nitze was also saying the units defended
their villages against American troops.

But Mr. Nitze said he was uncertain in 1967, as now, what importance to attach
to forces that ''could be one thing one day'' and ''the next day be something
else.''

During the war, he said, it was difficult to ''make a reasonable estimate as to
what those forces were.'' But, in terms of ''military capability,'' he said, to
have added their number to the enemy's regular forces was to have added
''flies'' to ''elephants.''

''When you aggregate elephants and flies,'' he remarked, ''you get nonsense.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 5, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'DISTRICT LINE,' FROM NEGRO ENSEMBLE

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


JOSEPH A. WALKER has not been much heard from since his corrosive family drama,
''The River Niger,'' won the Tony Award for best play a decade ago. ''District
Line,'' Mr. Walker's new work for the Negro Ensemble Company, may reflect the
frustrations of that long silence. A potpourri of clashing theatrical styles,
far- ranging political aper,cus and truncated emotional catharses, ''District
Line'' seems a jam-packed anthology of a talented writer's false starts and
half-developed projects. Even in Douglas Turner Ward's sleek, sensitive staging
at the Theater Four, the evening is a mess - albeit a peppery, well-acted mess.

The play apotheosizes a day in the life of taxicab drivers who wait for fares at
the district line, the boundary between Washington and its Maryland suburbs. At
his liveliest, Mr. Walker creates funny, pointed encounters between the hackers
and their passengers. In one bit, a proud black domestic, portrayed with gusto
by Saundra McClain, good-naturedly describes both the rewards and indignities of
serving as a paternalistic white family's unofficial matriarch for 20 years.
Samuel L. Jackson is just as vibrant as a fast-talking jive artist who wittily
defends robbery as a form of sophisticated protest against economic injustice.



Yet such sparky, self-contained cameos intermingle with fragmented, at times
cryptic accounts of the hackers' own melodramatic biographies. Washington may be
an exciting place and ''District Line'' may not be a realistic play, but Mr.
Walker's cabbies are involved in so many life- and-death confrontations that
credibility is soon left totally behind. One driver (Larry Sharp) pistol-whips a
colonel (John D. McNally) who once did him dirt in the Army; another (Frankie
Faison) is a violence-prone Vietnam veteran and former policeman who'll stop at
nothing to regain his badge. Even an aspiring cabbie (Richard Gant) proves to be
a busy operative in South Africa's anti- apartheid underground. While guns are
waved in dizzying profusion on stage and off, both the bullets and storytelling
are too scattershot to hit the play's various thematic targets.

Some of Mr. Walker's concerns are passionately conveyed by his flavorsome
dialogue, if not his dramatic events. The author seems particularly troubled by
the self-destructive anger that can divide a black community; the most
philosophical cabbie, a moonlighting Howard University teacher named Doc (a
genial C. Dumas), speaks eloquently about the fear that engenders such anger and
how it might be overcome. As in ''The River Niger,'' Mr. Walker is also
preoccupied with the bonds between fathers and sons, but this time he must
abruptly kill off one father and exhume the ghost of another to make his points.

The alternately obnoxious and sympathetic white characters - among them a
nymphomaniacal female lawyer and an octogenarian English couple contemplating
suicide - are completely unconvincing. But Mr. Walker, who has himself driven a
Washington cab, knowingly surveys a sociological and geographic topography
unknown to most tourists who visit the nation's capital. The Washington of
''District Line'' is an unglamorous place with an elaborate black class system
in town and an equally baroque white pecking order in the sprawling suburbs
beyond.



The authentic splashes of local color must co-exist with contrived metaphors
that are often explicated in choral verse by the entire company. Let anyone
mention a steering wheel and it's a cue for ruminations on ''the wheel of
life''; the district line carries more symbolic weight than Michael Bennett's
chorus line. The wise Doc, who serves as the evening's narrator, must not only
deliver such epiphanies but must also spell out vaporous esthetic principles
(''Reality is a villain - all is flux'') that sound like the author's defensive
attempts to rationalize choppy, disorganized writing as a form of stream of
consciousness.

''Go with the flow,'' Doc explains at one typical point, and, in his production,
Mr. Ward does exactly that. Both the pacing and acting maintain a comic brio, no
matter how diffuse or weighty the action becomes. Charles Henry McClennahan, the
set designer currently represented on Broadway with ''Ma Rainey's Black
Bottom,'' uses stylized taxi facades and George Segal-style sculpted figures to
suggest the hackers' waiting station. When it's time for a ride, the actors sail
forth on rolling chairs, traveling to destinations that now and then justify the
fare.


Line of Demarcation

DISTRICT LINE, by Joseph A. Walker; directed by Douglas Turner Ward; set design
by Charles Henry McClennahan; costumes by Myrna Colley-Lee; lighting by William
H. Grant 3d; sound by Bernard Hall; production stage manager, Jerry Cleveland.
Presented by the Negro Ensemble Company, Douglas Turner Ward, artistic director;
Leon B. Denmark, managing director. At Theater Four, 424 West 55th Street. Actor
9(Tweetie/Commodore)Graham Brown Actor 6(Doc)C. Dumas Actor 2(Cal)Frankie Faison
Actor 3(Zilikazi/Cal's Father)Richard Gant Actor 1(Andy/Richard Brown)John
Harnagel Actor 7(The Crook/Bra 'Jim)Samuel L. Jackson Actor
4(Rosette/Dovey)Saundra McClain Actor 10 (Colonel Fletcher)John D. McNally Actor
8(Your Majesty/Nancy)Peggy Schoditsch Actor 5(Ike/Larry Brown)Larry Sharp


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of C. Dumas and Frankie Faison

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 6, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS PRODUCER TESTIFIES AS A 'HOSTILE WITNESS'

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1376 words


Beginning a new phase of their case, lawyers for Gen. William C. Westmoreland
called to the stand as a ''hostile witness'' yesterday the CBS producer who was
chiefly responsible for the 1982 documentary on Vietnam that is the subject of
the general's $120 million libel suit.

George Crile, the 39-year-old producer who is a co-defendant with CBS and
others, began testifying late in the day as the first of a half-dozen CBS
employes the plaintiff will call in an effort to show the network knew or should
have known it was falsely accusing the general of conspiring to deceive his
superiors about enemy troop strength in South Vietnam in 1967.

Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's principal attorney, opened his examination
of Mr. Crile by suggesting that, in 1980, the producer was relatively
inexperienced, had been criticized for some of his earlier work at CBS and was
under pressure from his superiors at CBS to find a project he could undertake
without the assistance of a co-producer.

Mr. Crile said he approached all his work professionally.

''I always made an effort to to be as careful as I could be and to be as
faithful to events as was possible,'' he said. He said it was the job of his
superiors to ''complain'' about the work of all the CBS producers who carried
out projects for them.

McNamara to Testify

For nine weeks, the jury in Federal District Court has listened to the testimony
of 16 witnesses from the military, civilian intelligence agencies and the White
House of President Johnson. All of them have focused on the question of whether
the charges contained in the documentary were true. And, today, Mr. Crile's
testimony will be interrupted to allow the jury to hear from Robert S. McNamara,
the Secretary of Defense under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson.

But, with the testimony of Mr. Crile, General Westmoreland's lawyers are now
directing their case to the practices of making documentaries for television and
specifically to the preparation in 1980 and 1981 of the 90-minute broadcast
titled ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

The importance of what CBS knew when it put the documentary together was
underscored yesterday by David Boies, the lawyer for the network, just after
General Westmoreland completed nine days of testimony.

In a brief interim summation to the jury - an unusual feature of this trial
permitted by Judge Pierre N. Leval - Mr. Boies told the jury that ''to prevail''
in the suit, the general ''must prove not only that the broadcast was false -
and we think he has failed to do that, and, indeed, we think that the witnesses
that will come on throughout this trial will demonstrate that it was true.

''But, aside from that issue, he must prove that CBS, at the time the broadcast
was put on, knew that the broadcast was false or was reckless about it,'' Mr.
Boies said.

Mr. Burt, in his own interim summation, said the witnesses who preceded Mr.
Crile had established that ''the CBS broadcast was untrue'' and that any other
conclusion was ''simply ridiculous.'' The testimony of these witnesses, he said,
proved that the general ''couldn't have suppressed anything if he wanted to.''

General Westmoreland, who is 70, was commander of American forces in Vietnam
from January 1964 to June 1968, when he became Chief of Staff of the Army. The
general's testimony ended yesterday morning with a series of questions about the
military chain of command posed by Judge Leval.

The CBS broadcast alleged a ''conspiracy'' by his command in Vietnam to
''suppress and alter critical intelligence on the enemy'' in the year before the
Tet offensive of January 1968.

The purpose of the ''conspiracy,'' according to the documentary, was to minimize
North Vietnamese and Vietcong strength to show that America was winning the war.
The broadcast said General Westmoreland imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of
300,000 on reports of enemy size, partly by dropping the Vietcong's self-defense
forces from the official listing of enemy strength known as the the order of
battle.

Besides CBS and Mr. Crile, the defendants in the case are Mike Wallace, the
broadcast's narrator, and Samuel A. Adams, a 51-year old former Central
Intelligence Agency analyst who served as a paid consultant to the network on
the documentary.

Producer Knew C.I.A. Analyst

Mr. Adams was a C.I.A. specialist on Vietnam in 1967, when the agency clashed
with General Westmoreland's command over the estimates of the size and nature of
North Vietnamese and Vietcong strength. Mr. Adams had argued for substantially
higher figures than General Westmoreland and his senior military intelligence
officers were willing to accept. And, even before Mr. Adams resigned from the
C.I.A. in 1973, he had concluded that the military had engaged in ''deception''
over the numbers.

Yesterday, Mr. Crile testified that when he was working at Harper's magazine in
1975, he edited an article by Mr. Adams on this theme. He said he had known Mr.
Adams since the early 1970's.

Mr. Crile said the article generated hearings by a House Select Committee on
Intelligence and that the committee's counsel, Greg Rushford, told him the
committee supported Mr. Adams's thesis and was impressed by his ''mastery'' of
the subject.

In 1976, Mr. Crile said, he joined CBS as a correspondent/producer - essentially
a reporter's position - and during the next four years worked mainly on a
variety of documentaries, always with a co-producer.

Questioned About 1980 Program

Mr. Burt brought out that, in 1980, Mr. Crile was criticized for a documentary
he co-produced called ''Gay Power, Gay Politics,'' a study of the political
power exercised by homosexuals during a San Francisco mayoralty campaign in
1979.

As the result of an editing error, Mr. Crile said, applause that had occurred at
one point in a speech by Dianne Feinstein, who was a candidate, had been moved
up ''a few seconds'' in the broadcast.

Mr. Crile denied that his immediate superior at CBS in 1980, Howard Stringer, an
executive producer, was ''unhappy'' with his work, and said he received ''the
most challenging'' assignments ''given during that time.'' Mr. Stringer, he
said, thought the ''Gay Power, Gay Politics'' broadcast was ''a sound piece of
work.''

Mr. Crile said that Robert Chandler, who was then a CBS vice president for
administration, told him ''on a number of occasions'' before 1980 that he should
''do a show on his own.'' But Mr. Chandler, he said, did not mean it critically.
Having a single producer on a documentary, Mr. Crile said, offered ''more return
on the dollar.''

Mr. Crile said he saw Mr. Adams infrequently after 1976. In the spring of 1980,
while in Washington, Mr. Crile said he called Mr. Adams to ask whether he could
bring his daughter to Mr. Adams's farm in Virginia to see cows.

Q. Were you looking for a story when you called Adams?

A. No, my daughter was a New York girl of 3 who never had basically seen any
lawn other than Central Park and I thought it would be a good educational
experience for her.

But Mr. Crile said he and Mr. Adams discussed the book Mr. Adams was then
writing on the enemy strength dispute in 1967. The book, for which Mr. Adams was
given a contract by W. W. Norton after the Harper's article appeared, has yet to
be published.

In the fall of 1980, Mr. Crile said, he proposed the documentary on Vietnam to
CBS, based largely on Mr. Adams's ''rather extraordinary research.'' The
proposal was made in the form of a 16- page ''blue sheet'' that, yesterday, was
admitted into evidence. Mr. Crile said that, if the idea for a program does not
originate with superiors at CBS, a producer has ''to sell his story.''

When Mr. Burt suggested that the ''blue sheet,'' with its many references to a
''conspiracy'' by General Westmoreland and others, showed that Mr. Crile had a
preconceived notion of the documentary, the producer stressed that such a
proposal ''inevitably has an operating premise.''

At the close of testimony, Judge Leval instructed the jury that a ''preliminary
document'' like the ''blue sheet'' could not be considered to reflect the
defendants' ''state of mind'' when they ultimately prepared the documentary.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook;
The 'Order of Battle,' Then and Now

BYLINE: FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 516 words


Testimony in the case of Gen. William C. Westmoreland against CBS gives
unexpected prominence to a military intelligence branch known as the Order of
Battle. It informs commanders of the size, location and nature of the opposing
forces.

A question raised in the trial was whether figures of enemy strength cited in
Vietnam Order of Battle documents had been accurately transmitted to Washington.
When General Westmoreland referred to the ''so-called Order of Battle'' he
appeared to be playing down its importance and reliability. At one point he
referred to the Order of Battle as a producer of ''historical'' documents,
compiled for the record, that did not necessarily convey up-to-date data.

Some of us World War II Order of Battle (OB) alumni would have been profoundly
insulted by such a characterization of our work. In that war the OB was anything
but ''historical.''

OB began as a British enterprise. The War Office chose as its head an
anthropologist who specialized in the order of battle of the old Roman armies.
Any man who could reassemble long-departed ancient troops, the British figured,
could certainly do as  In World War II The Troop Count Was Hardly 'Historical'
much for live armies across the Channel. Col. Eric Birley, who was to become my
commanding officer, was a genius with a photographic memory, an analytical
magician who calmed his nerves with needlepoint and gourmet cooking.  Ten of us
Americans, fresh from four weeks of a grueling, top-secret training course, were
summoned to serve in the colonel's Military Intelligence Research Section,
installed in a charming but tightly guarded house in fashionable Kensington.  We
put together detailed estimates of the opposing forces, down to the last bakery
company. Beyond troop movements, locations and strengths, we analyzed the units'
past experience and training, the idiosyncrasies of their home regions and the
history and capacities of their officers.  Our information came from many
sources, including Germans captured in Italy or in commando raids. Even though
it was strictly verboten, it seemed as though every one of them kept a detailed
diary. We even learned the telephone extensions of our opposite numbers in
Berlin.

In those days commanders paid close attention to our work, and the enemy
appeared to know about it. Just before the American invasion of Sicily, the
Germans planted a phony order-of-battle map.

In our little enclave, expertise counted for more than rank, and the master
sergeant in charge staked his reputation on his belief that it was a phony. The
ruse was ignored and the invasion came off without casualties.

None of this is meant to deny the vast difference between fighting known Germans
and fighting unknown Vietnamese, regular and irregular. Still, it's easy to
speculate that Colonel Birley's motley crew of former civilians would have
constructively applied its persistent unorthodoxy to any enemy, regardless of
its unorthodoxy. We spoke the enemy's languages. We had no interest in military
politics. And we never thought of our work as merely for the record.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EGYPT BIDS U.S. ACCEPT P.L.O. IN PEACE TALKS

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 691 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Dec. 6


Egypt's Foreign Minister urged the United States today to become actively
involved again in efforts to resolve the Arab-Israeli conflict and to accept the
Palestine Liberation Organization as a participant in peace talks.

''This is a very appropriate time for the United States to assume its role as
full partner in the peace process,'' the Foreign Minister, Esmat Abdel Meguid,
said at a news conference. ''I hope our American friends can understand that we
cannot achieve peace without negotiating with the Palestinians and the P.L.O.''

Mr. Abdel Meguid said Egypt welcomed next week's visit here by Richard W.
Murphy, Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, and any help he
could offer in bringing about the withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon.

The Foreign Minister also said Egypt had seen encouraging signs from Prime
Minister Shimon Peres of Israel. His statement, on a visit to France, that
Israel is prepared to withdraw its troops from Lebanon without a simultaneous
commitment from Syria was a ''step forward,'' the Egyptian official said.

Arbitration Is Proposed


He said that Israel was expected to reply soon to an Egyptian request that their
dispute over Taba, a disputed 750- yard stretch of Sinai land, be submitted to
arbitration.

Several weeks ago, Egyptian sources said, Egypt and Israel discussed Taba at the
Rome headquarters of the multinational force that patrols Sinai. Egypt proposed
that both sides withdraw from Taba and that the multinational force police the
area until the dispute was arbitrated. The Israelis did not agree, Egyptian
officials said.

Mr. Abdel Meguid's news conference followed a visit by King Hussein of Jordan.
President Hosni Mubarak and the King declared their support for Arab- Israeli
peace talks based on United Nations Resolution 242, which calls for the return
of land by Israel in return for peace, and for ''self-determination'' for the
Palestinians.

The two leaders also endorsed an international peace conference that would be
attended by the P.L.O. and the Soviet Union. Israel and the United States have
rejected such a plan.

Others Forums Suggested


Mr. Abdel Meguid appeared eager to stress that Egypt did not believe that an
international peace conference was the only desirable forum for pursuing peace.
He added that an international conference was not incompatible with the 1978
Camp David peace accords, which provided the framework for Egypt's peace with
Israel in 1979.

King Hussein denounced the Camp David accords during his visit, but Mr. Abdel
Meguid said Egypt stood by previous commitments.

''There are so many different ways and means to reach a setttlement,'' he said.
''One should not exclude the other.''

He said he believed the P.L.O. had accepted the framework favored by Egypt and
Jordan. Other Egyptians said Yasir Arafat, the P.L.O. chairman, had not publicly
indicated a position.

Mr. Abdel Meguid urged the United States to change its position and negotiate
with the P.L.O.

''I remind our American friends that at a certain moment you don't have to
recognize an organization to negotiate with it,'' he noted. ''The U.S. during
the Vietnam War negotiated with the Vietcong.''

Washington has followed Israel's refusal to negotiate with the P.L.O., which
Israel says is a terrorist organization that does not recognize Israel's right
to exist.

Mr. Abdel Meguid's appeal to the United States reflected the priority Cairo
places on American involvement in the peace process. Diplomats said Egypt
believed that no peace initiative would make progress unless the United States
prodded Israel.

Despite Mr. Abdel Meguid's praise for Mr. Peres, Egypt fears that the Israeli
Government may be too weak and divided for new peace talks.

While praising Mr. Peres, Mr. Abdel Meguid indirectly criticized what he
indicated were less conciliatory statements from Foreign Minister Yitzhak
Shamir. The Egyptian said he hoped Mr. Shamir would realize ''that Egypt is an
Arab country and any attempt to try to dissociate Egypt from her Arab brothers
is certainly a very serious mistake.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Fugitive Is Arrested After Year in Woods

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 87 words

DATELINE: WANAQUE, N.J. Dec. 6


Facing burglary charges and determined not to be caught, a 37-year-old man
retreated to the woods where he lived in a lean-to for a year, only to be snared
by two officers disguised as hunters, the police said today.

The man, Carlton DeGroat, was wanted on warrants for two house burglaries in
this Passaic County community last winter.

Mr. DeGroat told Sgt. Robert Kronyak, a Wanaque detective, that he had learned
survival skills while serving in the armed service during the Vietnam War, the
detective said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 7, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

MCNAMARA DISCUSSES WAR AT CBS LIBEL TRIAL

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1514 words


Robert S. McNamara, the former Secretary of Defense, broke a 16-year silence on
the Vietnam War yesterday to testify at the CBS libel trial that, although he
had major policy differences with Gen. William C. Westmoreland during the war,
he did not believe the general had conspired to deceive him or President Johnson
and could not have succeeded if he had tried.

Mr. McNamara, who served Presidents Kennedy and Johnson as Secretary of Defense
from January 1961 to February 1968, told the jury in 30 minutes of direct
testimony in Federal District Court in Manhattan that General Westmoreland was
''a person of tremendous integrity'' who ''served his country well and whom I
have the highest regard for.''

In a much lengthier cross-examination, lawyers for CBS attempted to show that
Mr. McNamara himself had misled Congress and the public about the course of the
war and was now trying to justify his actions.

Mr. McNamara said that any optimism about the war that he appeared to convey on
Capitol Hill and at news conferences reflected the thinking of senior military
leaders and his own belief at the time that ''the political track'' toward
negotiations with Hanoi was still open.

Believed War Could Not Be Won

Speaking in a husky tenor - with light glancing off the gold tip of a black
fountain pen he cradled in his left hand - Mr. McNamara testified that, unlike
General Westmoreland, the Joint Chiefs of Staff and such White House aides as
Walt W. Rostow, he had come to the belief as early as 1965 or 1966 that the war
could ''not be won militarily.''

''I say this without saying that I was right and they were wrong,'' Mr. McNamara
said.

Mr. McNamara said the dispute over enemy strength in 1967 that has been the
subject of much testimony in the nine-week-old trial was known to him then and
represented nothing more than a difference of judgment - ''an honest
disagreement between people putting forth their best figures.''

Moreover, he said, he gave ''little weight'' to specific figures for North
Vietnamese or Vietcong troop strength because the numbers never ''added up''
logically and because he believed the enemy was composed of ''a continuum from
regular troops on the one hand to black pajama-clad youth and elderly on the
other.''

Mr. McNamara - who General Westmoreland had testified had a voracious appetite
for statistics and who only yesterday referred to a sentence as being ''roughly
40 percent down the page'' of a document he was holding - said he had ''a
constant skepticism of all figures.''

''I lived with uncertainty,'' he recalled before a courtroom whose every seat
was occupied.

Mr. McNamara said that even if General Westmoreland had sought to deceive his
superiors about enemy strength, he could not have gotten around a ''system of
cross-checks'' that, at Mr. McNamara's urging, provided for Central Intelligence
Agency review of military data.

Mr. McNamara's increasing pessimism about the war in the mid 1960's has been
clear for some years since he left office - and he said yesterday that it had
been known to the press as early as 1967. But until he agreed to testify for
General Westmoreland, he had refused, since 1968, to discuss his views publicly.

At his deposition last March, he said he did not believe that a participant in a
decision-making process, as he described himself, ''should be the judge of his
own actions or the validity of those actions.''

The former Defense Secretary, who retired as president of the World Bank in 1981
after 13 years there, said at his deposition that his answers were being
''extracted against my wishes.''

Mr. McNamara's gloomy feelings about the military side of the war - and his
differences with General Westmoreland - were reflected in a 22-page declassified
memorandum that Mr. McNamara sent President Johnson on May 19, 1967 and that was
introduced into evidence yesterday by Mr. Boies.

In the memo, Mr. McNamara opposed a request by General Westmoreland that he be
given 200,000 additional troops, to ''reinforce success'' and bring a resolution
of the war within several years. The general, who was commander of American
forces in Vietnam, was telling the President that his men were winning a ''war
of attrition.''

But, in his own memo to the President, Mr. McNamara wrote that the war was
''acquiring a momentum of its own that must be stopped. Dramatic increases in
United States troop deployments, in attacks on the North, or in ground actions
in Laos or Cambodia are not necessary and are not the answer. The enemy can
absorb them or counter them, bogging us down further and risking even more
serious escalation of the war.''

Mr. McNamara told the President that political initiatives - coupled with a
relatively modest increase in troop strength - could reduce ''the danger of
confrontation with China and the Soviet Union'' and improve ''our image in the
eyes of international opinion.''

Eventually, General Westmoreland received an extra 47,000 men.

In his $120 million suit against CBS, the general contends he was defamed on a
1982 CBS Reports documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' The
network says the documentary was true.

Broadcast Alleged 'Consipiracy'

The broadcast, produced by George Crile and narrated by Mike Wallace - both of
whom are defendants in the suit - alleged a ''conspiracy'' at the ''highest
levels'' of military intelligence to ''suppress and alter critical intelligence
on the enemy'' in the year before the Tet offensive of January 1968.

The purpose of the ''conspiracy,'' the documentary said, was to show progress in
the war by minimizing North Vietnamese and Vietcong strength.

The broadcast said General Westmoreland imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of
300,000 on reports of enemy size, partly by dropping the Vietcong's self-defense
forces from the official military listing of enemy strength known as the order
of battle.

Yesterday, Mr. McNamara testified that George Carver, the chief of Vietnamese
affairs for the C.I.A., had told him in 1967 of a dispute over enemy strength
estimates between General Westmoreland's command and the C.I.A., which favored
higher figures. He also said he was aware of which categories of enemy forces
were contained in the order of battle.

But Mr. McNamara seemed to be unfamiliar with the details of the 1967 dispute -
including the element, as the CBS program stated, that some officers under
General Westmoreland thought the official estimates were much lower than they
should have been.

Producer Called McNamara

In June 1981, Mr. McNamara testified, Mr. Wallace called him at the World Bank
and asked him to talk to Mr. Crile, who had been working on the CBS documentary
for months.

Mr. McNamara said that Mr. Crile told him that CBS had ''overwhelming evidence''
that General Westmoreland ''had conspired to deceive'' the Defense Secretary and
the President ''and that I would recognize the truth and force of it and that he
was certain I would wish to appear on the program in support of CBS's
contention.''

But Mr. McNamara, who declined to appear, said he told the producer that the
evidence was simply ''illustrative of the controversies that existed then and
had existed previously,'' over a variety of intelligence matters ranging from
the selection of bombing targets to the prospects of a military victory ''and in
my experience were customary in such situations, and were nothing more than
that.''

Mr. McNamara said Mr. Crile kept repeating the phrase ''faking the data'' and
added: ''I kept repeating that I didn't believe the data had been faked. I
didn't believe it had been suppressed. I didn't believe that General
Westmoreland would try to conspire to deceive the President and me.''

Mr. Crile, 39, who began testifying on Wednesday, is expected to return to the
stand when court resumes on Monday.

During his cross-examination of Mr. McNamara, Mr. Boies showed the former
Defense Secretary two pages of data, including figures concerning estimates of
enemy strength, that he had attached to his May 19, 1967 memo to the President.

Mr. Boies suggested that the inclusion of the data - the accuracy of which has
been brought into question during the testimony of earlier witnesses -
demonstrated Mr. McNamara's real concern with the figures.

Mr. McNamara insisted yesterday that, in the 22 pages of the memo, he had not
focused on that issue. But Mr. Boies noted that, on page 2 of the document, Mr.
McNamara mentioned that the ''VC/NVA order of battle is leveling off, and
General Westmoreland believes that, as of March, we reached the 'cross-over
point' - we began attriting more men than Hanoi can recruit or infiltrate each
month.''

''I stated that General Westmoreland and I had major differences of opinion,''
Mr. McNamara said.

When Mr. Boies asked whether the military intelligence ''process'' in 1967 had
been ''affected by political or public relations concerns'' - another point at
issue in this trial - Mr. McNamara replied: ''Not to my knowledge.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Artist's sketch of courtroom scene

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Say China Fired 52,000 Rounds Over Border

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 75 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 8


The Hanoi radio accused China today of stepping up border provocations by firing
more than 52,000 rounds of mortar and artillery into Vietnam last month.

The radio, monitored here, said the Chinese artillery attacks, mainly in Ha
Tuyen Province, had been coordinated with small ground and sea intrusions.

It said more than 100 Chinese troops were killed and more than 40 wounded
between Nov. 24 and Nov. 28 in fighting along the border.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JERSEY TESTS LOOK FOR DIOXIN EFFECT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 66, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 388 words

DATELINE: PATERSON, N.J., Dec. 8


Vietnam War veterans started checking into a hospital here this week to begin
what researchers said was the first scientific study in the country to determine
if the dioxin in the defoliant Agent Orange was responsible for medical problems
suffered by veterans.

''Unlike the statistical studies done by the Government, we're doing studies
with real people, the kind of work I think that Vietnam veterans want,'' said
Wayne P. Wilson, director of the New Jersey Agent Orange Commission, which is
sponsoring the study.

Peter Kahn, associate professor of biochemistry at Rutgers University, said the
veterans would spend about three days in the Barnert Memorial Hospital Center
for physical and psychologial tests.

Test samples of fatty tissue and blood will be sent to dioxin experts at the
University of Umea in Sweden for analysis, said Mr. Kahn, a coordinator of the
project. Rutgers scientists will compile statistics on the relation between
dioxin exposure and disorders suspected of being caused by the chemical.

Divided Into Two Groups


The 30 veterans from across the country are divided into two groups - those
heavily exposed to Agent Orange and a control group of those who were not. The
researchers said the veterans were chosen from among 2,000 volunteers to provide
a high degree of similarity in age, background and military service between the
two groups.

Six veterans checked into the hospital on Thursday, including Charles Krause, 37
years old, of Pompton Lakes, who served in the Air Force from 1966 to 1970. Mr.
Krause said he volunteered as soon as he heard about the study.

The study, which is being financed $125,000 in state funds, is called the
Pointman Project, after the soldier who would walk 20 to 30 paces ahead of his
squad and would be the first person exposed to enemy fire or booby traps.

Veterans who were exposed to Agent Orange have complained of ailments ranging
from skin rashes to miscarriages to cancer, and they have contended that their
children have suffered birth defects as a result of the parents' exposure to the
defoliant, which was sprayed across wide areas of Southeast Asia in the 1960's.

Dioxin, a byproduct of the manufacture of some herbicides including Agent
Orange, has been found to cause cancer and other problems in laboratory animals.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AGENCIES CHANNEL DONORS' AID TO CITY'S DESTITUTE

BYLINE: By MSGR. JAMES J. MURRAY By ROBERT E. CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 58, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1824 words


New York Catholic Charities


TO love one's neighbor is to care

for one's neighbor. While most of

us are able to care for our own needs, there are many in our midst who, through
no fault of their own, live in the twilight of poverty. They are the needy and
neediest, worthy of our assistance and compassion.

Helping them was on the mind of Adolph Ochs when he established The New York
Times Neediest Cases Fund in 1912.

At that time, the Catholic Charities of the Archdiocese of New York did not
exist in its present form. It was brought into being some seven years later as a
membership corporation to oversee the many and varied archdiocesan charitable
works. Until then, most of the charitable activities of the archdiocese were
carried out by small groups concerned with helping the young, the orphaned, the
sick and the aged.

The Roaring Twenties, with its postwar boom, saw a great wave of immigration.
The problems germane to such mass movements were, at best, unsettling.

The rashness of ''boom and bust'' reached extreme proportions with the historic
stock market crash, followed by the Great Depression. Sheer daily survival
became the broad issue for many thousands of families. Catholic Charities, aided
by the Neediest Cases Fund, made its impact. There was no panacea to a problem
of such vast proportions. Yet many a family's plight was eased and a serious
burden lessened.

The war years united the nation in a great military effort against a common
enemy. This giant struggle left some impact on most of us. It altered the
international stance of the nation forever.

The postwar years, the Korean conflict and the Vietnam era saw many changes on
the national scene. Programs were initiated to eradicate poverty. A firmer
duality and cooperation between the public and private sectors came into being.

The Neediest Cases took on different forms and dimensions. The principles of
private philanthropy were stengthened. Catholic Charities and the Neediest Cases
Fund not only reacted to the changes; they initiated many of them.

Who are today's neediest who will be helped by The 1984 New York Times Neediest
Cases Fund? They are the homeless huddled in the streets; they are the abandoned
and abused children; they are the unemployed or unemployables; they are the
frail elderly clinging tenaciously to their cherished independence in the face
of almost insurmountable odds. They are the many people who struggle to survive
in a world that overwhelms them. Their lives are cherished because they are
valuable.

Commitment to life at all stages has been and continues to be the basis of the
caring partnership between The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund and Catholic
Charities. It is worthy of your support, which is truly appreciated.




By JOYCE PHILLIPS AUSTIN


Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies



THE pernicious phenomenon of

poverty amid plenty continues to

challenge America's conscience as 1984 comes to a close.

Because we see the word ''poverty'' in print so often, it inevitably loses some
of its meaning. It is, perhaps, too easy for us to forget that for many
thousands of people, poverty means deprivation, hunger, pain, loneliness,
anxiety, and, sometimes, danger and despair.

In New York City, the ranks of the needy, the homeless and the hungry still
increase. Although many agencies seek to alleviate hunger, including some
members of the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies, the lines at soup
kitchens and food pantries continue to grow. The extreme lack of permanent,
affordable housing for New York's poor has barely begun to be addressed by the
authorities. Despite the city's efforts to provide temporary shelter, there are
reportedly more homeless people living in the streets today than last year. One
in four children in this city lives in poverty, and one in seven of the elderly
lives below the poverty line.

The cutbacks in Federal funds for social service programs continue to limit the
money available for many vital services. The initiative and compassion of
private contributors are, therefore, more important than ever.

Many voluntary agencies, struggling to maintain essential services to the needy,
need guidance or technical assistance in management and administration in order
to deliver quality services most effectively and efficiently. Scores of such
agencies receive that help from the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies,
''the hand that helps the helping hands.''

The federation, the only federation of Protestant and nonsectarian service
agencies in the nation, is a planning, consulting and coordinating organization
for more than 250 agencies in the New York metropolitan area that provide vital
services to children, youth, families, and the elderly. Each year, the
federation and its agencies bring help to more than one million needy people of
all races, ages and faiths.

The federation's Division on Children, Youth and Families works with more than
200 voluntary service agencies. At least 90 of these operate from more than one
location, and more than 100 provide services citywide.

As just one example of its initiatives, the division recently was involved in
the founding and funding of a job-training program for pregnant teen-agers in
Brooklyn. This project includes a day-care service as well as parent training.

The federation's Division on Aging provides similar help to about 120
organizations serving the elderly throughout the city and in surrounding
counties. These organizations include nursing homes, hospitals, senior centers,
home-care and home-attendant programs.

Through the Division on Aging, the federation brings together organizations to
explore issues directly concerning the elderly and the agencies that serve them,
to improve the delivery of services wherever needed. For example, we are now
heavily involved in an investigation of the tragic problem of elderly abuse -
physical, emotional and financial - and we are focusing the attention of many
agencies on the problem to find ways to deal with it.

The federation's other activities include an outreach program to help churches
to develop and expand social service programs and to take advantage of
federation services; a program to help agencies establish and manage programs
for volunteers and to provide volunteers to agencies on all levels, and a
monitoring and advocacy program in the field of public social policy.

The federation also provides scholarships for technical and vocational training
and for graduate social work eduction, and conducts a personal referral service
that aids thousands of troubled people annually.

The Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies receives no government funding; it
is enabled to carry out its programs through the generosity of private,
individual donors. We are deeply grateful for past support by readers of The New
York Times, and we hope you will continue to help us help others in this season
of renewed charity and goodwill toward all.






Staten Island Family Service



STATEN Island Family Service,

the oldest nonsectarian counseling agency on Staten Island, has been carrying
out its mandate of trying to preserve the family unit for the last 65 years.

Over the years, this task has been made more difficult by the ever- changing
economic and social pressures within our society. However, the generosity of the
contributors to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund makes it possible to meet
the needs of those less fortunate, both financially and emotionally.

For Barbara D. and her two children, life has been full of hardship and
suffering. Her husband's desertion after 16 years of marriage has been a
traumatic experience on Barbara D. and her two children. To compensate for her
loneliness, she turned to alcohol, frequently coming home drunk. The teen-age
daughters, seeing their family dissolving, began to be truant from school and
stay away from home for periods of time. The school authorities saw a need for
counseling and made a referral to our Agency.

At this time, some stability has been brought back into Barbara D.'s home. The
family counseling of a professional social worker at the agency has tempered
Barbara D.'s drinking, is resolving the children's running away from home and
has assisted Barbara D. in pursuing support from her husband through legal
channels. However, counseling on a weekly basis must be maintained if this
family is ever to be able to function as a normal family.

This case is typical of how the stress and strains of everyday living on a
family can chip away at its very foundation. The causes of the stress and
strains are many, but generally can be divided into economic, emotional and
social areas.

A cycle of abuse and deterioration can be seen in the case of Marvin G. and his
two young children. He and his wife recently divorced. The court, viewing Marvin
G.'s wife as an abuser of the children, granted Mr. G. custody of his children.
Marvin G. is on the borderline of poverty. Faced with rearing two, small
children and caring for an elderly grandmother, Marvin G. sought the counseling
of our agency.

At this point, counseling sessions have been arranged for Marvin G., his former
wife and their children in an effort to diffuse the level of violence to help
the children see their parents as persons who can provide a nurturing
atmosphere. Plans are being developed to enroll the parents in individual
counseling sessions so they can learn to control their feelings of anger and
frustration, and to provide more appropriate role models for their children.

The board of directors and staff of the agency have become aware of the
increasing emotional devastation placed on children of divorced parents and
those in the process of divorce. To meet this need, the agency is starting a
Program for Children of Divorced and Divorcing Parents. The program provides
group counseling for children and adolescents, ages 7 through 17.

No matter how responsible parents are toward their children, children of divorce
suffer from confusion, feelings of anger, rejection and abandonment, as well as
guilt that they may have helped caused the divorce. In the program, children and
adolescents meet in weekly group sessions to discuss their feelings, concerns
and issues relating to the changes in their life. The initial reception of the
program has been most impressive. However, its development can only be made
possible by the generosity of your contribution to The New York Times Neediest
Cases Fund.

Contributors to the Neediest Cases, are part of a major effort in our city to
help families and individuals in crisis obtain the necessary immediate
counseling that allows them to continue living and working and contributing to
our community. Participation supports counseling services that help people
overcome conditions that destroy lives and their human dignity.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE MENTAL DEFICIT

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 756 words


WASHINGTON The conversation of a great capital is important, and here in

Washington these days it's mainly about money: about deficits in the Federal
budget, deficits in the nation's world trade, about tax burdens and tax
shelters.

This not only dominates the talk of the city but the newspaper headlines and the
evening television reports. We are battered and stunned by the statistics of the
economists, who are telling us, quite rightly, that we're the richest people on
earth but can't pay our bills.

Meanwhile, there is a kind of mental deficit in the land that doesn't get the
attention it deserves. Consider the latest report by the National Endowment for
the Humanities on undergraduate education in the United States. It warns that
many college graduates today lack even the most rudimentary knowledge about the
history, literature, art and philosophical foundations of their own nation and
civilization.

''It is simply not possible,'' says William J. Bennett, the chairman of the
survey, ''for students to understand their society without studying its
intellectual legacy . . . On too many campuses the curriculum has become a
self-service cafeteria through which students pass without being nourished.'' If
the past is hidden from them, he concludes, they will become aliens in their own
culture, strangers in their own land.

This complaint is not new, of course, but the connection between education and
policy, or rather the lack of connection, has never seemed more alarming than in
the history of the last two generations.

For example, the fierce debate in the last Presidential election over the
relationship between church and state is only the latest evidence of mental
confusion over the long American history on this subject. Further afield, an
argument can be made that many of our failures in Korea, Vietnam, Iran and
Lebanon were rooted in ignorance of the history and religions of the people who
live there.

And Mr. Bennett's warning of the need for improved education about our own
culture and the other cultures of the world is made all the more urgent by the
fact that we have lost control of our borders and are faced with serious task of
integrating literally millions of new Americans into the common life of the
nation.

The problem is not that these issues are neglected in the nation as a whole.
Never has any society spawned as many study groups as this country has since the
last world war. The libraries are full of their good work. The trouble is that
most of the reports are filed and forgotten, and that many of the new think
tanks have become instruments of partisan politics.

The debate on the nuclear arms race illustrates one part of the problem. The
discussion goes on within the government and within the universities and private
institutions, but there is not nearly as much contact between the two
often-opposing strains of thought as there ought to be.

For example, four of our most experienced former officials - McGeorge Bundy,
George F. Kennan, Robert S. McNamara and Gerard Smith - recently published a
study on the conflict between the President's ''Star Wars'' policy and his
forthcoming negotiations with the Russians on nuclear arms control.

In their view, these two policies are in flat contradiction, and the point here
is not whether they are right or wrong, but that there is no serious
conversation by the Administration with these four men, though the
Administration will inevitably have to answer their arguments to get a nuclear
program through the Congress.

In short, there is endless talk here about the cost of everything and not enough
about the value of anything. The place hums with computers, but they don't
control the mental deficit.

Maybe there's a clue to this problem from the past. When Edmund Burke wrote
about the decline of chivalry, he complained that ''the economists and
calculators'' had taken over, along with the ''sophisters,'' those masters of
plausible but misleading argument.

He was a little hard on the economists, but he had a point. He thought they were
trying to turn the poetry of life into a timetable. Leave it to them, he
insisted, and the ''spirit of exalted freedom, the unbought grace of life is
gone.''

Burke was undoubtedly right, however, in appealing for a little more leisure and
a lot more education and honest conversation among adversaries. It might even
lead, he thought, to a little more ''humorous kindliness,'' and we sure could
use more of that around Washington in the coming battle of the budget.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ, WEINBERGER NONDIFFERENCES

BYLINE: By J. William Fulbright and Seth P. Tillman

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It has been widely taken as something of a paradox that Secretary of State
George P. Shultz has emerged within the Reagan Administration as a vigorous
advocate of the use of force, while the Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger advocates caution and discrimination in the application of American
military power. In fact, there may be less to their apparent differences than
meets the eye.

This is not to say that there are no differences, or that the ''Weinberger
doctrine'' is not a useful statement of the need for prudence drawn from the
Vietnam experience. Nor is this the first time that the professional military,
for which Mr. Weinberger speaks, has recognized potential hazards that diplomats
and politicians tend to overlook. It was the infantry generals, above all
President Dwight D. Eisenhower himself, who opposed American involvement in the
first Indochina war in 1954, as against the inclinations of then Vice President
Richard M. Nixon and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles. Soldiers are
understandably wary of quagmires.

On the more fundamental level of policy and national interest, however, there is
little apparent difference between the two secretaries' approaches. Neither
suggests any reconsideration of the deep-seated anti-Sovietism that forms the
core of the Administration's foreign policy. And while they may differ as to
when and how it should be used, both regard military force as the primary in J.
William Fulbright was Democratic Senator from Arkansas from 1944 to 1974 and
chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee from 1959 to 1974. Seth P.
Tillman, research professor of diplomacy at the Georgetown University School of
Foreign Service, was a member of the committee staff from 1961 to 1977.

[TEXT OMITTED FROM SOURCE] strument of American foreign policy.  In his speech
on terrorism on Oct. 25, Mr. Shultz called for a ''strategy'' of pre-emption,
retaliation and surprise, even in the absence of ''evidence that can stand up in
an American court of law.'' He also advised against any questioning of the
policies against which acts of terrorism are ostensibly directed lest this be
seen as a ''reward'' to terrorists.  Mr. Weinberger, for his part, said last
week that he would commit the armed forces only if certain ''tests'' were met:
the commitment must, among other things, be deemed vital to our national
interest and be undertaken ''wholeheartedly and with the clear intention of
winning.'' These tests were evidently conceived as a corrective to the mistakes
made in Vietnam, but they are so broad and subjective, so amenable to the widest
variety of interpretation, that, had they been in place at the time, it is
hardly likely they would have posed a serious obstacle to our involvement and
escalation in Vietnam.  Both men also chafe under more objective,
institutionalized restraints such as the War Powers Resolution of 1973. ''We
will need the capability to act on a moment's notice,'' Mr. Shultz said in his
recent speech. ''There will not be time for a renewed national debate after
every terrorist attack.'' Mr. Weinberger and his Pentagon colleagues have made
no secret of their dislike of the resolution, which, despite certain
shortcomings, comes as close as has been found possible to establishing
objective, legally binding rules governing military commitments abroad. Both
secretaries stress the need of public and Congressional support, but neither
seems aware of what is perhaps the single most compelling lesson of Vietnam:
that neither the people nor their representatives can be expected to support
protracted military involvements undertaken by Presidential fiat or subterfuge.
It is easy enough to drum up public enthusiasm for showcase trivialities like
the invasion of Grenada, which the Administration has elevated to the rank of
Agincourt and Waterloo in the annals of military glory. More consequential
involvements require the exercise by Congress of its constitutionally mandated
war powers. As Senator John C. Stennis said in 1973 in support of war powers
legislation: ''In the long run, the only stable basis for continued confidence
in our Government is to have the people participate in the major decision of
whether we are to have war or peace. The only practical way for the people to
participate is through their elected representatives - the Congress.''

But even more fundamental than the debates within the Reagan Administration over
''rules of engagement'' is what is not being debated. Fascinated as they are
with the weapons and tactics to be used in waging the battle against the ''evil
empire,'' our policy makers show little discernible interest in how that battle
might be moderated and perhaps eventually ended. Despised if not forgotten is
the detente that flourished briefly in the early 1970's, when Henry A. Kissinger
spoke of the ''special duty'' of the superpowers ''to see to it that
confrontations are kept within bounds that do not threaten civilized life.'' The
greatest lack and the greatest need in American foreign policy is a conception
of world order. In lieu of that today we have a precarious nuclear peace based
on mutual deterrence. The underlying premise of this elaborate system of
delicately balanced threats and counterthreats is mutual blackmail, and if
either side could mount a successful first strike without suffering major damage
itself, it would do so. The international system today - if it can be called a
''system'' - is based on the ingenuity and technological virtuosity of
''strategic doctrine.'' Maintaining the peace is not a common interest but a
game of wits - a perpetual ''war game'' in which a single major miscalculation
by either side will bring general catastrophe.

A stable system requires a more solid foundation. Now as in the past, lasting
peace requires some minimal shared commitment on the part of the great powers to
sustain and protect the international order. Such was the original intent of the
United Nations Charter and of Franklin D. Roosevelt's conception of the ''four
policemen'' who it was hoped would make it work. Such too was the intent of the
Nixon detente of the early 1970's, consisting of such disparate but mutually
reinforcing elements as arms control, the Berlin access agreement of 1972, the
aborted trade agreement of that year, scientific and cultural exchanges and
proposed annual summit meetings between the superpowers.

There is no possibility whatever at this late date of either superpower
neutralizing the vast destructive capacity of the other, no matter how many
nuclear weapons it builds nor how ingenious its strategic doctrine. All we can
hope to do is to influence each other's intentions in a constructive direction.

Implicit in the arrangements that came to be called detente was the concept of
an evolving system of superpower collaboration for the limited but crucial
purpose of preserving the world order against the nuclear threat. The absence of
a conception of this kind is the principal threat to world peace and the great
failing of current American foreign policy. B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 9, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HUCKLEBERRY FINN, ALIVE AT 100

BYLINE: Norman Mailer

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2384 words


Is there a sweeter tonic for the doldrums than old reviews of

great novels? In 19th-century Russia, ''Anna Karenina'' was

received with the following: ''Vronsky's passion for his horse

runs parallel to his passion for Anna'' . . . ''Sentimental rubbish'' . . .
''Show me one page,'' says The Odessa Courier, ''that contains an idea.''
''Moby-Dick'' was incinerated: ''Graphic descriptions of a dreariness such as we
do not remember to have met with before in marine literature'' . . . ''Sheer
moonstruck lunacy'' . . . ''Sad stuff. Mr. Melville's Quakers are wretched dolts
and drivellers and his mad captain is a monstrous bore.''

By this measure, ''Huckleberry Finn'' (published 100 years ago this week in
London and two months later in America) gets off lightly. The Springfield
Republican judged it to be no worse

Norman Mailer's latest novel is ''Tough Guys Don't Dance.'' than ''a gross
trifling with every fine feeling. . . . Mr.  Clemens has no reliable sense of
propriety,'' and the public library in Concord, Mass., was confident enough to
ban it: ''the veriest trash.'' The Boston Transcript reported that ''other
members of the Library Committee characterize the work as rough, coarse, and
inelegant, the whole book being more suited to the slums than to intelligent,
respectable people.''

All the same, the novel was not too unpleasantly regarded. There were no large
critical hurrahs but the reviews were, on the whole, friendly. A good tale, went
the consensus. There was no sense that a great American novel had landed on the
literary world of 1885. The critical climate could hardly anticipate T. S. Eliot
and Ernest Hemingway's encomiums 50 years later. In the preface to an English
edition, Eliot would speak of ''a master piece. . . . Twain's genius is
completely realized,'' and Ernest went further. In ''Green Hills of Africa,''
after disposing of Emerson, Hawthorne and Thoreau, and paying off Henry James
and Stephen Crane with a friendly nod, he proceeded to declare, ''All modern
American literture comes from one book by Mark Twain called 'Huckleberry Finn.'
. . . It's the best book we've had. All American writing comes from that. There
was nothing before. There has been nothing as good since.''

Hemingway, with his nonpareil gift for nosing out the perfect vin du pays for an
ineluctable afternoon, was nonetheless more like other novelists in one dire
respect: he was never at a loss to advance himself with his literary judgments.
Assessing the writing of others, he used the working author's rule of thumb: if
I give this book a good mark, does it help appreciation of my work? Obviously,
''Huckleberry Finn'' has passed the test.


A* SUSPICION immediately arises. Mark Twain is doing the kind of writing only
Hemingway can do better. Evidently, we must take a look. May I say it helps to
have read ''Huckleberry Finn'' so long ago that it feels brand-new on picking it
up again. Perhaps I was 11 when I saw it last, maybe 13, but now I only remember
that I came to it after ''Tom Sawyer'' and was disappointed. I couldn't really
follow ''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn.'' The character of Tom Sawyer whom
I had liked so much in the first book was altered, and did not seem nice any
more. Huckleberry Finn was altogether beyond me. Later, I recollect being
surprised by the high regard nearly everyone who taught American Lit. lavished
upon the text, but that didn't bring me back to it. Obviously, I was waiting for
an assignment from The New York Times.

Let me offer assurances. It may have been worth the wait. I suppose I am the
10-millionth reader to say that ''Huckleberry Finn'' is an extraordinary work.
Indeed, for all I know, it is a great novel. Flawed, quirky, uneven, not above
taking cheap shots and cashing far too many checks (it is rarely above milking
its humor) - all the same, what a book we have here! I had the most curious
sense of excitement. After a while, I understood my peculiar frame of attention.
The book was so up-to- date! I was not reading a classic author so much as
looking at a new work sent to me in galleys by a publisher. It was as if it had
arrived with one of those rare letters which says, ''We won't make this claim
often but do think we have an extraordinary first novel to send out.'' So it was
like reading ''From Here to Eternity'' in galleys, back in 1950, or ''Lie Down
in Darkness,'' ''Catch-22,'' or ''The World According to Garp'' (which reads
like a fabulous first novel). You kept being alternately delighted, surprised,
annoyed, competitive, critical and finally excited. A new writer had moved onto
the block. He could be a potential friend or enemy but he most certainly was
talented.

That was how it felt to read ''Huckleberry Finn'' a second time. I kept
resisting the context until I finally surrendered. One always does surrender
sooner or later to a book with a strong magnetic field. I felt as if I held the
work of a young writer about 30 or 35, a prodigiously talented fellow from the
Midwest, from Missouri probably, who had had the audacity to write a historical
novel about the Mississippi as it might have been a century and a half ago, and
this young writer had managed to give us a circus of fictional virtuosities. In
nearly every chapter new and remarkable characters bounded out from the printed
page as if it were a tarmac on which they could perform their leaps.  The
author's confidence seemed so complete that he could deal with every kind of man
or woman God ever gave to the middle of America.  Jail-house drunks like Huck
Finn's father take their bow, full of the raunchy violence that even gets into
the smell of clothing.  Gentlemen and river rats, young, attractive girls full
of grit and ''sand,'' and strong old ladies with aphorisms clicking like
knitting needles, fools and confidence men - what a cornucopia of rabble and
gentry inhabit the author's river banks.

It would be superb stuff if only the writer did not keep giving away the fact
that he was a modern young American working in 1984. His anachronisms were not
so much in the historical facts - those seemed accurate enough - but the point
of view was too contemporary. The scenes might succeed - say it again, this
young writer was talented! - but he kept betraying his literary influences. The
author of ''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'' had obviously been taught a lot
by such major writers as Sinclair Lewis, John Dos Passos and John Steinbeck; he
had certainly lifted from Faulkner and the mad tone Faulkner could achieve when
writing about maniacal men feuding in deep swamps; he had also absorbed much of
what Vonnegut and Heller could teach about the resilience of irony. If he had a
surer feel for the picaresque than Saul Bellow in ''Augie March,'' still he felt
derivative of that work. In places one could swear he had memorized ''The
Catcher in the Rye,'' and he probably dipped into ''Deliverance'' and ''Why Are
We in Vietnam?'' He might even have studied the mannerisms of movie stars. You
could feel traces of John Wayne, Victor McLaglen and Burt Reynolds in his pages.
The author had doubtless digested many a Hollywood comedy on small-town life.
His instinct for life in hamlets on the Mississippi before the Civil War was as
sharp as it was farcical, and couldn't be more commercial.

No matter. With talent as large as this, one could forgive the obvious eye for
success. Many a large talent has to go through large borrowings in order to find
his own style, and a lust for popular success while dangerous to serious writing
is not necessarily fatal. Yes, one could accept the pilferings from other
writers, given the scope of this work, the brilliance of the concept - to catch
rural America by a trip on a raft down a great river! One could even marvel
uneasily at the depth of the instinct for fiction in the author. With the boy
Huckleberry Finn, this new novelist had managed to give us a character of no
comfortable, measurable dimension. It is easy for characters in modern novels to
seem more vivid than figures in the classics but, even so, Huckleberry Finn
appeared to be more alive than Don Quixote and Julian Sorel, as naturally near
to his own mind as we are to ours. But how often does a hero who is so
absolutely natural on the page also succeed in acquiring convincing moral
stature as his adventures develop?

It is to be repeated. In the attractive grip of this talent, one is ready to
forgive the author of ''Huckleberry Finn'' for every influence he has so
promiscuously absorbed. He has made such fertile use of his borrowings. One
could even cheer his appearance on our jaded literary scene if not for the
single transgression that goes too far. These are passages that do more than
borrow an author's style - they copy it! Influence is mental, but theft is
physical. Who can declare to a certainty that a large part of the prose in
''Huckleberry Finn'' is not lifted directly from Hemingway? We know that we are
not reading Ernest only because the author, obviously fearful that his tone is
getting too near, is careful to sprinkle his text with ''a-clutterings'' and
''warn'ts'' and ''anywheres'' and ''t'others.'' But we have read Hemingway - and
so we see through it - we know we are reading pure Hemingway disguised:


''We cut young cottonwoods and willows, and hid the raft with them. Then we set
out the lines. Next we slid into the river and had a swim . . . then we set down
on the sandy bottom where the water was about knee-deep and watched the daylight
come. Not a sound anywheres . . . the first thing to see, looking away over the
water, was a kind of dull line - that was the woods on t'other side; you
couldn't make nothing else out; then a pale place in the sky; then more paleness
spreading around; then the river softened up away off, and warn't black anymore
. . . by and by you could see a streak on the water which you know by the look
of the streak that there's a snag there in a swift current which breaks on it
and makes that streak look that way; and you see the mist curl up off of the
water and the east reddens up and the river.''


Up to now I have conveyed, I expect, the pleasure of reading this book today. It
is the finest compliment I can offer. We use an unspoken standard of relative
judgment on picking up a classic. Secretly, we expect less reward from it than
from a good contemporary novel. The average intelligent modern reader would
probably, under torture, admit that ''Heartburn'' was more fun to read, minute
for minute, than ''Madame Bovary,'' and maybe one even learned more. That is not
to say that the first will be superior to the second a hundred years from now
but that a classic novel is like a fine horse carrying an exorbitant impost.
Classics suffer by their distance from our day-to-day gossip. The mark of how
good ''Huckleberry Finn'' has to be is that one can compare it to a number of
our best modern American novels and it stands up page for page, awkward here,
sensational there - absolutely the equal of one of those rare incredible first
novels that come along once or twice in a decade. So I have spoken of it as kin
to a first novel because it is so young and so fresh and so all-out silly in
some of the chances it takes and even wins. A wiser older novelist would never
play that far out when the work was already well along and so neatly in hand.
But Twain does.

For the sake of literary propriety, let me not, however, lose sight of the
actual context. ''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'' is a novel of the 19th
century and its grand claims to literary magnitude are also to be remarked upon.
So I will say that the first measure of a great novel may be that it presents -
like a human of palpable charisma - an all-but-visible aura. Few works of
literature can be so luminous without the presence of some majestic symbol. In
''Huckleberry Finn'' we are presented (given the possible exception of Anna
Livia Plurabelle) with the best river ever to flow through a novel, our own
Mississippi, and in the voyage down those waters of Huck Finn and a runaway
slave on their raft, we are held in the thrall of the river. Larger than a
character, the river is a manifest presence, a demiurge to support the man and
the boy, a deity to betray them, feed them, all but drown them, fling them
apart, float them back together. The river winds like a fugue through the marrow
of the true narrative which is nothing less than the ongoing relation between
Huck and the runaway slave, this Nigger Jim whose name embodies the very stuff
of the slave system itself - his name is not Jim but Nigger Jim. The growth of
love and knowledge between the runaway white and the runaway black is a relation
equal to the relation of the men to the river for it is also full of betrayal
and nourishment, separation and return. So it manages to touch that last fine
nerve of the heart where compassion and irony speak to one another and thereby
give a good turn to our most protected emotions.


READING ''Huckleberry Finn'' one comes to realize all over again that the near-
burned-out, throttled, hate-filled dying affair between whites and blacks is
still our great national love affair, and woe to us if it ends in detestation
and mutual misery. Riding the current of this novel, we are back in that happy
time when the love affair was new and all seemed possible. How rich is the
recollection of that emotion! What else is greatness but the indestructible
wealth it leaves in the mind's recollection after hope has soured and passions
are spent? It is always the hope of democracy that our wealth will be there to
spend again, and the ongoing treasure of ''Huckleberry Finn'' is that it frees
us to think of democracy and its sublime, terrifying premise: let the passions
and cupidities and dreams and kinks and ideals and greed and hopes and foul
corruptions of all men and women have their day and the world will still be
better off, for there is more good than bad in the sum of us and our workings.
Mark Twain, whole embodiment of that democratic human, understood the premise in
every turn of his pen, and how he tested it, how he twisted and tantalized and
tested it until we are weak all over again with our love for the idea.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 10, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM SPEECH BY SHULTZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 834 words


Following are excerpts from Secretary of State George P. Shultz's address
Saturday to a Yeshiva University convocation at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in
Manhattan:


Today, as we meet, a terrible tragedy is taking place on the other side of the
globe. The atrocity of the terrorist hijacking in Teheran continues - a brutal
challenge to the international community as well as to the most elementary
standards of justice and humanity. One way or another, the law-abiding nations
of the world will put an end to terrorism and to this barbarism that threatens
the very foundations of civilized life.

Unlike most other peoples, Americans are united neither by a common ethnic and
cultural origin nor by a common set of religious beliefs. But we are united by a
shared commitment to some fundamental principles: tolerance, democracy, equality
under the law, and, above all, freedom. We have overcome great challenges in our
history largely because we have held true to these principles.

For the world's leading democracy, the task is not only immediate self-
preservation but our responsibility as a protector of international peace, on
whom many other countries rely for their security.

Power and Diplomacy


Americans, being a moral people, want our foreign policy to reflect the values
we espouse as a nation. But, being a practical people, we also want our foreign
policy to be effective. And, therefore, we are constantly asking ourselves how
to reconcile our morality and our practical sense, how to relate our strength to
our purpose - in a word, how to relate power and diplomacy.

Americans have sometimes tended to think that power and diplomacy are two
distinct alternatives. This reflects a fundamental misunderstanding. The truth
is, power and diplomacy must always go together, or we will accomplish very
little in this world. Power must always be guided by purpose. At the same time,
the hard reality is that diplomacy not backed by strength will always be
ineffectual at best, dangerous at worst.

The use of power is legitimate:


- Not when it crushes the human spirit and tramples human freedom, but when it
can help liberate a people or support the yearning for freedom;


- Not when it imposes an alien will on an unwilling people, but when its aim is
to bring peace or to support peaceful processes; when it prevents others from
abusing their power through aggression or oppression;


- And not when it is applied unsparingly, without care or concern for innocent
life, but when it is applied with the greatest efforts to avoid unnecessary
casualties and with a conscience troubled by the pain unavoidably inflicted.

Our great challenge is to learn to use our power when it can do good, when it
can further the cause of freedom and enhance international security and
stability.

Support of the Public


There is no such thing as guaranteed public support in advance. Grenada shows
that a President who has the courage to lead will win public support if he acts
wisely and effectively. And Vietnam shows that public support can be frittered
away if we do not act wisely and effectively.

Americans will always be reluctant to use force. It is the mark of our decency.
And clearly, the use of force must always be a last resort, when other means of
influence have proven inadquate. But a great power cannot free itself so easily
from the burden of choice. It must bear responsibility for the consequences of
its inaction as well as for the consequences of its action. In either case, its
decision will affect the fate of many other human beings in many parts of the
world.

If one were looking for a model of how nations should approach the dilemmas of
trying to balance law and justice with self-preservation, one need look no
further than Israel.

It is not that Israel has made no mistakes in its history. In this world, that
is too much to ask of any nation. But the people of Israel, in keeping with
their tradition, have engaged in open, continual and enlightened debate over the
central question of when it is just and necessary to use power.

Role of the U.S.


We in America must be no less conscious of the moral responsibility inherent in
our role as a great power and as a nation deeply devoted to justice and freedom.
We look forward to the day when empire and tyranny no longer cast a shadow over
the lives of men and women. We look forward to the day when terrorists, like the
hijackers in Teheran, can find not one nation willing to tolerate their
existence. But until that day comes, the United States will fulfill the role
that history has assigned to us.

Our challenge is to forge policies that keep faith with our principles. We know,
as the most powerful free nation on earth, that our burden is great, but so is
our opportunity to do good. We must use our power with discretion, but we must
not shrink from the challenges posed by those who threaten our ideals, our
friends and our hopes for a better world.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ-WEINBERGER DISCORD SEEN IN NEARLY ALL FOREIGN POLICY ISSUES

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1722 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 10


As President Reagan prepares for a second term, his two top foreign policy
advisers, Secretary of State George P. Shultz and Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger, are reported at odds on virtually all foreign policy issues, often
to the frustration and concern of the White House.

A proponent of Cabinet Government, Mr. Reagan has often said that he welcomes
listening to top Cabinet officials and other advisers argue out policy
differences to help him set the direction of policy.

But senior officials in every major foreign policy agency say that the disputes
between Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger have gone well beyond this positive
notion, causing stalemates in the Government and feeding bureaucratic rivalries
at lower levels.



Their Speeches Conflict


In the last few weeks, the two secretaries have clashed openly with
contradictory speeches on the proper use of American military force abroad.
Other officials say that this issue is simply the most visible dispute between
them and that their disagreements touch virtually all major aspects of policy,
including arms control, terrorism, Central America, the Middle East, and how
hard to press the Atlantic alliance to improve its conventional forces.

''Their speeches are no help to anyone,'' complained one well-placed national
security official. ''They represent a basic division that split this
Administration right down the middle on Lebanon. But that's over. It's gone. I
don't see why they want to fight it out in public.''

Policy disputes have become so persistent and hard-fought that key officials
report that the normal interagency process managed by Robert C. McFarlane, the
national security adviser, cannot resolve many policy differences. They say that
some relatively minor issues, such as whether to permit the sale of American
computers to Rumania, have been carried to the President personally by the two
secretaries.

''It's gotten bad,'' said one Administration policy maker. ''McFarlane cannot
resolve the disputes between the two of them. No one can except the President.''

''I think McFarlane's very frustrated,'' added a senior White House official,
worrying aloud about a mood of feuding between the State Department and
Pentagon.

Sign of Prgress Seen


Two senior officials, while acknowledging disagreements, contended that the
deadlock on arms control was now less severe than it was earlier this year
because President Reagan had moved to moderate the policy disputes between Mr.
Shultz and Mr. Weinberger.

''The President's aware of it,'' said a senior White House official. ''He
continually tries to get them to work together. Reagan is a very patient guy. He
likes both of them. He wants it to work. He's going to do everything he can to
make it work.''

Some presidential aides had feared that after the November election internal
deadlocks would paralyze arms control in Mr. Reagan's second term. But a few now
see signs of movement. ''This is the first time it's been under control in that
area,'' one official said.

Nonetheless, what has emerged seems to be very different from what Mr. Reagan
and his advisers envisaged four years ago. The Reagan team came into office
determined to avoid the troublesome wrangling under President Carter between
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance and Zbigniew Brzezinski, the national security
adviser.

Now, rather than sustaining an easy collegial style of policy making as
President Reagan had hoped or having policy managed by a single preeminent
figure like Henry A. Kissinger when he was national security adviser and
Secretary of State under Presidents Nixon and Ford, President Reagan finds
himself in much the same position as Mr. Carter was, with top advisers
constantly battling, officials said.

Bright Side Is Sought


Some officials have sought to see advantages in this. ''The fact is he's got
strong Cabinet officers and they've got strong views and things have to go to
the President to be decided,'' this national security official said. ''That's
the way it's supposed to work.'' But then he added quickly that neither the
President nor Mr. McFarlane had ''enough time and energy'' to handle the running
flow of disagreements outside the top priority fields of arms control and
Soviet-American relations.

Although the two Cabinet secretaries disagreed for some time, the openness of
their current disagreements stems in part from Mr. Shultz's increasing
assertiveness as a policy leader and spokesman, according to several officials.

Mr. Weinberger, who was in Mr. Reagan's state Cabinet in the 1960's when he was
Governor of California, has a close personal relationship with the President
that stretches over two decades. Mr. Shultz was an economic and foreign policy
adviser to the President in the 1980 campaign and has developed his relationship
with Mr. Reagan since joining the Cabinet in 1982.

''Shultz has gotten more comfortable in his job and in his relationship with the
President in the last year,'' one Reagan adviser who knows them both well said.

''Shultz has had two meetings alone with the President every week starting just
about a year ago, every Wednesday and Friday, at 1:30. He's been with the
President more, both in the Oval Office and in the mansion, socially. This has
given him a better feeling about where the President wants to go and where he
stands with the President.''

The Areas of Dispute


On some of the key issues, this is how the two men have differed:


- Arms Control - Although neither has said much publicly, State Department
officials working with Mr. Shultz have said he favors introducing some new
elements or reformulations into American negotiating positions before he meets
with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko on Jan. 7. But the Defense Department
position has been to stick more closely with existing positions to put pressure
on Soviet negotiators to move first.


- Strategic Defenses - At least initially, some State Department officials
suggested in internal discussions that the American research into development of
some strategic defense could be a bargaining chip in talks with the Soviet
Union, whereas Pentagon officials have said nothing should be done to hinder
American development of such weapons.


- Central America - This fall, the Pentagon, joining with William J. Casey, the
Director of Central Intellgence, advocated a change in American policy that
would withdraw diplomatic recognition from the Sandanista Government of
Nicaragua and extend political recognition to Nicaraguan rebels long backed by
the Reagan Administration. But Mr. Shultz and Mr. McFarlane have argued for
continuing present policy and pursuing diplomatic negotiations with the
Sandanistas, particularily while Congress refuses to grant more aid to the
Nicaraguan rebels.


- NATO Allies - Shortly before the election, Secretary Shultz sent the White
House and Pentagon a State Department plan for persuading this country's
European allies to make a commitment to build up their conventional forces. In a
quick response, Mr. Weinberger was reported to have objected to the State
Department's interference in a realm that was the Pentagon's responsibility. The
Pentagon sought European pledges to fulfill earlier pledges to increase their
NATO spending by 3 percent each year, above inflation. But the vaguer, more
flexible State Department approach was taken and later both agencies claimed
credit and cricitized the other's approach.


- Technology - Mr. Weinberger and other senior Pentagon officials have had a
running battle with the State and Commerce Departments over the sale of American
high technology to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. After Rumania decided to
take part in the Los Angeles Olympics, Mr. Shultz advocated granting a licence
for the sale of American computers to Rumania, but this fall, just before the
election, Mr. Weinberger took the case to President Reagan and blocked the sale,
officials said.


- Terrorism - Mr. Shultz has made a strong public case for this country to be
ready to launch pre-emptive strikes against terrorists and to retaliate against
terrorists even if it led to the killing of American servicemen and innocent
civilians abroad. Mr. Weinberger, siding with Vice President Bush, has urged
restraint.

Use of Force - In their most dramatically open disagreement, the two men have
differed sharply over the use of American forces abroad. Mr. Shultz was in the
forefront of Administraton policy makers advocating the use of American military
units in Lebanon and Grenada and against international terrorists, while Mr.
Weinberger and the Joint Chiefs of Staff were hesitant in each case.

The Use of Force


In two major speeches, last spring and on Sunday night, Secretary Shultz argued
that the United States had to be ready to use its military might to give
leverage to American diplomacy and that it was ''the burden of statesmanship''
to be ready to use force even when there was no guarantee of public support.

In an address to the National Press Club on Nov. 28, Mr. Weinberger gave his
view, openly sounding ''a note of caution,'' reflecting the views of many senior
military officers since the public's disillusionment with the Vietnam War.

Despite such contradictory language, high Administration officials say there is
no situation now where Mr. Shultz is advocating sending in American troops while
Mr. Weinberger refuses. Indeed, both men are said to back such displays of
American power in the third world as highly visible military exercises in
Central America or sending Awacs reconaissance planes to Saudi Arabia.

Occasionally, some officials say, the policy frictions between the two
Secretaries have taken on an air of personal tension.

Some officials also say they have detected elements of personal rivalry between
Mr. Shultz and Mr. Weinberger, who both served in the Nixon Administration and
were high executives of the Bechtel Corporation before joining the Reagan
Administration.

But others deny that. ''They're both so gracious that I can't see that,'' said
one State Department official. ''Shultz rarely blows his stack even when he
feels strongly. Theirs is not a knee-jerk reaction to each other. They deeply
believe in what they are saying.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Rock Band Singer Arrested In Traffic Death of Drummer

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 75 words

DATELINE: REDONDO BEACH, Calif., Dec. 10


The lead singer of the heavy- metal rock band Motley Crue is free on $2,500 bail
after being arrested in connection with a traffic accident that killed the
drummer for the punk band Hanoi Rocks.

Motley Crue's Vincent Wharton, 23 years old, was arrested Saturday night after a
traffic accident that killed the Hanoi Rocks drummer, Nicholas Dingley, 24, of
London. Filing of formal charges, manslaughter and drunken driving, was pending.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FIRST DEFENDANT TO TESTIFY

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 277 words


George Crile, the first of the defendants to take the stand in Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit against CBS, is a 39-year-old film
producer with a taste for politically controversial journalism.

Before producing the disputed documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' Mr. Crile worked on films and reports for CBS that included
documentaries on Panama, South Africa, drug dealing in Miami, homosexual rights,
Three Mile Island and the Central Intelligence Agency. In June 1983, when Mr.
Crile was suspended by the network for a year for having violated a CBS News
standard by tape recording a telephone conversation with former Secretary of
Defense Robert S. McNamara without telling him, he was at work on a documentary
about Nicaragua.

Mr. Crile, born in San Diego in 1945, is the son of Dr. George Crile Jr. and
Jane Halle Crile. Mr. Crile's stepmother was Helga Sandburg, the daughter of the
poet Carl Sandburg. Mr. Crile attended Trinity College, graduated in 1968 and
entered the Marine reserve training program. He worked briefly for the
columnists Drew Pearson and Jack Anderson before becoming a reporter for The
Gary (Ind.) Post-Register, and then joined Knight-Ridder Newspapers as Pentagon
correspondent. From 1973 to 1976, he was Washington editor of Harper's Magazine.

In 1976, on joining CBS News, he produced ''The CIA: the Secret Army'' and won
an Emmy Award. In 1982 he produced ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

Brown-haired, blue-eyed, 5 foot 11 and 170 pounds, Mr. Crile married Susan Lyne,
a feature film producer, last summer. He has two daughters from his first
marriage.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 11, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AT WESTMORELAND TRIAL, PRODUCER TELLS OF RATIONALE ON INTERVIEWS

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1274 words


A. FARBER

In an effort to show that CBS was not objective in 1981 in preparing its
disputed documentary on Vietnam, lawyers for Gen. William C. Westmoreland
questioned the program's producer, George Crile, yesterday about his reasons for
not interviewing a number of officials who held high rank during the war.

Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's principal attorney, sought to illustrate at
the general's $120 million libel trial against CBS that Mr. Crile and his
colleagues feared the officials would contradict the documentary's premise of a
''conspiracy'' by military intelligence officers in 1967 to minimize the
strength of the enemy.

General Westmoreland was commander of United States forces in Vietnam from 1964
to 1968.

Mr. Crile - whose testimony in Federal District Court in Manhattan began last
Wednesday but was interrupted by the appearance of Robert S. McNamara, the
former Secretary of Defense - generally said he had no cause to interview the
individuals cited by Mr. Burt.

Whatever their rank, Mr. Crile said, most of them were not directly involved in
''the process of intelligence gathering or reporting.''

Those officials, with their titles in 1967, included Ellsworth Bunker, the
United States Ambassador to South Vietnam and General Westmoreland's immediate
civilian superior; Adm. Ulysses S. Grant Sharp, the commander of American forces
in the Pacific and General Westmoreland's immediate military superior; Maj. Gen.
Phillip B. Davidson Jr., General Westmoreland's intelligence chief after June
1967, and Robert W. Komer, who was in charge of the ''pacification'' program in
Vietnam and held the rank of Ambassador.

Mr. Burt said yesterday that in June 1981 General Westmoreland recommended that
if CBS intended to be ''fair and objective,'' it contact most of those
officials, as well as others who were subsequently not interviewed.

Mr. Komer testified at the trial in October and contradicted an assertion on the
broadcast that General Westmoreland had suppressed a May 1967 report by Maj.
Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, General Davidson's predecessor as intelligence
chief, on the size of Vietcong irregular forces and political cadre.

Yesterday, Mr. Burt referred to a letter written by Mr. Crile in February 1981
in which he indicated his intention to interview Mr. Komer for the 1982 CBS
Reports documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' Mr. Burt also
introduced notes from that period in which Mr. Crile was advised by Samuel A.
Adams, a paid CBS consultant, that Mr. Komer was an ''impressive man'' and to
''expect fireworks.''

Mr. Burt now closed in on the witness, saying:

''You didn't interview Mr. Komer before the broadcast because you were afraid
half the audience would believe him, isn't that right, Mr. Crile?

But Mr. Crile said that was not the reason. Having interviewed General
Westmoreland and other people about the same events in which Mr. Komer figured,
he said, ''We didn't feel the need to go to him.''

Mr. Burt went on to show Mr. Crile an excerpt from unused portions of a filmed
interview by CBS with Col. Gains Hawkins, an intelligence officer in Vietnam in
1967 who is expected to be a key witness for the network.

Colonel Hawkins, who told Mr. Crile in 1981 that he ''arbitrarily reduced''
estimates of enemy strength, explained in the same interview that Mr. Komer was
''thoroughly, completely aware'' of every figure ''accepted or rejected''
regarding the enemy, ''and you must assume that he was reporting to the White
House.''

''Do you recall Colonel Hawkins telling you that?'' Mr. Burt asked.

But Mr. Crile said that the portion seized upon by Mr. Burt did not adequately
portray Colonel Hawkins's views and that, in any case, Mr. Crile believed in
1981 that the colonel was mistaken about the extent of Mr. Komer's knowledge.

'Can't Take Piece of Interview'


''You can't take a piece of an interview and hold that up as the sum total of
what Colonel Hawkins told me,'' Mr. Crile said.

When Mr. Burt - again using Mr. Adams's notes - suggested that Mr. Bunker and
Admiral Sharp were indeed familiar with the events portrayed on the documentary,
and were ''worth a phone call,'' Mr. Crile insisted that the 80 or more people
interviewed by CBS were even more pertinent.

''The focus was on what had happened in the intelligence community,'' he said.
''We had gone to those people we felt could help us.''

From time to time in the 10-week-old trial, which is expected to last another 10
weeks, Judge Pierre N. Leval has cautioned witnesses against ''debating'' with
the lawyer questioning them. And yesterday, in what he termed his most forceful
instruction yet, he warned Mr. Crile to stop making self- serving ''speeches.''

''Let me explain to you in clear and unmistakable terms that that is not a
proper role for you to be playing as a witness,'' Judge Leval told the 39-year-
old producer after the jury was excused from the crowded courtroom.

General Westmoreland contends in his suit that CBS defamed him by saying he
deceived President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the
size and nature of North Vietnamese and Vietcong troops in the year before the
Tet offensive of 1968.

The broadcast contended that the purpose of the ''conspiracy'' was to show that
American forces were winning the war. Its result, according to the documentary,
was to leave Washington ''totally unprepared'' for the Tet attack.

Mr. Crile, as well as Mr. Adams and Mike Wallace, the narrator of the broadcast,
is a defendant in this case. The producer, who will continue on the stand today,
has been called as a ''hostile witness'' by Mr. Burt, making his direct
testimony virtually the equivalent of a cross-examination.

To prevail in his suit, General Westmoreland must prove not only that the
statements about him on the broadcast were false but also that they were made by
the defendants with knowledge that they were false or with ''reckless
disregard'' for their truth or falsity.

Yesterday, Mr. Crile said he ''very much'' wanted to interview General Davidson
in 1981 but had believed the general was terminally ill with cancer. Mr. Burt
asked Mr. Crile whether it was true that Mr. Adams had told him six weeks before
the documentary was finished that General Davidson had recovered.

''Not to my recollection,'' the producer replied.

Mr. Burt showed Mr. Crile a question he had written for Mr. Wallace in advance
of an interview with General Westmoreland in May 1981, asking whether the
general had ''confidence'' in the two officers who had served him as chief of
intelligence.

The notes for Mr. Wallace, according to Mr. Burt, added: ''We want to get
Westmoreland to say McChristian was great stuff. We don't give a goddamn about
Davidson.''

Mr. Crile testified that he had only wanted Mr. Wallace, at that time, to draw a
clear distinction between the two intelligence chiefs.

''It was important that we didn't mix them,'' he told the jury.

General Davidson testified for General Westmoreland in October, saying he had
never been asked by the plaintiff to falsify data.

Earlier yesterday, Mr. Crile contradicted Mr. McNamara's testimony that the 1967
dispute over enemy strength statistics was ''an honest difference of opinion.''
Mr. McNamara said he had told that to the producer in an off-the-record
interview in 1981.

But Mr. Crile testified that, in the interview, Mr. McNamara simply lacked any
knowledge of the evidence CBS had accumulated pointing to a ''conspiracy.''

''He was saying he could not conceive of this happening,'' Mr. Crile testified.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 12, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CRILE TESTIFIES ON PROGRAM'S ACCRACY

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1233 words


George Crile, the producer of a disputed CBS documentary on Vietnam, vigorously
defended its accuracy in court yesterday as lawyers for Gen. William C.
Westmoreland continued their 10-week assault on the broadcast.

Mr. Crile - in his third day of testimony at the trial of General Westmoreland's
$120 million libel suit against the network in Federal District Court in
Manhattan - made no concessions to arguments by the general's lawyer that the
1982 CBS Reports documentary was seriously flawed.

''You deliberately tried to mislead the viewer, didn't you, Mr. Crile?'' Dan M.
Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, asked with regard to statements on the
broadcast by Col. Gains Hawkins, a former intelligence analyst.

The producer, unwavering, said: ''I believe very strongly that that was an
absolutely accurate presentation of Colonel Hawkins's views.''

In a portion of an interview with Colonel Hawkins that was shown on the program,
''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' the colonel appeared to be saying
that enemy strength estimates proposed by General Westmoreland's command in
Vietnam in 1967 were worthless.

Colonel Hawkins also said on the air that he had not concealed his view in 1967
from Samuel A. Adams, who was then an analyst for the Central Intelligence
Agency and, having served as a consultant to CBS for its documentary 15 years
later, is now a defendant in this case.

''There was never any reluctance on my part to tell Sam or anybody else who had
a need to know that these figures were crap, they were history, they weren't
worth anything,'' Colonel Hawkins said.

But, yesterday, Mr. Burt drew on the unedited transcript of the Hawkins
interview with Mr. Crile in 1981 and read aloud a phrase that immediately
preceded the segment that was broadcast.

It said: ''Now prior to this when we had the old figures that we inherited from
the South Vietnamese forces . . .''

Mr. Burt suggested that Colonel Hawkins was really talking about figures that
predated the ones advanced by General Westmoreland's officers in 1967 and that
CBS, in its editing, had distorted the colonel's meaning.

Mr. Crile, he said, had made it appear that the new figures, not the old ones,
were being referred to as being without validity.

''That's correct, and that is the case,'' Mr. Crile replied.

The 39-year-old producer - who has repeatedly been accused by Mr. Burt of
misrepresenting General Westmoreland's positions - went on to say that Mr. Burt
should consider the entirety of Colonel Hawkins's interview, other parts of
which were broadcast.

''You can't take this answer outside the totality of Colonel Hawkins's
response,'' he said.

General Westmoreland, who was commander of American forces in Vietnam from 1964
to 1968, contends in his suit that CBS defamed him by saying he had deceived
President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and
nature of North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces in the year before the 1968 Tet
offensive.

The documentary - which was based heavily on what Mr. Crile has called Mr.
Adams's ''exhaustive research'' over the years - charged a ''conspiracy'' by
General Westmoreland's command to ''suppress and alter critical intelligence on
the enemy.''

The purpose of the ''conspiracy,'' it said, was to make it appear that the
United States and its allies were winning a ''war of attrition.'' Its result,
according to the broadcast, was to leave Washington ''totally unprepared'' for
the scope of the Tet attack.

Mr. Crile is also a defendant at the trial, as is Mike Wallace, the narrator of
the documentary.

Colonel Hawkins, who now operates a retirement home in Mississippi, is expected
to support Mr. Crile's testimony when he takes the stand as a witness for the
network.

In Saigon in 1967, the colonel was in charge of developing the official listing
of enemy strength known as the order of battle. During most of his tour in
Vietnam, he worked for Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, who was General
Westmoreland's chief of intelligence from 1965 to June 1, l967.

In the spring of 1967, Colonel Hawkins and his colleagues produced new - and
higher - estimates for the Vietcong's part-time, hamlet-based self-defense
forces. Whereas those units had previously been thought to number about 70,000,
they were subsequently considered to total 117,000.

Self-Defense Forces Deleted

After General Westmoreland learned of the new figures, he ordered the self-
defense forces deleted from the order of battle. Those units, he has testified,
posed no significant military threat. He said their inclusion in the order of
battle at a higher figure in 1967 would have ''misled'' the press into thinking
that the overall size of the enemy's ''real fighters'' had grown markedly.

CBS, both in its documentary and now at the trial before Judge Pierre N. Leval,
argued that the general's decision was ''politically'' motivated, contravened
the ''best intelligence'' available to him and was simply intended to keep the
figures for enemy strength artificially low.

In any event, Colonel Hawkins was among General Westmoreland's representatives
at a conference at Central Intelligence Agency headquarters in Langley, Va., in
August 1967 to iron out differences over strength figures for the self-defense
and other forces. At that conference, Mr. Adams opposed the removal of the
self-defense forces and favored a total figure for Communist strength that was
nearly twice that sanctioned by General Westmoreland.

Yesterday, Mr. Burt took issue with a statement on the CBS broadcast that
General Westmoreland had adopted a ''new tactic'' by deleting the self-defense
forces, and showed Mr. Crile a cable sent by the C.I.A. in Saigon to C.I.A
headquarters on April 1, 1967.

The three-page cable, a page of which has been missing in recent years,
indicated that a team from the Defense Intelligence Agency, the intelligence arm
of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, was ''at odds'' with General McChristian and
planned to recommend that only guerrillas be counted as part of the enemy's
''military force figure'' for ''irregulars.''

In a secret cable to Richard Helms, the Director of Central Intelligence, the
acting chief of the C.I.A.'s Saigon station said he found the D.I.A. team's
reasoning ''persuasive.''

But Mr. Crile testified that, on the basis of his interviews with General
McChristian in 1981 and conversations with him since the suit was filed, he was
unaware of any formal move by the D.I.A. along these lines.

General McChristian, he recalled, said the D.I.A. was ''completely satisfied''
with the figures developed by Colonel Hawkins.

''There was no such proposal as you are saying,'' Mr. Crile told Mr. Burt.

Using copies of Mr. Adams's notes from 1967, as well as draft pages from a book
Mr. Adams is writing, Mr. Burt also attempted to demonstrate that General
Westmoreland had not secreted the higher figures for the self- defense forces.

Those figures, he suggested to Mr. Crile, had been shown by Colonel Hawkins in a
series of Vugraphs that were screened at the conference at C.I.A. headquarters,
attended by Mr. Adams and intelligence analysts from a variety of agencies.

But what was important, Mr. Crile insisted, were the figures General
Westmoreland would accept. And those, he stressed time and again, did not
include self-defense forces.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge Pierre Leval

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WE MUST REMEMBER

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


BOSTON The most compelling experience I

have had in a theater in years

was watching the new movie ''The Killing Fields.'' It is about the horrors
visited on Cambodia between 1973 and 1979, and about the relationship between
two reporters who were there - Sydney Schanberg of The New York Times and his
assistant, Dith Pran. But the film has a deeper subject, a deeper purpose, or so
I understood.

I was at a showing for students and faculty of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. At the end Sydney Schanberg and Dith Pran came on stage to answer
questions, along with Sam Waterston, who stars as Schanberg in the movie. First
Waterston put a question to the audience: ''How many of you did not know that
these things happened?''

A third of the people in the large hall raised their hands. A third of that
elite audience had never heard about the American intervention in Cambodia, with
its devastating consequences, or about the nightmare years of mass murder under
the Khmer Rouge.

Historical memory has never been a strong point in the American character. We
look forward, not back. But it was eerie to find that intelligent Americans knew
nothing at all about events so terrible and so recent - events for which we as a
country bear some responsibility.

What the film tells us is that it is necessary to remember. The necessity is
both social and individual.

''The Killing Fields'' brings home the reality of what happened to Cambodia in
images of extraordinary power, beyond the ability of words to convey. Many
things on the screen are hard to bear: shattered bodies, human cruelty,
pervasive fear. But none is gratuitous, sensation for sensation's sake.  First
there was the American bombing. After the Vietnam truce in 1973, all available
B-52's and other planes were used to bomb Cambodia. The movie shows us the
gruesome results of the ''accidental'' B-52 bombing of Neak Luong, near Phnom
Penh. Just why it happened we do not know, but we understand that it is an
example of much more - and that it is the result of American politicians playing
superpower games without concern for the human consequences in Cambodia.  U.S.
officials tried to keep Schanberg away from Neak Luong, tried to keep the world
from knowing what had happened. Schanberg is shown as driven, obsessive in his
determination to tell the story - to the point of harshness toward Dith Pran in
insisting that he find a way. In April 1975 the Khmer Rouge took over, and
fanaticism was king. Not many of the great film epics have touched the emotions
with spectacle as grippingly as ''The Killing Fields'' does in the scene of the
young revolutionaries driving the whole population of Phnom Penh out of the
city.

The Khmer Rouge literally tried to expunge history. They declared that they were
beginning at Year Zero. They killed anyone suspected of being an intellectual, a
doctor, a teacher. They enslaved the country. That all this could be suggested
successfully in a film I would not have believed, but it is done. In scenes of
what happened to Dith Pran we sense, we fear the larger horror. For minutes not
a word of English is spoken, but we know what is happening.

The dramatic crux of the story is that Schanberg got out as a foreigner, but
Dith Pran could not. Back in the United States, Schanberg lives with his guilt
for not somehow saving his friend. In the prison that is Cambodia, Dith Pran
thinks letters to his friend Sydney. Some film reviewers have criticized the
device as artificial. I think they have missed the point.

Through the ages political prisoners have found the strength to survive in part
through the determination to tell their stories. They have hidden bits of paper,
scratched on the walls of cells. Thus they reaffirm their belief that there is a
better humanity. They reaffirm life.

Dith Pran was doing that when he thought his letters to Sydney Schanberg. And
more: He was carrying out, psychologically, their joint commitment to
journalism, to history, to memory.

The film is the expression of that commitment. Dith Pran, who works as a Times
photographer now, said after the showing that all day he thinks about New York -
but his nightmares are about a Cambodia that is still not free or at peace. B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CRILE, ON STAND, ACCUSED OF SUBVERTING THE TRUTH

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words


Comparing what was shown on the air to what was not, lawyers for Gen. William C.
Westmoreland yesterday accused George Crile, the producer of a disputed CBS
documentary on the Vietnam war, of using the editorial process to subvert the
truth.

Mr. Crile, testifying for the fourth day at the Westmoreland-CBS libel trial in
Federal District Court, said that he ''resented'' the attacks and that General
Westmoreland's lawyers were distorting what the producer had done and the
15-year-old events portrayed in the 1982 broadcast.

By their attempts to ''misconstrue'' what some participants in the documentary
had said - taking transcript passages ''in isolation'' - Mr. Crile told the
jury, the lawyers, not he, were doing ''a great disservice to the truth.''

As he had on Wednesday, Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lead attorney, cited
a number of examples where segments of interviews had been edited out of the
broadcast - leaving the viewer, he suggested, with a ''misleading'' impression
of what had happened in Vietnam in 1967 and what had been said to CBS in 1981
when it was preparing its program.

For instance, General Westmoreland had told Mike Wallace, the narrator of the
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' that President Lyndon
B. Johnson ''wanted bad news like a hole in the head.'' But the general said he
gave him ''both the good and the bad.'' The latter phrase, however, was not
broadcast.

Viewers Said to Be Alerted


But Mr. Crile said a camera on General Westmoreland might have run out of film
at that point. Moreover, he said, the question that preceded the general's
answer - ''Was President Johnson a difficult man to feed bad news about the
war?'' alerted viewers that Mr. Johnson had been given ''bad news,'' as well as
good.

Mr. Burt also tried to show that, in contrast to the treatment of General
Westmoreland when he was interviewed - the general has testified that he was
''ambushed'' by the network - key participants whom CBS believed would support
the ''conspiracy'' thesis of its broadcast had been coddled.

Mr. Burt brought out, for instance, that Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, who
was General Westmoreland's intelligence chief between 1965 and June 1, 1967, was
given extensive information on CBS's findings before he was interviewed on
camera at his home in Hobe Sound, Fla.

George Allen, the former deputy chief of Vietnamese affairs for the Central
Intelligence Agency, was interviewed on camera twice by Mr. Crile, the
39-year-old producer acknowledged yesterday. And before the second session, Mr.
Crile said, Mr. Allen was shown filmed interviews with General McChristian and
others to help him ''clarify his thoughts.''

Q. And you showed him the interviews in order to coach him, correct, sir?

A. Mr. Burt, George Allen is one of the most distinguished public servants that
I am aware of. He has served his country well. No one was going to coach George
Allen on what he would say about Vietnam, about the enemy we had to fight, about
his particular field of expertise.

Q. You knew when you showed Mr. Allen the interviews of other people prior to
the second filmed interview with him that that was not the proper thing to do,
did you not, sir?

A. Mr. Burt, it is standard reportorial procedure to tell people that you are
interviewing information that you have gained in the hopes that it will elicit
more information from them, something that I think you see on broadcasts often,
and it is something that reporters do on a regular basis.

Mr. Burt has been barred from telling the jury that the double interview was
later found by CBS, during an internal investigation, to have violated the
network's rule that interviews be ''spontaneous and unrehearsed.''

General Westmoreland, who led American forces in Vietnam between 1964 and 1968,
contends in his $120 million suit that CBS defamed him by saying he deceived Mr.
Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the size and nature of the enemy in
the year preceding the 1968 Tet offensive.

The documentary charged a ''conspiracy'' by General Westmoreland's command to
minimize the strength of North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces to make it seem
the United States was winning a ''war of attrition.'' The general himself, it
said, imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy strength
after June 1967, leaving Washington ''totally unprepared'' for the scope of the
Tet attack.

Mr. Crile, like Mr. Wallace and Samuel A. Adams, a former C.I.A. analyst who
served as a consultant to CBS for the documentary, is a defendant at this trial
before Judge Pierre N. Leval.

Mr. Adams, who was in favor of a substantially higher estimate of enemy strength
than General Westmoreland in 1967, was a participant in efforts at that time to
resolve the issue. Another participant whose name arose in court yesterday was
Col. Gains Hawkins, a ranking intelligence officer in General Westmoreland's
command until the late summer of 1967.

Colonel Hawkins told CBS in 1981 that while he ''defended'' General
Westmoreland's lower numbers in meetings with the C.I.A., he considered them too
low. But ''the message we got,'' he said, was that higher figures would not be
accepted by the general.

The dispute was finally settled at the time by a ''compromise'' agreement and
formalized in a ''national intelligence estimate'' for the President. But, in
its documentary, CBS characterized the agreement as a ''capitulation'' by the
C.I.A. to ''demands'' of General Westmoreland.

Yesterday, Mr. Burt showed Mr. Crile the transcript of his first interview with
Mr. Allen, in which the following exchange - not used on the air - appeared.

MR. CRILE: But in - but - but please, in November of - in September of 1967 when
we are moving towards a war with 500,000 troops in Vietnam to - consciously in a
national intelligence estimate say that the enemy is much, much smaller than you
believed to be the case, isn't that an extreme position for the Central
Intelligence Agency to take?

MR. ALLEN: But that is not what the estimate said. Mind you! The numbers were in
there.

MR. CRILE: But my view - Mr. Allen -

MR. ALLEN: The presentation was different.

Mr. Burt read the passage aloud, and asked Mr. Crile whether it did not
contradict the views expressed by Mr. Allen on the air.

But Mr. Crile, offering to help the lawyer ''understand this,'' said that Mr.
Allen eventually came to regard the agreement on a lower estimate for the enemy
as the intelligence ''mistake of the century.'' In 1981, Mr. Crile said, Mr.
Allen felt ''awkward about in any way saying anything critical about the
C.I.A.'' and, in that passage, was looking for ''an intellectually defensible
fig leaf to put over the position that had been taken'' by the agency in 1967.



Reported 'What Was There'

''Mr. Burt,'' Mr. Crile said, ''I would not have wanted to put in the broadcast
a line in which Mr. Allen would not have felt comfortable with, nor would I have
felt comfortable with it if I thought it did not reflect his views.''

The lawyer also showed Mr. Crile an unbroadcast answer given by Colonel Hawkins
in a 1981 interview with CBS, in which the colonel said he was not told to
refrain from reporting higher figures for the enemy.

''I continued to report what was there,'' the colonel had told Mr. Crile.

Mr. Crile said yesterday that the answer only reflected the fact that Colonel
Hawkins was in no position to tell the men in his unit to stop work. The
colonel, Mr. Crile insisted, was still unable to get the higher numbers accepted
by his superiors.

Mr. Burt read out, as well, an exchange between Mr. Crile and General
McChristian during an interview in 1981, in which the producer asked whether the
general might have been transferred out of Vietnam in June 1967 because of his
''attempt to increase the enemy strength estimates'' the previous month.

MR. CRILE: ''Because you would not keep the numbers down.''

GENERAL MCCHRISTIAN: ''No, because nobody ever asked me that, because I reported
it as I saw it and evidently people didn't like my reporting because I was
constantly showing that enemy strength was increasing.''

On the documentary, Mr. Crile's remarks to General McChristian were substituted
by a statement by Mr. Wallace: ''Consider General Westmoreland's dilemma. If he
accepted his intelligence chief's findings, he would have to take the bad news
to the President. If he didn't, well, there was only General McChristian to deal
with.''

And General McChristian's answer begins with the word ''Evidently.''

Mr. Crile told the jury that the alteration was made because General McChristian
had not been ordered before May 1967 to keep enemy strength figures low.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS PEOPLE;
Ali Goes to Court

SECTION: Section B; Page 31, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 116 words


Muhammad Ali , who was stripped of his heavyweight title and not allowed to
fight for three years after being convicted of draft evasion during the Vietnam
War, filed suit against the Federal Government and the World Boxing Association
yesterday. The suit seeks to have his title restored for the 1967-70 period and
to recover earnings lost because of the ban. Ali's conviction, in 1967, was
overturned in 1970 by the Supreme Court, which ruled that the Government had
wrongly rejected his contention that his Moslem religion precluded his fighting
in the war. One of his lawyers,

Stanley Sacks , said the suit had been Ali's idea, to remove the ''stigma''
attached to the conviction.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Muhammad Ali

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 13, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Government Accused of Torture



BYLINE:
By Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 173 words


A human rights group said yesterday that the Vietnamese-backed Government of
Cambodia routinely and brutally tortured political prisoners, while a major
opposition-controlled sector was run like a police state.

A report by the New York-based Lawyers Committee for International Human Rights
said, ''The rule of law is not respected in any serious sense'' in Cambodia.

Floyd Abrams, co-author of the report, said, ''Beatings with truncheons, metal
pipes or rifle stocks appear to be the most common form of torture.''

Mr. Abrams and the co-author, Diane Orentlicher, spent two weeks last month
interviewing former detainees and others in refugee camps on the Thai-Cambodian
border.  They were refused permission to enter Cambodia but were allowed into
the sector of the country controlled by the Khmer Rouge.

Of the Khmer Rouge, Mr. Abrams said: ''It would appear that the murderous
practices of the mid-1970's are no longer the order of the day. But severly
restrictive controls over daily life remain a pervasive reality.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

400 FOES OF HANOI SAID TO FACE TRIAL

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 660 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 13


Vietnam appears to be starting a public campaign against dissidents at home
while it steps up military activities against the Chinese on its northern border
and rebel forces in Cambodia.

According to diplomatic reports from Hanoi this week, the Vietnamese are
preparing to put on trial in Ho Chi Minh City, the former Saigon, a group of at
least 100 people accused of plotting to overthrow the Hanoi Government.  Some
Western reporters are being given permission to go to Vietnam for the trial,
according to Vienamese diplomats here.

Reports from Hanoi this week quoting foreign diplomats there, said that the
dissidents were being described as rebels trained and armed in China and
Thailand. The Thais have denied any involvement in or knowledge of such
activities.

The Vietnamese Government radio has at the same time been reporting new fighting
near the border with China.

Border Is Strengthened


On Wednesday the Vietnamese press agency said the country's six northern
provinces were being strengthened against ''an eventual large-scale invasion''
from China. It said 100 Chinese troops were killed in 40 clashes along the
border in the last week in November.

The reports of clashes with Chinese troops come at a time when Vietnamese forces
are stepping up military pressure on Cambodian guerrilla forces seeking to
overthrow the Vietnamese-installed Government in Phnom Penh from bases along the
Thai border inside Cambodia.

Since mid-November, Vietnamese troops have been shelling and occasionally
overrunning camps belonging to the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a
non-Communist faction within the loose coalition of groups that is fighting
against the Cambodian Government of Heng Samrin.

Hanoi is thought to have between 160,000 and 180,000 troops in Cambodia, which
it invaded in late 1978 to overthrow the Khmer Rouge Government under Pol Pot.

Anti-Government Forces


Arrayed against the Vietnamese are a surviving Khmer Rouge army of about 30,000,
the Khmer People's National Liberation Front force of about 15,000 and a smaller
army of 7,000 who are followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

In the recent attacks on border camps the Vietnamese have concentrated on the
Khmer People's National Liberation Front and have not mounted attacks on the
Khmer Rouge camps.

Some Thai and foreign specialists who have followed the patterns of fighting in
Cambodia since Vietnam installed the present Government in early 1979, suggest
that Hanoi has the capacity to destroy the Khmer Rouge camps, but does not do so
because the presence of the Pol Pot forces provide an excuse for prolonged
Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

Further, experts say, as long as the Khmer Rouge remain the strongest element in
the three-part opposition coalition called Democratic Kampuchea, Cambodian and
foreign opinion would not be in favor of returning the coalition to power. The
Khmer Rouge, who were originally backed by the Vietnamese, are thought to have
killed more than a million Cambodians during their years in power in Phnom Penh
from 1975 through 1978.

Recruits to the Khmer People's National Liberation Front are reported to be
increasing. That organizaton, and the Sihanouk faction, would be more popular
within and outside Cambodia than the Khmer Rouge as an alternative government to
Heng Samrin, diplomats and Cambodian refugees say, and this may be causing
concern in Hanoi. Cambodian refugees are now telling reporters that Vietnamese
troops are making it more difficult for would-be defectors and refugees to reach
the front's camps.

Interviews with Vietnamese refugees along the border area over the last few
months lend some credence to Hanoi's charges that there may be at least a small
armed uprising within Vietnam itself. Former inmates of Vienamese prison camps
say that they believe increasing numbers of dissidents are being arrested, some
on charges of possessing illegal weapons.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE RULES CBS STUDY NOT ADMISSIBLE IN TRIAL

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 866 words


The presiding judge in Gen. William C. Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit
ruled inadmissible as evidence yesterday a CBS internal report that found the
network had violated its news standards in the preparation of a disputed
documentary on Vietnam.

The judge, Pierre N. Leval of Federal District Court in Manhattan, said in a
ruling that the report ''is largely irrelevant to the issues before the jury and
consists in great part of opinion and hearsay of varying degrees of
remoteness.''

At the same time, however, Judge Leval said that various ''items'' from the
report could be put before the court.

The report, known as the Benjamin report, was prepared by Burton Benjamin, a
senior executive producer at CBS Reports.

Legal observers differed in their reactions to the ruling. Dan M. Burt, the
attorney for General Westmoreland, contended that it would have ''very little,
if any,'' effect on the trial.

10 Standards Found Broken


After a day in court, unusual because of the presence of five top CBS News
executives, the attorney for CBS, David Boies, said the ruling would have some
impact on the trial, particularly with regard to the inadmissibility of the
Benjamin report's conclusions that were critical of the producer of the
documentary, George Crile.

In his 60-page report, Mr. Benjamin concluded that although the creators of the
disputed documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' stood by the
facts in it, they had broken 10 CBS News standards. Among these was ''an
imbalance in presenting two sides of the issue'' and violations that ranged from
''coddling of sympathetic witnesses'' to film editing that distorted
interviewing sequences.

Floyd M. Abrams, a lawyer and an authority on libel law, said, ''The judge has
made a significant ruling which lessens the likelihood that General Westmoreland
can prevail.''

But Mr. Abrams said that until a consensus was reached on what parts of the
Benjamin report's evidence were admissible, no conclusion would be possible on
whether the ruling would hurt the general's case.

'Fairness Not at Issue'


The ruling followed submissions of memorandums to the court from Mr. Burt
supporting the admissibility of the report and from Mr. Boies opposing it.

Judge Leval wrote in his ruling that the standards addressed in the report - the
fairness or one-sidedness of a documentary - were not relevant to the trial of a
public figure's libel case.

''The fairness of the broadcast is not at issue in the libel suit,'' Judge Leval
wrote. ''Publishers and reporters do not commit a libel in a public-figure case
by publishing unfair one-sided attacks. The issue in the libel suit is whether
the publisher recklessly or knowingly published false material.''

He ruled that the extensive discussions of fairness and of CBS standards in the
Benjamin report ''cannot fairly be brought before a jury.''

''A publisher,'' he wrote, ''who honestly believes in the truth of his
accusations (and can point to a nonreckless basis for his beliefs) is under no
obligation under the libel law to treat the subject of his accusations fairly or
evenhandedly.''

Asked to Do Report in 1982


In the report, Mr. Benjamin said he received a call on May 24, 1982, from Van
Gordon Sauter, then president of CBS News, asking whether Mr. Benjamin would
investigate charges in a May 1982 TV Guide article that CBS had violated
journalistic ethics in the documentary.

''My best recollection is that I said yes right away,'' Mr. Benjamin said in an
interview yesterday. ''I figured somebody had to do it.''

Mr. Benjamin said he had worked with two researchers for six weeks. ''I started
as though I was writing a news story,'' he said, ''with no apprehensions. I had
a great concern that we be accurate.''

The Report Spoke for Itself'

He said that from the time he was asked to do the report until now he had not
given any interviews on it ''because the report spoke for itself, and there was
nothing I could add or subtract.

''All I knew,'' he said, ''was that there were allegations. I didn't know that
they were true, or could have been true. I had no sense of being the protector
of the flag. The only feeling I had was that I thought this was important and I
wanted to do the best job I could. I have spent 28 years at CBS News, and I care
about it.''

After he submitted the report, he said, he began to feel some hostile
reverberations within CBS. ''I expected that,'' he said. ''That's a given. But
it wasn't excessive. I think ventilation is always good. It shows the character
of an organization that it took on a project of this sort. That's good for any
news organization.''

George Vradenburg 3d, a CBS vice president and deputy general counsel, said
Judge Leval had ''separated out the issues that journalists would think about
from the issues that lawyers think about in libel cases.''

''As Judge Leval says,'' Mr. Vradenburg added, ''the issues addressed in the
Benjamin case are not the issues addressed in a libel case. I think it would
have confused the case if the report had been admitted, but I don't think it
might have been harmful.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Burton Benjamin

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CRILE DENIES HE 'MADE UP' SEQUENCE IN CBS FILM

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1333 words


George Crile, the producer of a disputed CBS documentary on the Vietnam War, was
accused in court yesterday of fabricating a part of the program that dealt with
a supposed ''cover-up'' of enemy strength statistics after the Tet offensive of
January 1968.

After four hours of close questioning about intelligence gathering and computer
memories, Dan M. Burt, the lawyer for General William C. Westmoreland, suddenly
raised his voice and asked:

''Mr. Crile, you just made up the whole data-base sequence in the broadcast,
didn't you?''

''Mr. Burt, that is not true,'' the witness shot back, his own voice tinged with
emotion. ''I have explained to you the sources of that sequence.''

One of the sources, he underscored, was Comdr. James Meacham, an intelligence
officer in Saigon who, according to evidence in the case, often wrote to his
wife of the ''gargantuan falsehoods'' and ''mesmerizing lies'' involved in his
work and of how enemy strength estimates had to ''come out the way the general
wanted them to.''

Fifth Day of Testimony

Mr. Crile was testifying for the fifth day at General Westmoreland's libel trial
against CBS in Federal District Court. The general's $120 million suit stems
from the documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' produced by
Mr. Crile in 1982.

Yesterday, as Mr. Burt continued his assault on the accuracy and objectivity of
the program, he brought out that Mr. Crile had helped to unlock the ''mental
block'' of a key participant in the broadcast, Col. Gains Hawkins, by giving him
information before his on-camera interview and had secretly tape recorded
telephone conversations with two others, Commander Meacham and Col. Russell
Cooley.

In July 1983, Mr. Crile was suspended by CBS for a year for having taped without
authorization a number of telephone conversations during the preparation of the
Vietnam broadcast, including one with Robert S. McNamara, the former Secretary
of Defense. The names of Colonel Cooley and Commander Meacham, who is now the
military correspondent of The Economist, the British magazine, did not emerge
then.

The network's policy required that the interviewee, or the president of CBS
News, grant permission for such taping.

Mr. Crile testified yesterday that he used the tape recorder simply as a
''backup'' to his notes or his memory, particularly when he was discussing
complicated subjects.

And he denied that he had told Colonel Hawkins, a former military intelligence
officer who informed CBS that he had ''arbitrarily reduced'' enemy strength
estimates in 1967, what to say during interviews in 1981.

'An Act of Courage'

''I don't think, Mr. Burt, that you tell someone like Colonel Hawkins that you
want him to come forward and make acknowledgments that are deeply embarrassing
to him,'' Mr. Crile said. ''That is an act of courage on his part and it was an
enormous self-sacrifice. It is not in any way involved in being able to suggest
to him what he should say. These are very major decisions that people of this
caliber make.''

Q. Did you offer to help General Westmoreland refresh his memory before you
interviewed him, sir?

A. Yes, I did, Mr. Burt. I spoke to General Westmoreland on two occasions and I
wrote him a very specific letter and I read that letter out to him on the
telephone the week before and I had conversations with him about these subjects,
and I will be very happy to go into it in as much length as you would like.

Mr. Burt resumed his questioning about Colonel Hawkins's ''mental block''
regarding a six-week period before the colonel left Vietnam in September 1967.

But, later, he questioned Mr. Crile about a letter and package of official
records that General Westmoreland had sent the producer in June 1981, several
weeks after Mike Wallace, the narrator of the Vietnam documentary, had
interviewed him.

The Repeated Assertion

The materials, according to Mr. Burt, concerned the repeated assertion by
General Westmoreland during the interview that North Vietnamese infiltration
into South Vietnam in the fall of 1967 had been approximately 20,000 a month -
much as the documentary would contend, from other sources as well, when it was
broadcast in January 1982.

But in 1967, when the general was interviewed on ''Meet the Press,'' he had put
the figure at roughly 5,000 to 6,000. And, with the letter to Mr. Crile - a
letter in which he described his session with Mr. Wallace as being ''more of an
inquisition than a rational interview'' - the general included records that
showed infiltration to have been at the lower level he portrayed it in 1967.

Now, Mr. Burt suggested that Mr. Crile had deliberately ignored General
Westmoreland's materials and ''correction.''

''On the contrary, Mr. Burt,'' Mr. Crile said, ''there was no statement anywhere
in it that he had made a mistake and no request for a correction. There was no
alert whatever that he intended to change his repeated statements in the
interview. All he said was that there were some documents that he said might be
of interest to us.''

Mr. Burt introduced a note Mr. Crile sent to Mr. Wallace after receiving the
materials, in which the producer said ''Westmoreland doesn't bring anything to
our attention that is particularly relevant. Certainly nothing that causes
concern and requires a new look at anything we have been asserting.''

General Westmoreland was commander of American forces in Vietnam from January
1964 to June 1968. In his suit, he contends that CBS defamed him by saying that
he had deceived President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about
the size and nature of the enemy in the year before the Tet offensive.

The broadcast alleged a ''conspiracy'' in General Westmoreland's command to
minimize the strength of the enemy to make it appear that the United States was
winning ''a war of attrition.'' As a result of this ''conscious effort,'' it
said, the President and other senior officials in Washington, as well as
American forces in Vietnam, were left ''totally unprepared'' for the widespread
attack in January 1968.

One of the five sections of the 90- minute documentary also covered what Mr.
Wallace and Mr. Crile called an attempt, after the offensive, to ''alter'' or
''tamper with'' the ''historical record'' of enemy strength contained in a
computer at military intelligence headquarters in Saigon. Because the estimates
of enemy strength had been kept low in 1967, and the casualties at Tet were so
high, Mr. Wallace said, General Westmoreland's command was faced with the
question: ''Whom are we fighting?''

The documentary showed interviews with Commander Meacham and Colonel Cooley,
whom Mr. Wallace said - and Mr. Crile reiterated yesterday - had ''in effect''
accused another intelligence officer, Lt. Col. Daniel Graham, of ''personally
engineering a cover-up'' of the real size of the enemy. Colonel Graham, who
later became a lieutenant general and head of the Defense Intelligence Agency,
appeared briefly on the broadcast to deny the charge.

Yesterday, Mr. Burt brought out that Colonel Graham's superior, Maj. Gen.
Phillip B. Davidson Jr. was present during the discussions in the spring of 1968
about ''resetting'' enemy strength. The lawyer also tried to show that nothing
in the episode was ''dishonest.''

Mr. Burt played for the jury unused portions of the Meacham and Cooley
interviews with Mr. Crile in 1981, in which Commander Meacham denied ''faking
any intelligence'' or knowing of any such efforts and Colonel Cooley indicated
that a ''question of honesty'' was not at issue.

Mr. Crile, who will continue testifying when court resumes on Monday, replied
that Colonel Cooley's remarks were being taken out of context. The producer said
that Commander Meacham had never ''disavowed'' what he had written to his wife
from Saigon. But, when CBS interviewed him in London 15 years later, Mr. Crile
said, the commander got ''cold feet.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 870 words


FRIDAY, DECEMBER 14, 1984 International

Masses of Indians fled Bhopal after an announcement that the Union Carbide plant
there would be started up again Sunday to neutralize what remains of a toxic
chemical that leaked Dec. 3 and killed at least 2,000 people. By the tens of
thousands and using any vehicle available, the residents left, abandoning jobs
and homes, crippling many services and activities. (Page A1, Column 1.)

Masses of Ethiopians were carried from the famine-stricken northern areas to
more fertile lands in the west and south. An armada of buses, trucks and Soviet
helicopters and troop transport planes is carrying tens of thousands of hungry,
destitute peasants at the start of a huge resettlement program. (A12:3-6.)

A U.S. decision to leave Unesco is expected to be announced formally by
President Reagan next week, Administration officials said. (A1:2.) National

Only limited savings in the budget for the Pentagon will be accepted by
President Reagan, backing the position of Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger, according to a senior Administration official. Unless Mr. Reagan
seeks further cuts in domestic spending, the tentative decision means the
Administration will be far short of its goal of reducing the deficit, now more
than $200 billion, to $100 billion in 1988. (A1:6.)

Plans for a space-based defense against ballistic missiles face serious trouble
next year as Congress tries to cut the military budget, according to
Representative Joseph P. Addabbo, Democrat of Queens, the chairman of the House
subcommittee on military appropriations. (B17:1-2.)

William J. Schroeder had a stroke but was partially recovering from it,
according to a doctor attending the second artificial heart recipient. The
doctor, Allan Lansing, said Mr. Schroeder's condition had shown some improvement
since he suffered the stroke at 6 P.M. (A1:3-4.)

More whooping cough deaths of children may result from a year-long shortage in
the vaccine against the potentially fatal illness, according to the Centers for
Disease Control. The Federal agency recommended that doctors delay the booster
shots usually administered to children aged 18 months and 5 years to provide
more immunization for infants, who are most at risk. (A1:3-5.)

More treatment in doctors' offices rather than in hospitals is expected to
result from a new Federal program to control Medicare expenses. A Federal
estimate shows that over the next two years about l.4 million Americans with
medical problems that would have required admission to a hospital before now are
going to be treated in doctors' offices or not at all. (A1:1-2.)

New nuclear artillery shells for the Army can be converted to neutron bombs,
according to sources in Congress and the Pentagon. Production of neutron bombs
is forbidden by Congress, but the sources said the design of the new shells
would enable the Army to alter them in the field if Congress reversed itself.
(A22:1-3.)

Comparable worth, the concept that men and women should get the same pay for
doing jobs of similar difficulty and requiring equivalent skills, is drawing
increasing attention from the courts, the Reagan Administration and researchers.
Litigation is pending around the country in which many public employee unions
are seeking to upset longstanding pay patterns that they argue discriminate
against women. (A20:1-3.) Metropolitan

A ban on bias against homosexuals by organizations receiving money from New York
City generated more controversy. Archbishop John J. O'Connor startled Mayor Koch
by suggesting he might consider operating the archdiocese's social programs
without government funds rather than comply with the ban. (A1:5.)

The extradition of an I.R.A. member convicted of the murder of a British soldier
was barred by a Federal District Court judge in Manhattan. The judge, John E.
Sprizzo, ruled the slaying was a political act exempt from the extradition
treaty between the United States and Britain. (A1:6.)

An 18-year-old youth was convicted of manslaughter in the random clubbing of a
student in a Manhattan video game arcade last New Year's Day. The defendant,
Joseph Brennan, was found guilty of recklessly causing the death of the victim,
Jonny Habib, 18, in an assault in the unlicensed and now-closed arcade on First
Avenue and 77th Street. (B1:1-2.)

The Chinese citizen whose body was found hanging Wednesday on the roof of the
Chinese Consulate General in Manhattan had sought asylum in the United States,
but had come to regret his decision in the hours before he committed suicide,
according to officials at the consulate and the State and Justice Departments.
The Chinese citizen was Zhang Xin, a 49-year- old engineer. (B3:1.)

A CBS internal report that found the network's news standards had been violated
in preparations for a disputed documentary on Vietnam was ruled inadmissible as
evidence by the presiding judge in Gen. William C. Westmoreland's libel trial.
The judge, Pierre N. Leval of Federal District Court in Manhattan, said the
report ''is largely irrelevant to the issues before the jury.'' (B11:1-2.)


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Books of The Times;
Bard of the Beats

BYLINE: By HARVEY SHAPIRO

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 972 words

DATELINE: COLLECTED POEMS 1947


-1980. By Allen

Ginsberg. 837 pages. Illustrated.

Harper & Row. $27.50.  It was in 1961 that Allen Ginsberg's book of poems,
''Kaddish,'' established him as a major talent. ''Howl'' some five years earlier
had brought him fame, but fame as a spokesman for the Beats. The poem had
brilliance but there was something glitzy about it, sensational, or so it seemed
to many critics at the time. Could you take seriously a poet who began a poem by
announcing: ''I saw the best minds of my generation destroyed by madness,
starving hysterical naked''? After all, who were these best minds?

''Kaddish'' was an undeniable success, particularly the title poem, which
presented the brutal story of the poet's life in Newark with his mad mother,
Naomi, of her breakdowns and her death in a ''madtown on Long Island.'' The poet
had accomplished an incredible feat: He had been able to cut through and summon
the dead, to recreate his insane mother, to make his peace with her, more than
that, to make a muse of her, the most bizarre muse in English Lit. Though the
poem was rich in narrative detail, mixing real places, real people, real events
with visionary arias, it was essentially a long death anthem that fused the
exaltation of God's name (even in one section echoing the sounds of the Hebrew
prayer for the dead) with the exaltation of the woman's insane life and death.

There was evident joy and faith in the composition itself, in the actual process
of composition, that came across to the reader through the long lines, and
through the poet's ability to make his imagination soar over the details, harsh
and ugly as they were, of the remembered life.

''Kaddish'' sent many readers back to ''Howl'' with renewed respect for this
poet of long lines, zany humor (''America I'm putting my queer shoulder to the
wheel'') and lyrical intensity. Now, 23 years later, by now a legend for his
role in the countercul ture, Allen Ginsberg has gathered his seven books
published by City Lights (including ''Howl'' and ''Kaddish'') and his other
books by fugitive presses into a single volume, the poems arranged
chronologically to compose an autobiography.

The strongest impression the volume gives is that this is Whitman returned with
a vengeance. Mr. Ginsberg is like Whitman in his garrulousness, in his
concentration on America as subject, which in Mr. Ginsberg's case takes the form
of denunciations of America's role in the world. Whitman's ''Passage to India''
becomes in Mr. Ginsberg, who is a practicing Buddhist, a frequent recourse to
Buddhist terms and prayers. Whitman's love of comrades becomes detailed
descriptions of homosexual lovemaking. Mr. Ginsberg's use of newspaper items in
his verse recalls Emerson's description of ''Leaves of Grass'' as a mixture of
the ''Bhagavad Gita and The New York Tribune.''

Though Whitman is the tutelary genius of this volume, it was William Carlos
Williams who was the first contemporary poet to encourage him. A few of the
early poems show Williams's influence clearly. But what Mr. Ginsberg took from
Williams ultimately was the confidence to be himself and the understanding that
our industrial landscape is the world we have to deal with. When he came to deal
with it, it was the Surrealists more than an objectivist like Williams who
taught him how. In fact, these poets are opposites. Williams has his ear tuned
to the small sounds of the language, to the articulation of syllables. Mr.
Ginsberg, when he begins to hit his stride, works with large blocks of sound.
Williams, who maintains a speaking voice in his poems, always plays off of
contemporary speech. Mr. Ginsberg, who chants, has a rhetoric as mannered and as
made up as Milton's.

Read as autobiography, this giant collection begins with the story of a poet in
his early 20's who cannot find a place for himself in this world, who cannot
take any satisfaction in himself: ''I have become physically and/ spiritually
impotent in my madness this month.'' And he says this over and over in poems
that are not interesting in themselves - some are imitation Blake or ballads or
Williams - but that do move the reader to pity.

Mr. Ginsberg had to learn to love himself (a good deal of the book is taken up
in this process) before he could write the poems that stake his claim to
immortality. The autobiography ends with poems that carry the burden of a public
personality. Sometimes the poet kids himself but he is only half-kidding when he
writes in the final pages of this book ''I'm immortalizing your exhaust, Avenue
A bus.'' Here, the prophetic Ginsberg, which has been his true role - this poet
really believes in inspiration and immortality - begins to merge with the media
Ginsberg.

In his preface, Mr. Ginsberg says, ''Reader may further observe poetic energy as
cyclic, the continuum a panorama of valleys and plateaus with peaks of
inspiration every few years.'' Maybe that's his way of acknowledging that the
strong poems are few, and that between them are pages of dull poetry.

No poem in this collection is as realized as ''Kaddish'' but that one poem would
be enough to insure this poet's survival. Beside it, this reviewer would put
''Howl''; ''Wichita, Vortex Sutra,'' a long history poem, adapting Pound, about
America during the Vietnam War, and ''Wales Visitation,'' a nature vision.
Somewhat beneath these, about 20 other poems, among them: ''A Supermarket in
California,'' ''Sunflower Sutra,'' ''Death to Van Gogh's Ear,'' ''To Aunt
Rose,'' ''Cafe in Warsaw'' and ''Don't Grow Old.'' Many of these have already
taken their just place in the anthologies.

It is an ironic reflection on our cultural progress that this bard of the Beats
explains in his preface that his '' 'Notes' transmit cultural archetypes to
electronic laser TV generations that don't read Dostoyevsky Buddha bibles.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Allen Ginsberg

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 15, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
21 Indicted in Vietnam On Subversion Charges

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Dec. 14


The Government put 21 men on trial today on charges of trying to overthrow the
Communist regime through espionage, sabotage and guerrilla warfare.

The trial, which is being held in public and covered on television, is expected
to last four to five days. Some of the defendants have been identified as
officers of the former South Vietnamese military.

A 29-page indictment read by a judge said the defendants were backed by Chinese
and Thai officials in their five- year effort. The indictment says the
defendants had clandestine dealings with five Americans at the United States
Embassy in Bangkok.


WASHINGTON, Dec. 14 (AP) - A State Department press officer called the
Vietnamese allegation of United States involvement in a plot ''a total
fabrication.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD ;
Vietnam Arrests 119 As 'Traitors and Spies'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 93 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Dec. 15


Vietnam announced today that 119 people accused of being ''traitors and spies''
had been arrested in connection with a purported plot to overthrow the Communist
Government.

The official Vietnamese radio, monitored in Bangkok, said the 119 were picked up
by security forces ''one by one,'' along with weapons, counterfeit money and
other equipment. No other details were given.

The announcement was made during a trial of 21 people, some of them former South
Vietnamese military officers, who are accused of plotting to overthrow the Hanoi
Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORPS TRAINS OFFICERS FOR U.S. OCEANIC ADMINISTRATION

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 54, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: KINGS POINT, L.I.


The ensigns' black uniforms disappeared beneath yellow slickers as the morning
mist turned into rain. The officers moved quickly, carting crates of food to the
galley below.

An hour later, the Kings Pointer, a World War II tugboat, eased out of the
harbor and started her trip north to Boston. It was the final voyage of the fall
training program of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Corps.

Last Thursday night, the class of 20 corps officers, which included 9 women,
graduated from the 11-week course here at the training center of the corps at
the Merchant Marine Academy.

For many of the graduates, the program was their first experience with the sea.

Goal of the Program

Comdr. Theodore Wyzewski, who is in charge of the training center, said that the
ensigns were told from the start that the goal of the program was for them to be
able to pilot the ship. ''They look at me as if I'm crazy,'' he said.

But somehow between orientation and graduation, the ensigns learned the language
and law of seamanship.

Ensign Betsy Crozer, 22 years old, a fall graduate, has successfully navigated
the tugboat down the length of East River. ''I was amazed,'' she said.

The corps is the smallest of the nation's seven uniformed services. Its 400
commissioned officers, who all receive their initial training at Kings Point,
operate a fleet of laboratories and research ships with 14,000 civilian
employees of the oceanic administration.

Similar to Other Services

The corps is similar to the Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Coast Guard and
Public Health Service in that its officers wear uniforms and receive the same
basic pay, which begins at $17,500 a year, said Lieut. Michael E. Henderson.

But enlistees in the corps receive no military training and are commissioned
only after they have received their undergraduate degrees in engineering, earth
science or a related field.

The beginnings of the corps date back to 1807 when Congress ordered the Navy to
chart the coastlines and the Army to survey the shore.

''In 1919, Congress created a separate officer corps which would not necessarily
have to go off to war,'' Lieutenant Henderson said.

Forming the Organization

In 1970, Congress combined the Commission Corps with the Environmental Science
Services Administration, the National Geodetic Survey, the old Weather Bureau,
the Bureau of Commercial Fisheries and several smaller agencies to create the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

That year, the training center moved from Norfolk, Va., to Kings Point.

Unlike two decades ago, when some officers enlisted in the corps to avoid the
Vietnam War, this year's recruits say they are attracted by the career
opportunities in the organization.

''I was looking for something that wasn't an 8-to-5 engineering job,'' said
Ensign Crozer, a Brown University graduate. ''But I did have to adjust to
putting on a uniform every morning.''

'Out Tagging Dolphins'

''This gives you the opportunity to do research without going back to school for
a graduate degree,'' said Ensign Jennifer A. Hill, 24, a graduate of the
Colorado School of Mines. ''If I was just doing engineering research, I would be
in a lab, I wouldn't be out tagging dolphins.''

The graduates said the course work was intense, the hours long and the trips
away from home lonely. But as the term progressed, the ensigns said, they became
accustomed to the regimentation of military life and familiar with seamanship.

They study navigation, radar and management first in the classroom, then with
simulated equipment in the laboratory and finally aboard the tugboat.

The 143-foot, 8-ton vessel serves as a home away from home during their three-
and four-day trips along the Eastern Seaboard. The boat is much like the ones
they will be on for the required initial sea duty. They spend much of the
voyages practicing maneuvers and standing watch.

Corps Has 45 Female Officers

''If you're not warm, standing watch is a misery,'' said Ensign Hill. ''When
it's nice out, it's so peaceful, but when it's rough, you feel like you're
riding an elevator.''

Today, 12 years after the corps first accepted women, it has 45 female officers.

''Early on, they didn't think women would be interested in going to sea and
having this life style,'' Lieutenant Henderson said. ''But now I would say 40
percent of our inquiries are from women, mainly because there are no legal
restrictions on them in NOAA.''

Women have more career and training opportunities in the corps than in the Navy,
where they are barred from being assigned to combat ships, he said.

After a few weeks' leave, the officers will begin their first tour of duty. Most
will spend two and half years aboard oceanic administration ships assisting
senior officers in navigating and commanding the boats.

''They said to expect to work 18 hours a day,'' said Ensign Carol Coho, 23, a
graduate of Pennsylvania State University. ''But I'm excited, there's so many
interesting things to do.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo; Photo of Tammy Halfast

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

THE AVANT-GARDE IS BIG BOX OFFICE

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2632 words


Eight years ago, when ''Einstein on the Beach'' was presented at the
Metropolitan Opera for two performances, it was a sensational one- of-a-kind
event in which the downtown art world occupied a temple of uptown establishment
culture for one brief moment. So great was the excitement that even as
performances of the four-and- one-half hour opera by Philip Glass and Robert
Wilson were in progress, art world aficionados who were unable to get in waited
patiently outside in hopes of confiscating the ticket stubs of walkouts who had
grown impatient with its length or mystified by its hallucinatory vision of
Albert Einstein's life and times.

Today, ''Einstein'' officially opens in New York again. Its reputation, partly
through a superb complete recording, has grown to the point that it has become
the surefire hit of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival, selling
out its run of 12 performances in the Academy's 2,100-seat opera house. The
revival has cost BAM over a million dollars to produce, roughly the amount that
the Next Wave Festival will gross this year. In the world of the avant-garde,
those are big numbers. And according to BAM's president, Harvey Lichtenstein,
the million-dollar gross is nearly twice the business the entire festival did
last year.

Such spectacles - and their increasing commercial success - are by no means
limited to BAM. The New York City Opera this fall presented Philip Glass's
opera, ''Akhnaten,'' which did sellout business in spite of generally
unfavorable reviews. At City Center, the Japanese dance troupe Sankai Juku
melded kinetic human sculpture and Jungian themes into compelling,
psychologically rich dance-theater. Martha Clarke's dramatization of Hieronymus
Bosch's ''Garden of Earthly Delights,'' at St. Clement's Church, offered
absorbing dreamlike music-theater in which members of the cast soared over the
audience like trapeze artists. It proved so successful that it will have a
return engagement starting Dec. 28.

What has happened to make the world of avant- garde performance, traditionally
limited in its audience and finances, so economically robust? Why have these
experimentalists become major box-office attractions?

''There's been a coming together of many elements of so-called popular culture
and so-called serious culture,'' Mr. Lichtenstein observed recently. ''You've
had rock composers like David Byrne of Talking Heads writing music for Twyla
Tharp and Robert Wilson. Next year, we have Laura Dean working with Andy Summers
of the Police. Today's serious artists have been very influenced by pop. Philip
Glass was influenced by rock and Steve Reich by jazz. Until recently it wasn't
the creative artists - the composers - who were the heroes but the people who
recreated the work - the conductor and the opera singers. It's significant that
Philip Glass and Steve Reich have not only been composers but have been involved
as performers, and their links to the audience as performers have allowed them
to build followings that have have in turn influenced their work.''

Can one generalize about the work that is drawing crowds to the Brooklyn Academy
and other avant- garde institutions? Broadly speaking, yes. The spectacles that
have become almost a house style at BAM blur the distinctions between high and
low art. Many suggest intellectual rock shows. Popular culture is so
ominipresent, their creators insist, that it can't be shoved under the rug.

Unlike much of yesterday's avant-garde, which in its pursuit of esthetic purity
didn't seek to entertain, today's experimentalists do not view art and culture
as sacred; to them, works of art need not be finely honed artifacts. In the
performance collage, elements may be added, shifted, or taken out at will. These
elements may include not only different media, but surprising modes of vision,
from the perceptions of autistic youth to animals and imaginary aliens.
Moreover, the performance itself is something that an artist doesn't expect to
be remembered forever. Like a rock show, it is a very intense but fleeting
experience intended to engage the audience fully for its duration while rarely
promoting any message or philosophy.



Admitting every kind of expression, the new spectacles, performance art pieces,
music-theater works - whatever - tend to be sexy, fun, and ''psychedelic'' in
the way they bombard audiences with light, sound, energy and a certain glamour.
''Secret Pastures,'' the most popular dance event of this year's Next Wave
Festival had a playful set by the artist Keith Haring and a score by Peter
Gordon that blended quotes from TV kitsch like ''Mission Impossible'' squealing
free jazz, and echoes of Prokofiev. With freewheeling choreography by Bill T.
Jones and Arnie Zane and wackily trendy costumes by Willi Smith, ''Secret
Pastures'' added up to a shiny package. Laurie Anderson, among many others,
loved it because it reminded her, she said, of ''Saturday morning cartoons.''

The young audiences who are flocking to the Brooklyn Academy know all about
Saturday morning cartoons, for they grew up immersed in television and pop
music. Unlike 20 years ago, pop culture - conveyed through media from network
television to MTV - is an inescapable fact of life for young people, even those
from highbrow backgrounds. At the same time, experimental techniques have become
widely accepted, and even pervade television commercials.

''We're living in a culture that's incredibly multifaceted,'' notes Peter
Sellars, the 27-year old experimental director. ''I grew up with John Cage and
Merce Cunningham as old masters. But while they were giving birth to something,
Norman Rockwell was also in his prime. The thing to realize is that what John
Cage gave birth to can also be found in Erik Satie or in a 13th-century Japanese
manuscript. At the same time that we can disregard the entire culture of the
world, we know more of it than we ever have before. With just the push of a
button we can choose some eighth-century Chinese lute music, Mahler's Sixth
Symphony, or Prince. It's one of the paradoxes of our time that culture today is
of necessity everything and of necessity nothing.''

Laurie Anderson is one performance artist who moves easily between pop and
highbrow culture. She, along with Philip Glass, has emerged as one of the
avant-garde's certified ''art stars.'' Two years ago, her multi-media collage,
''United States, I-IV,'' drew an audience of around 16,000 to the Brooklyn
Academy. And following her two pop LPs, which have each sold in excess of
100,000, Warner Bros. Records has just released a five-disk set of the complete
''United States.'' Miss Anderson's performances engulf the audience in animated
cartoons, electronic pop, spoken anecdotes and sound effects that present an
all-encompassing surrealistic vision of the world. At the center stands the
artist, magically wielding high technology to contemplate high technology.
Though these collages have their ominous and solemn moments, above all they
evoke the diversity, clatter and craziness of the world, challenging us to
figure out for ourselves what it all might mean.



''The Games,'' which opened this year's Next Wave Festival, had much the same
frolicsome energy as ''United States, I-IV'' and ''Secret Pastures.'' An
''opera-music theater collboration'' conceived and directed by Meredith Monk and
Ping Chong, with sets and costumes by Yoshio Yabara, it imagined a
post-apocalyptic world in which arriving aliens ''learned'' civilization with
movement that suggested minimalist parodies of the Olympic Games in an
environment straight out of ''Star Trek.''



The avant-garde theater is also becoming recognized on a national basis. The
National Endowment for the Arts recently launched a new funding program to
promote the formation of theater companies. Along with mainstream institutions
like Circle Repertory, one of the first Ongoing Ensembles grants went to the
Wooster Group, the SoHo-based avant-garde collective led by Elizabeth LeCompte.
''L.S.D.,'' the Wooster Group's last ensemble piece, used psychedelic music,
excerpts from Arthur Miller's play, ''The Crucible'' performed in gibberish,
readings from countercultural texts, and a stage reenactment of a group LSD
experience, to create a play about ecstasy and demonism.

This year, the Kennedy Center in Washington appointed Peter Sellars to create an
American National Theater Company. Mr. Sellars plans to open the center's doors
to Robert Wilson, Miss Anderson, the Wooster Group, Squat Theater (the Hungarian
emigre performance troupe), and other leading experimental theater artists.

Mr. Sellars, who has directed everything from operas (a space-age production of
Handel's ''Orlando'' at Harvard's Loeb Theater) to rock videos (Herbie Hancock's
''Hardrock''), believes today's avant-garde is destined to become tomorrow's
mainstream.

''The whole shape of culture is changing, and it has to do with education,'' Mr.
Sellars observed recently. ''Compare things now to Paris in the 20's! Stravinsky
could make references to the classicism of the Baroque era, Andre Gide could
make reference to Greek mythology, and Cocteau could survive by referring to the
Orpehus myth. The astounding thing is that nobody knows the references anymore,
and that's a major new departure for culture. The new culture makes a big mess
on its first impression, but then you realize that behind the mess is a rigid
system that is as classical as anything that has been invented before, but by
its own rules, which are rigidly modern. All of this work demands to be seen in
the context of our national culture, not as an event off to the left. Over the
next decade, I hope we can assist in forging a new contemporary theatrical
mainstream vocabulary.''



In New York, meanwhile, experimental work thrives at otherinstitutions. At the
Public Theater, Joseph Papp continues to stage productions by Richard Foreman
and Mabou Mines. La Mama, which has been home to the theatrical avant-garde for
more than two decades, opened its fall season with ''Benevenuto,'' a trilogy of
Italian experimental theater works that included a laser art visualization of
''The Aeneid'' by the Florentine group, Krypton, and a pop mixed-media version
of Verdi's ''Otello,'' with music by Peter Gordon.

If the Brooklyn Academy is unquestionably the Parnassus of the experimental
performance world, it is only one of growing number of spaces offering mixed
media works of every shape and size to adventurous audiences. Dance Theater
Workshop, the Kitchen, Franklin Furnace, P.S. 122, and Lower East Side clubs
like the Pyramid Cocktail Lounge and 8 B.C. are all seedbeds for performing
talents that may someday end up at the Brooklyn Academy or, indeed, on Broadway.

''All the activity in the New York club scene has shown that there is a change
in the public mentality regarding experimental work,'' said David White, the
executive director of Dance Theater Workshop. ''Traditionally, the difference
between this country and Europe, where there is a substantial festival circuit,
is that European audiences have been more receptive toward the unknown. Here,
many people have considered going to something avant-garde akin to taking
medicine. At places like the Pyramid club, however, the weekend traffic has
become heavy, and people come not expecting the familiar but wanting the
unknown.''



Dance Theater Workshop, which began 20 years ago as a choreographers'
collaborative, represents the the next-to-the-top rung of the performing arts
ladder, and some of the artists it has nurtured, like Whoopi Goldberg, Bill
Irwin, and the Flying Karamazov Brothers, have been produced in commercial
venues. Miss Goldberg, along with Eric Bogosian and Spalding Gray, is among the
most gifted of a new generation of monologist-storytellers who either play
multiple characters or who offer surreal autobiographical monologues.

Mr. Gray's latest creation, ''Swimming to Cambodia,'' is a first- person account
of the making of the movie, ''The Killing Fields'' in which he plays a minor
role. Interweaving intimate personal confession with a political history of
Southeast Asia after Vietnam, he evokes in a single narrative voice a mixed
media kind of experience in which tiny physical details of existence matter as
much as world events.



All this activity cries out for an organizational frame, and with substantial
foundation money forthcoming, David White is involved in putting together a
national performance network of alternative spaces in 14 cities. The network
includes the Walker Arts Center of Minneapolis, which has long been hospitable
to experimental performance, Inter/Section in San Francisco, On the Boards in
Seattle, the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, and the Institute of
Contemporary Art in Boston. One of its aims is to help subsidize performance
artists around the country. With funding from Morgan Guaranty Trust, Dance
Theater Workshop this year administrated the first annual Bessie Awards, which
recognize not only the best work in dance but also the emerging field of
''related performance work.''

John Cage, the patron saint of the avant-garde, is delighted with all this
activity. It was Mr. Cage who helped set the wheels in motion for today's
performances when he reinterpreted Marcel Duchamp's dictum that ''anything can
be art.''

While these days, Mr. Cage is championing a gentle music closely related to
nature, he's still not doctrinaire about what music should be. What he likes to
call ''earth work'' music is only a very narrow segment of an experimental music
scene whose other end, at least decibel- wise, is represented by Glenn Branca's
roaring guitar ''symphonies.'' Meanwhile an emerging ''world music'' movement is
spewing out fusions of every imaginable style of European classicism, pop, jazz,
electronic, Indian, African, Latin American, Asiatic, and ''ethnic'' musics.
Last year, one of the Next Wave's biggest hits was ''The Gospel at Colonus,'' an
unlikely but effective fusion of Sophocles and Greek tragedy created by the
experimental director Lee Breuer with the composer Bob Telson.

Surveying the music scene recently, Mr. Cage said he felt the musical climate is
much healthier today than it was ten years ago. ''There hasn't been a mainstream
for 25 years, and I don't think one is emerging,'' he said. ''We're in a delta
with many different streams.''



Mr. Lichtenstein and Mr. White also point to the widespread collaboration among
visual and performing artists as a merging of art forms into structures Mr.
White calls ''three dimensional and holographic.'' The term that Mr. Sellars and
others use to describe this new kind of theater is Gesamtkunstwerk, the
Wagnerian ideal of a united art work melding every art form into a total
representation of human nature.

''Wagner called it the art work of the future, and he was right,'' Mr. Sellars
maintains. ''I don't think theater exists independently of music. It was no
accident that all of Greek drama was opera. And particularly in the light of the
way new technologies are transforming everything we now know as performance, the
theater of the future is necessarily this Gesamtkunstwerk.''

Whether mystical or nonsensical, the idea of evoking a totality of experience is
the essential thrust behind works like ''Einstein on the Beach,'' 'United
States,'' ''L.S.D.'' ''The Games,''and ''Secret Pastures.'' But that reality
isn't a rarefied perception of truth and God toward which high art has
traditionally directed audiences, but a multiplicity of images and sounds, from
cartoons to Mozart. Its appeal may come from its attempt to embrace not only the
familiar but everything we don't know and can only imagine.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 17, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
 An article in the Arts and Leisure section yesterday about avant-garde events
misstated the availability of tickets for ''Einstein on the Beach'' at the
Brooklyn Academy of Music. Seats may still be available for some performances.


GRAPHIC: photo of scene from ''Garden of Earthly Delights''; photo of scene from
''Einstein on the Beach''

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
'JEWEL IN THE CROWN'- SUPERB DRAMA

BYLINE: By John J. O'Connor

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1455 words


There are those of us who have long been insisting that television is not just a
convenient conduit for carrying old films, that the medium has its own
distinctive artistic and esthetic forms.  Still another outstanding example of
the kind of undertaking that would be impossible in the traditional settings of
film or theater is getting underway tonight at 9 on Masterpiece Theater, public
television's enduring showcase for largely British imports. Produced by
Christopher Morahan for Granada TV, ''The Jewel in the Crown'' is based on four
Paul Scott novels known as ''The Raj Quartet.''

The television adaptation by Ken Taylor runs for 15 hours, the first two of
which have been combined for a single episode on WNET/13 this evening. The
entire project adds up to that increasingly rare experience - superb drama of
reverberating substance. Viewers in search of indisputable quality are advised
to set aside their Sunday evenings, brooking no interruptions, for ''The Jewel
in the Crown'' over the next three months.



The setting and the subject is India, a country that has been tragically
prominent in the news recently. Ironically, India has also been receiving
unusual attention in major entertainment productions, including the Academy
Award-winning ''Gandhi,'' the miscalculated cable- TV version of ''The Far
Pavilions'' and David Lean's new film version of E. M. Forster's ''Passage to
India.'' Some of the effects from this sudden attention for a relatively
neglected subject have been decidedly frivolous. Fashions in Britain, we are
told, are being influenced by Indian images, from local dress to the khaki
uniforms of the former English ruling residents. There is talk about a certain
nostalgia in Britain for the supposed glory days of Empire.

All of which, if true, is certainly puzzling. ''The Jewel in the Crown'' is
anything but nostalgic. It is an unflinching portrait of the arrogance and
inevitable corruption of imperialism, exploring its underbelly of vicious social
snobbery and racism. Some observers suggest that American audiences might find
parallels with this country's experience in Vietnam. That is stretching matters
unnecessarily. The United States' role in places like the Philippines or Puerto
Rico, not to mention the current scenarios in Central America, are perhaps more
apt comparisons.

Like ''A Passage to India,'' with which it shares several key actors, ''A Jewel
in the Crown'' concerns a rape. In the words of the late Mr. Scott, his story
tells ''of a rape, of the events that led up to it and followed it and of the
place in which it happened.'' The rape of a young woman is a symbol, of course,
for the rape of a country. The violent act provides a distillation of the
peculiar spectacle of two nations in fierce opposition but still, as Mr. Scott
put it, locked in an imperial embrace that transcended the normal boundaries of
love and hate. The television story goes from 1942, at the height of World War
II, to 1947 and the very eve of Indian independence. The Scott novels go a bit
further into the past, using a ''Rashomon'' technique of flashbacks and
recounting the same incident from different vantage points. Lawrence Durrell
used similar devices in ''The Alexandria Quartet.''

Mr. Taylor's television adaptation, outlined with the aid of Sir Denis Foreman,
head of Granada TV, manages to get most of the Scott story into chronological
form, punctuated here and there with an illuminating flashback. The complicated
story involves dozens of major characters and some of the key transitions,
particularly in what is now Episode Four, are tricky and demand patience. But
the careful accumulation of marvelous detail is never less than fascinating. And
once again in a British production, the performances are rarely less than
extraordinary.



The first episodes revolve around the intriguing figure of Hari Kumar, known, in
his posh British public- school days, as Harry Coomer. Hari was taken to England
at the age of 2 by his ambitious Indian father who wanted to make sure that his
son would grow up to be a proper English gentleman. But when his father's money
ran out, Hari was shipped back to Mayapore, where the once-elegant cricket
player found himself an outsider, snubbed by the British rulers, known as ''the
Raj,'' and despised by Indians for being too British. Young Hari had become an
invisible man, lucky to get a modest job on an English-language newspaper that
enabled him to occasionally cross the river from his own humble home to the
grand residences of the British.

At this initial point, there arrives in Mayapore a rather gawky young woman
named Daphne Manners, the niece of a military family with a respected name in
India. She is staying with the formidable Lady Chattergee, an Indian woman who
navigates her way cautiously through powerful political circles in which both
Indian and British figures mingle, however uneasily. She warns Daphne that ''you
may find things here of which you do not approve, of which I do not approve.''
In her typically direct and disarmingly innocent way, Daphne replies that
''perhaps they should be changed.'' This is precisely the kind of attitude that
makes her a threat to the British establishment, which is determined to maintain
its position of privilege in India.

Worse, Daphne is attracted to Hari, ignoring the strictly enforced British
commandment that the ''naturally'' superior whites never mix with those of a
darker skin. Daphne also has the misfortune to catch the amorous attentions of a
police officer named Ronald Merrick, who is using his post in India as a means
to climb out of his humble middle-class origins back home. Brandishing a
pronounced sadistic streak, Merrick takes an intense dislike to Hari who,
despite the Indian's despised dark skin, looks and sounds like the stereotypical
English gentleman. When Daphne is found raped, Hari's fate at the hands of the
vicious Merrick is thus sealed.

The rape doesn't even occur until the third hour, which is next week's
installment, and by then ''The Jewel in the Crown'' has solidly established
itself as splendid television. Consider simply the performances. Susan
Wooldridge is a virtually perfect Daphne, an awkward, galumphing saint whose
beauty beams firmly from within. Art Malik, looking every inch the Englishman
with dark skin, plays Hari in demanding but effective combinations of being
difficult and sympathetic, darkly brooding and almost boyishly thankful for
crumbs of civility. These two major figures just about disappear after the first
few episodes, although Hari will very much remain the story's, and India's,
''loose end.'' Ronald Merrick, however, stays on, becoming increasingly
villainous as time passes. Tim Pigott-Smith etches him in acid. His Merrick is a
human horror but, much to Mr. Pigott- Smith's credit, an understandable one, a
victim in his own way of the British caste system.



As the story unfolds, a military family called the Laytons gradually takes over
center stage, playing their individual parts with varying degrees of virtue or
viciousness as their India, the India that provided a style of life they could
never have attained or afforded in Britain, begins crumbling around them. They
discover, with a shock that reveals the depth of their haughty ignorance, the
profound resentment that has been festering among their former servants.
Exceptional performances are contributed by, just to mention a few, Dame Peggy
Ashcroft as the missionary Barbie Batchelor who is caught in the web of hatred
and greed; Geraldine James as Sarah Layton, the one member of her family who,
like Daphne Manners, doesn't fit into the ways of the Raj; Eric Porter as the
wily Russian Count Bronowsky, adviser to an independent Indian ruler, and Judy
Parfitt as the cold, calculating Mrs. Layton, almost as vicious as Merrick in
her alcoholic snobbery.

Directed in more or less alternating episodes by Mr. Morahan and Jim O'Brien,
the production has hit upon the clever device of using clips from old British
newsreels of the period. As the fictional story progresses, its observations and
viewpoints are thus reinforced by the propagandistic films that were being
churned out for the folks at home in Britain.

As should be clear by this point, the scope, the richness, the sheer
accomplishment of ''The Jewel in the Crown'' can barely be skimmed in a single
summary. What emerges in the end is a comprehension of India far more convincing
than the posturings of a Rudyard Kipling and far deeper than the tightly focused
biography of a ''Gandhi.'' ''The Jewel in the Crown'' is not only engrossing
television. It is important television, a model of what the medium can do.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A THREE MILE ISLAND FOR CHEMICALS

BYLINE: By AGIS SALPUKAS

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2896 words


FOR about a week after a cloud of toxic gas killed

thousands of people in India, the public spotlight

focused on three places: Bhopal, the site of the tragedy; Institute, W. Va.,
where a similar plant was operating, and Danbury, Conn., headquarters of the
Union Carbide Corporation, owner of both plants.

That spotlight remains strong, and its glare intense. But now its scope includes
the entire chemical industry. From Monsanto in St. Louis to Dow Chemical in
Michigan, from Du Pont and Hercules in Delaware to American Cyanamid in New
Jersey, corporate executives are fielding the same question from reporters,
regulators, environmentalists, community activists, and many of their own
employees: Could what happened at Bhopal happen at one of their plants, here or
abroad?

Reassuring comments for public consumption abound. But in actuality, a ''there
but for fortune go I'' mentality is pervading the industry, as executives
recognize that Union Carbide's safety practices are neither better nor worse
than their own.

''We can't judge yet what happened in India and we can't say that nothing will
ever happen here,'' said Paul F. Oreffice, president and chief executive of the
Dow Chemical Company. Adds H. Michael Utidjian, medical director for American
Cyanamid and a former Union Carbide employee: ''I don't take any great comfort
that I now work for American Cyanamid and not Union Carbide.''

Some chemical companies - E.I. du Pont de Nemours & Company is a notable example
- are waiting for a full report from Union Carbide on exactly what happened at
Bhopal before they take any internal action. But others already are evaluating
their in-plant safety procedures, their community evacuation plans, their
emergency response systems - indeed, their entire process for making and using
chemicals. ''It would be remiss if we didn't check one more time to make sure
there wasn't something that we missed,'' said R.A. Smith, director of corporate
safety and services at Dow Chemical.

In some ways, trying to guarantee safety, particularly at overseas plants, is a
bit like shooting in the dark. There is woefully little data about the health
dangers that specific chemicals present. Strict regulations in many countries
where the American chemical industry operates can keep out modern equipment and
automated systems. And no one knows how to eliminate simple human error. ''You
can design the best system,'' said Geraldine Cox, vice president and technical
director of the Chemical Manufacturers Association, ''but when you deal with
people you can create a problem.''

Bhopal could lead to an onslaught of new, costly safety regulations, similar to
those that have been levied on the nuclear industry. ''The incident will be
viewed over time as the chemical industry's Three Mile Island,'' said James
Gustave Speth, president of the World Resources Institute. That prospect worries
chemical industry executives, and many large companies are setting up new
mechanisms for formal self-scrutiny. For example:

* The Allied Corporation is reviewing all the chemicals it uses to get a better
idea of the number of toxic substances involved, and of the adequacy of safety
devices and controls.  ''We also are taking another look at our operator
training, emergency drills and community response systems,'' said Edward L.
Hennessy Jr., chairman and chief executive.

* The American Cyanamid Company suspended the use of methyl isocyanate, the gas
that was released in Bhopal, at its pesticide plant in Brazil until it knows
what caused the disaster in India. The company also is reviewing its handling of
hazardous substances.

* The Monsanto Company formed a senior management panel to review safety
policies and procedures at its plants worldwide. ''Even though we are confident
that our plants are as safe as is humanly possible to make them, an incident
such as that in Bhopal prompts us to take additional steps,'' Richard J.
Mahoney, president and chief executive, said in a statement.


* Hercules is doing worst-case analyses of all of its plants to make sure each
is properly staffed to handle any situation - fires and explosions as well as
spills or leaks.

Ironically, statistics show the chemical industry to be among the safest in the
country. Last year it had 5.2 occupational injuries per 100 workers, compared
with an all-manufacturing-industry average of 7.5. Moreover, the industry has
often tried to substitute safer materials for ones that have been deemed toxic -
toluene for benzene, for example, or zeolites and polypropylene fibers for
asbestos.

But all too often, the substitutes pose hazards of their own. Indeed, Sevin,
Carbide's brand name for the pesticide it was making in India, was a substitute
for DDT, which was banned in 1972. Moreover, the record of diligent attention to
safety ''goes for naught when you have an accident like Bhopal,'' said George J.
Sella Jr., American Cyanamid's chairman, president and chief executive.


DATA about the health hazards of the 66,000 chemicals listed by the National
Institute of Occupational Safety and Health as toxic are sorely lacking. The
Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976 required that all new chemicals pass rigid
toxicity tests before they are allowed on the market. But it made no provision
for retroactive testing of the millions of chemicals already on the market in
1976, or for testing new versions of existing chemicals.

The result, according to Dr. Irving Selikoff, director of the Environmental
Sciences Laboratory at the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, is that only a
''handful'' of chemicals have been tested under the act. Meanwhile, he said, the
American Chemical Society registered new chemicals last year at the astonishing
rate of 70 an hour. ''There's so much catchup to do,'' Dr. Selikoff said.
''E.P.A. can't say 'let's stop the world for a while.' ''

The problem of control is indeed staggering. There are about 6,000 plants that
make hazardous chemicals in the United States alone. Although there are many
regulations governing disposal of waste from these plants, there are none that
deal with proper ways to store toxic materials, or with monitoring leakage.

Nor are there rules governing maintenance of chemical plants. And, noted Dr.
Selikoff, the changing state of the art in the industry militates against
keeping all of the plants in prime condition. ''You know that in a few years you
will replace that plant, so you let it run into the ground,'' he said. ''The
people in the chemical industry are knowledgeable and capable, but they must
operate within profit constraints.''

Profitability is a particular sticking point among chemical companies right now.
Many of them still have tremendous assets tied up in the manufacture of bulk
chemicals that return very little profit, and they are scrambling to find
specialty niches in markets such as agricultural chemicals. Moreover, the
industry was among the last to pull out of the recession. One analyst predicts
that this year chemical companies will show a 40 percent increase in earnings -
not because of stellar performance, but because 1983 was still a bad year.

The industry has also been mired in a swamp of litigation over its handling of
toxic wastes. The suit by Vietnam veterans against makers of dioxin-contaminated
Agent Orange was settled only last May. And few people have forgotten the damage
done by toxic wastes at such sites as Love Canal, near Niagara Falls, and Times
Beach, Mo.

These cases centered mostly on injury to Americans. But the Bhopal disaster has
raised the question of whether human lives in third- world countries are being
treated with the same degree of concern as those in the United States. The fact
that automated emergency warning systems existed at the Carbide plant in West
Virginia but were lacking at its Bhopal counterpart have exacerbated the issue.

Industry spokesmen hotly dispute any suggestion of a double standard. Still,
critics are pressing for new legislation on the export of products and
technology.

It may well come. In 1981 the Reagan Administration revoked an executive order,
passed under President Jimmy Carter, that imposed strict controls on sales
abroad of banned or restricted substances. Last Wednesday Robert Peck, a Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State, told a hearing by the House subcommittee on Asian
and Pacific Affairs that the Administration was ''reviewing'' that revocation.
And there is talk in Washington about not confining restrictions to export of
products of questionable safety, but to export of technologies and processes as
well.

The question of safety at overseas facilities is a particularly thorny one. Many
third-world countries, including India, Brazil, Chile and South Korea, do not
allow foreign companies to maintain full ownership of their plants. Many impose
severe restrictions on importing equipment. And they insist that the plant hire
only local people, even if they are not as well trained as their American
counterparts. And, perhaps most troublesome, local management often does not
have what Dr. Utidjian of American Cyanamid calls the ''North American
philosophy of the importance of human life.''

''If you identify what you consider to be a potential hazard in one of these
locations, what do you do if local management refuses to act on your
recommendation?'' asks John P. Frawley, general manager for health and the
environment at Hercules. ''You're caught between a rock and a hard place.''


EVEN without a double safety

standard at play, the industry

must prove that its standards are stringent enough. Political pressure is coming
to bear on Union Carbide, and other companies are unlikely to escape similar
scrutiny.

According to Phil Schiliro, a legislative assistant to the House subcommittee on
Health and Environment of the Energy and Commerce Committee, two Congressional
investigators have already spent more than a week scrutinizing safety and
evacuation procedures at Carbide's West Virginia plant, which has closed only
the section that makes methyl isocyanate. Mr. Schiliro said that the existing
warning system is inadequate to handle an accident. Few community residents
understand the complicated set of whistles that the plant uses to differentiate
a serious emergency from a minor problem. Moreover, no one has figured out an
effective evacuation procedure for a nearby hospital which houses disabled
patients.

Mr. Schiliro said that the committee would soon try to identify other plants
that are handling hazardous chemicals near populated areas to see if new safety
regulations were needed.

Such promises are sweet music to the ears of environmentalists, many of whom
charge the Reagan Administration with studied callousness to environmental
issues, and Congress with interest only in toxic waste.

High on the environmentalists' new agenda is a renewed push for so- called
right-to-know legislation - laws that would force companies to tell their
workers and the communities in which their plants are situated the chemical
composition of all materials made or used in the plant, and the way to
counteract effects of exposure. ''It's very important for a community to know
what type of toxic chemicals are being manufactured and stored on site, and what
are the risks,'' said Richard Asinof, a spokesman for Evironmental Action Inc.
''We shouldn't have to wait for an accident to have this information.''

Many chemical companies have balked at right-to-know laws, saying that few
laymen would understand technical descriptions of chemicals, and that full
disclosure would jeopardize trade secrets. Now, ''Bhopal will make Congress more
receptive to changes in the laws,'' predicted Eric Draper, media coordinator of
the National Campaign Against Toxic Hazards, a lobbying group. ''Arguments about
trade protection will not hold as much water.''

For some environmentalists, full disclosure is not enough to insure safety.
Knowledge of a substance does not neutralize its danger, they say, nor does it
guard against human error.

''If our best, most highly skilled industry in terms of its accident record can
still fall victim to this kind of problem, it indicates something basically
wrong with the way we're going about this,'' said Michael Oppenheimer, senior
scientist of the Environmental Defense Fund. ''The key is to make us less hooked
on chemicals. We treat chemicals as if they were pennies. We use a lot more than
we have to in many industrial sectors.''

Since the Bhopal disaster involved a pesticide plant, most of the environmental
groups are honing in on that sector of chemical production. They are pushing
even harder for natural forms of pest control - importing wasps to eat bugs, for
example - and for more recycling of end products such as plastics in order to
lessen the need for primary chemicals to make them.


THE chemical industry continues

to insist that its policies of self-

policing are adequate enough to preclude the need for further regulation or for
curtailment of growth.

The Chemical Manufacturers Association, for example, has since 1972 run a
24-hour center called Chemtrec, for Chemical Transportation Emergency Center, to
help localities deal with accidental spills during the transport of chemicals.
The Association's 180 member companies, which represent 90 percent of the
country's chemical production, pay for Chemtrec. The bill of lading of any
truckload of chemicals will have the Chemtrec number on it.

The association has also coordinated with railway groups to come up with design
changes that make tank cars used to carry chemicals - at a rate of about 180
million shipments of hazardous materials a year - better able to withstand a
derailment. Last year, there were 323 derailments of cars carrying hazardous
chemicals.

Although retrofitting old cars to incorporate the changes cost the chemical
industry $450 million, Mrs. Cox, the Association vice president, insists that
the companies willingly undertook the expense.

Still, even she admits that the industry's procedures, particularly for
familiarizing communities with evacuation procedures, need improvement. ''I live
in Alexandria, Virginia, and I don't know what to do in case of an evacuation,''
she said. ''We need to communicate the plan before the crisis.''

Better communications would still not guard against mistakes, though. And it is
the potential for human error that continues to haunt industry executives. Mr.
Hennessy of Allied emphasized that even the 100 safety audits his company
performs on its plants each year does not remove the specter of a catastrophic
human mistake. ''That's the one I live in fear of the most,''he said.

It is the one that all the chemical industry executives are living with today.
''If you had asked me two weeks ago, what are the odds that any top chemical
company could have an accident that would kill two to three thousand people, I
would have said that it was unthinkable,'' said Hal Corbett, Monsanto's senior
vice president of environment, facilities and materials. ''But an incident did
occur, to a respectable company. It's not possible to say our procedures are
better than theirs. It leads one to do some soul searching.''


LESSONS FROMTHE NUCLEAR MISHAP

The specter of nuclear accident, particularly since the meltdown incident at
Three Mile Island in 1979, has loomed large in the public imagination. No
nuclear accident has produced health impacts on the scale of Bhopal, or even of
smaller chemical mishaps. Yet there are analogies to be drawn between the issues
involved in nuclear safety and those now surfacing in the chemical arena.

Scientists have only sketchy information about the probability of sickness or
permanent environmental damage from specific doses of radiation or most
chemicals. Although some toxic substances can be sensed, many are as odorless,
tasteless and invisible as radiation. And, like radiation, in small doses many
chemicals do not produce symptoms until a long time after exposure.

There are also differences in the industries involved, however. Many chemical
companies have argued that close scrutiny by the public would jeopardize their
trade secrets. The utility industry, by contrast, is not highly competitive, and
thus is more open about its procedures.

It is also more highly regulated, a fact that may well be a harbinger of things
to come for the chemical industry after Bhopal. The Three Mile Island incident
convinced the Nuclear Regulatory Commisstion that the ''defense in depth''
principle, under which plants are built with multiple redundancies for safety,
required another layer: taking steps outside the plant gate to cope with an
accidental release of radiation. And many of those steps would have come in
handy at Bhopal.

The commission requires that a system exist for notifying everyone within 10
miles of a reactor of any impending hazard. In practice, that means a network of
sirens to alert the public to turn on their radios or televisions, and an
arrangement with the stations included in the Emergency Broadcast System to
convey instructions.

Matthew L. Wald

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Graph of The Big Unknowns

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEADLINERS ;
Ali Seeks DamagesIt will be billed as

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 125 words


Muhammad Ali vs. United States and it has the makings of a grudge match. The
former heavyweight champion filed suit in Federal court last week, charging that
the Government deprived him of his rights by ''arbitrarily'' denying him
conscientious objector status as a Muslim in 1967. He was convicted of draft
evasion during the Vietnam War, and was stripped of his title by the World
Boxing Association, which is also named as a defendant. Until the Supreme Court
overturned the conviction more than three years later, Ali was banned from the
ring. The three-time world champion wants $50 million in damages, of which a
''substantial portion'' would go to Vietnam veterans and their families.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Muhammad Ali

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FAMILY FEUDS

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words


WASHINGTON WHEN President Reagan took office nearly four years ago, the
simplicity of his agenda and his leadership style were vital assets. He gave
orders to cut the growth of Government and had loyal lieutenants work out the
strategy. An enthusiastic circle of Administration conservatives proudly used
its unity to overpower Democratic disarray.

Once again the President has proclaimed a handful of central goals - an arms
agreement with the Soviet Union, maintaining the momentum of economic growth,
pursuing the American military buildup, and deep cuts in Federal spending. This
time, things are far less tidy. Open wrangling has broken out over how to carry
out the President's orders, growing even more more tart in the past few days.

Weeks ago, a core group of economic and political strategists masterminded by
budget director David A. Stockman fashioned an austerity package that sliced $34
billion from domestic programs for 1986 and banked on $8 billion more in cuts
from the Defense Department. With the Pentagon given ''over a trillion dollars''
in the 1981-85 budgets, Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan argued, ''a pause for
a year is not asking too much.'' Otherwise, he warned, the entire budget package
doesn't ''have a prayer'' in Congress. Senate Majority Leader Bob Dole
concurred, urging even bigger cuts for the Pentagon.

But calls for sacrifice have moved Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger
little. Last week, he reluctantly produced a package that he claimed would save
$6 billion and won tentative blessing from the President. Stunned White House
officials, counterattacking through the press, cried ''flim-flam.'' Half of the
Weinberger package, including pay cuts for Pentagon civilian employees, they
pointed out, had already been counted as part of the general budget ''freeze.''
Moreover, they charged, his resistance was paralyzing the entire effort to halve
the $200 billion deficit by 1988. The Stockman formula would trim Pentagon
appropriations over three years by $121 billion; Mr. Weinberger accepted only
$19 billion.

On foreign policy, too, there have been frictions, between the Pentagon chief
and Secretary of State George P. Shultz. So persistent and hard-fought have
their differences been that high Administration officials complain only the
President himself could resolve the deadlocks. With increasing assertiveness,
Mr. Shultz has urged a greater willingness to use force abroad. Mr. Weinberger
has warned against the dangers of a ''gradualist, incremental approach.'' In
practice, sometimes the Pentagon line has been harder - for recognizing the
Nicaraguan rebels, against the sale of American computers to Rumania, and urging
firm military spending targets for Western European allies. The State Department
took a contrary tack on each issue.

On arms control, the White House has brought the feuding factions into one
Senior Arms Control Group to work out the American position for talks with the
Soviet Union. ''They've locked themselves into a room and not had such serious
disagreements that one side or the other went to the press to sell its case in
public,'' said one White House official. Nonetheless, word has emerged that the
State Department has been arguing for a more flexible stance than the Pentagon.
Officials have suggested that the President's pet idea of a strategic defense
could become ''a bargaining chip'' with the Russians - a proposal rejected by
the Pentagon and the President.

Republican contentiousness confronts the President elsewhere, too. Senator Barry
Goldwater of Arizona, in line to be the Armed Services Committee chairman, has
urged giving up on the MX missile. Senator David Durenburger of Minnesota,
likely to be Senate Intelligence Committee chairman, has opposed renewing
funding for Nicaraguan rebels. Meanwhile, Reagan conservatives complain they
will be left without a voice if Presidential counselor Edwin Meese 3d is
confirmed as Attorney General, and are deeply troubled that the President cannot
find a top job for Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, chief United States delegate to the
United Nations, before she resigns.

In part, the in-house ferment, especially over Pentagon spending, is a seasonal
ailment that comes on every budget-time. And few protectors of their share of
the pie are more canny or skillful than Mr. Weinberger. The fighting also
reflects the fact that two of the President's top priorities are in conflict -
cutting the deficit and increasing military spending. In the 1980 Presidential
campaign, John B. Anderson, the Illinois Republican who ran as an independent
candidate, said that giving the Pentagon more could be combined with a balanced
budget and lower taxes only ''with blue smoke and mirrors.''

Second-Term Contrasts

The Republican discord delineates as well the contrast between a President's
first term and his second. No longer are Cabinet officers directing their fire
at their Democratic predecessors. Each has vested interests now, and with a
President like Mr. Reagan, who delegates broad powers rather than tightly
shepherding his lieutenants, their divergent impulses flare. The President tried
to toss it all off in answer to a reporter's question about the stalemated
budget process. ''They must have just caught me asleep at a Cabinet meeting,''
he joked. ''It wasn't paralysis.''

There may be another factor at work, more telling for the history of the Reagan
Presidency. Historians note that Presidents who win landslide re-elections are
prone to overreach in their second term, alienating allies as well as foes.
''There's been a tendency on the part of Presidents who have been re-elected by
landslides - F.D.R., L.B.J. and Nixon - to do something that is uncharacteristic
of their first term,'' says Prof. Richard Neustadt of Harvard University. ''Each
time, it's been an extension of their instincts in the first term but something
they've suppressed or been cautious about doing until their re-election made
them feel looser.''

Mr. Neustadt points to Franklin D. Roosevelt's plan to pack the Supreme Court
after the 1936 election; Lyndon B. Johnson's entering the war in Vietnam after
1964, when previously he had cannily sensed the limits of power; and Richard M.
Nixon in 1973 firing some of his Cabinet, antagonizing Congress by impounding
funds, and setting a hard mood on Watergate. Now, some Republicans fear that
Ronald Reagan, with his drive for deep domestic cuts, more military spending and
an ''over-my-dead-body'' pledge against tax increases, may not properly sense
the temper of Congress, or the need for early compromises.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Who Needs Economic Advisers?

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 372 words


The President's Council of Economic Advisers seems to have made the White House
hit list. Abolish it, some Reagan aides urge. The Government has enough
economists without those three who mostly tell the President things he doesn't
want to hear. Who needs them?

The President needs them. Any President may take his advice where he wants. But
Mr. Reagan would be unwise to close down this fount of truly independent and
expert counsel in a critical sector of his responsibility.

The council was created in 1946 by a Congress fearful of a painful conversion to
peacetime conditions and another depression. The Government has acquired many
more economists since then, but no others have the status or mandate of the
council's three. The White House Office of Management and Budget concentrates on
how much Government should spend on what. The Treasury worries about how to pay
for the budget. The Commerce Department's economists look after business and the
Labor Department's labor. Only the council can help the President assess all the
economic costs and benefits of his policies.  President Reagan did not enjoy the
advice of his last council chairman, Martin Feldstein, now back at Harvard. More
like the Democratic opposition, Mr. Feldstein kept insisting out loud that the
budget deficit was a menace and that taxes might have to be increased to deal
with it. The late President Johnson suffered similar distress from advisers who
warned that he, too, had to raise taxes to wage war in Vietnam and against
poverty at home at the same time. But he didn't try to shoot the messenger.

Mr. Feldstein may have been an embarrassment in public but his message, even if
ignored, had to be delivered. Charles Schultze, President Carter's chairman,
points out that the council must often be a ''realistic hair shirt.''

White House aides contend that the budget deficit requires not such expert
advice but a questioning of every agency's worth. In this case, that's just
silly. The council costs $2.5 million a year and could earn its keep with the
advice of a single day. Its ultimate value is incalculable. Let Mr. Reagan find
a chairman he likes, but let him not be without this conduit of priceless
economic intelligence.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

On Language;
Free World, So-Called

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 18, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1386 words

DATELINE: NEW YORK


A NOTE CAME IN from a right

-wing Presidential aide after I had given an essay about the use of color for
political classification the daring title of ''Wave of the Fuchsia.'' The
message was brief and pointed - ''Your friends are worried'' - but the note
paper caught my attention. Instead of the simple blue-on-white ''The White
House, Washington,'' there was a yellow stick-on paper with the printed heading
''If This Gets Into the Hands of the Russians, It's Curtains for the Free
World.''

The phrase Free World is used ironically there, to establish a bezazzy,
out-of-date, ''Hiya, sweetheart, get me Rewrite'' tone. For nearly two decades,
the phrase has been in intellectual disfavor, but of late it has begun to be
reasserted with pride and perhaps defiance.

Free World, capitalized, filled the vacuum created by the need for an antonym
for Communist World. It was born in the labor movement and was organized labor's
most powerful contribution to the language since the previous century's full
dinner pail, solidarity and pie in the sky.

A gathering of trade unions from Western nations that styled itself the Free
World Labor Congress met from June to November 1949 in Geneva and London. The
phrase first appeared in public print in the Dec. 12, 1949, Time magazine: ''In
London's County Hall last week, 261 delegates from 53 countries, representing
some 48 million members, met to launch a new international non-Communist labor
organization. Provisional title: the Free World Labor Congress.''

That name, however, was not chosen; instead, the group, still both free and
worldly, calls itself the International Confederation of Free Trade Unions. The
reason for the switch, according to Murray Seeger of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., is this:
''The name had to include both the words free and union, to differentiate them
from the Communist-dominated organization calling itself the World Federation of
Trade Unions, which still operates today from Prague.'' Thus, the Western labor
leaders substituted International for the Communists' World and Confederation
for Federation and stuck Free in front of Trade Union to cast aspersions on the
unfree ''unions.''

Time subsequently used the rejected phrase without capitalization: ''In the free
world,'' it wrote in 1951, ''there was jubilation. . . .'' The Eisenhower
Administration liked it: Ike wrote a memo to John Foster Dulles in 1955 about
''actions best calculated to sustain the interests of ourselves and the free
world.''

The Russians, naturally, didn't like it. Their propagandists had already
captured the words people's, democratic and peaceloving; by retaliating with the
capture of free, the Western industrial nations implied that the Communist world
was not free. Nikita S. Khrushchev reacted with a sneering modifier in 1959:
''The so-called free world constitutes the kingdom of the dollar.''

In the late 1960's, the phrase began appearing inside quotation marks, as the
freedoms of the non-Communist world were criticized from within (or, as my
right- wing friend would put it, the era of Vietnam-Watergate self-flagellation
began). The phrase underwent a decline in the 1970's, as its use was recognized
as ''loaded'' in favor of the West, although the Communists felt no such
compunctions about arraying their peaceloving peoples against the ruling circles
of their adversaries. In his book ''How Democracies Perish,'' the French
conservative philosopher Jean-Francois Revel defined this trend within a pair of
dashes: ''De= tractors of the United States and the 'free world' - the
expression is usually employed as a term of derision, as though there were not
really a free world and a slave world. . . .''

In the 1980's, free world - usually not capitalized - took on a new life. Midge
Decter and a bipartisan group of neoconservatives organized into an unabashed
Committee for the Free World in 1981. Asserts Miss Decter: ''We used the term
the free world in naming our committee four years ago. It's not a free world
because that implies hope for achieving freedom in the future; it's the free
world because it's here now. As a term, it denotes something rare and precious,
something that involves privileges that are unfortunately not available to vast
numbers of humanity.''

Doppler's Defenders

CHRISTIAN DOPPLER, you are not forgotten. In a piece on the widening use of
effect - from ripples and halos to Hawthorne and Heisenberg - I described the
Doppler effect on frequencies as ''the closer you get, the higher they sound.''

That is a nefarious perversion of Doppler's contribution to science, as a legion
of his students have pointed out. ''Barring a Heisenberg effect on the Doppler
effect,'' writes Donald Morrison of Chicago, ''perceived frequencies depend on
whether you are coming or going, and how fast, not on how close you are. It's
the intensity of the sound that depends on distance, not the frequency.''

A physics professor, Mark Snyder of Wellesley College in Massachusetts, puts it
this way: ''If an object emitting sound is moving toward you, the frequency of
the sound will be higher than if the object were at rest . . . the change in
frequency is a result of the object's motion with respect to you, not of your
distance from the object.''

''The classic example of the Doppler effect,'' writes Dr. Allan Greenberg of New
York, whose practice is limited to endodontics, ''is the speeding freight train
emitting a constant-frequency horn blast. The apparent tone (as opposed to
volume) changes from high to low because of changes not in relative position but
in relative velocity (first toward, then away from, the listener).''

O.K.; why? ''Sound waves are thought of as peaks and valleys of air
compression,'' explains Irving Seideman of Lawrenceville, N.J. ''The number of
these that reach your ear at a given time determine the frequency (or pitch) of
the tone you hear. If you run toward the source of sound, your ear intercepts a
few more of the peaks and valleys than it would if you were standing still. As a
result, the pitch that you hear goes higher. It is the speed, not the distance.
. . .''

''The frequencies can be those of light as well as sound,'' contributes Steve
Lang of Denver. ''This is well known to astronomers, who use the Doppler effect
to measure the speed at which celestial objects are moving away from the Earth.
This is known as 'red shift.' ''

''I will ascribe your gratuitous Doppeltalk to the Deadline Effect,'' beats
Bruce Bush of Highland Park, N.J. Thank you. The next reference to the comings
and goings of the Doppler effect will be defined quickly as ''the faster you
approach, the higher the apparent tone.''

An endodontist, by the way, is not a person who goes around predicting the
accelerating approach of Armageddon (which sounds higher as it gets nearer). It
is a dentist specializing in root-canal work. Supply-side economists like Jude
Wanniski deride traditionalists who preach austerity and suffer recessions for
their ''root-canal economics''; that can now be shortened to endonomics.


Resume Speed

FIRST, THERE WAS THE curriculum vitae, from the Latin for ''course of life'';
this is still the preferred name in academia for a quick rundown of a life story
on one page (references on request). That is frequently shortened to vitae, as
in ''Send me your vitae,'' from school administrators who like to receive lives.
Professors like the Latin touch; that's why they speak for honoraria, not fees.

Then there came the resume, the French language's contribution to American
business. Some purists still give it the French pronunciation, with the
pursed-lips u, and spell it with acute accents on both e's, but most now put a
schwa in the middle and say rezuhmay. It is also jocularly pronounced rezoom.

Now, from Tom Reid of The Washington Post, this news: ''I was covering a story
today and ran into a fellow who gave me his resume. Only he didn't call it a
resume, or a curriculum vitae, or just a 'vitae.' He called it a biodata summary
. I laughed when I saw this, but the more I think about it, the more I like it.
Biodata summary. Has a nice high-tech ring to it.''

I am a low-tech man and like a thumbnail sketch.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New & Noteworthy

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words


THE PLAYER: A Profile of an Art, by Lillian Ross and Helen Ross. (Limelight,
$10.95.) The 22 actresses and 33 actors profiled in ''The Player'' were
interviewed between 1956 and 1962. Almost all the profiles, 21 of which were
published in the New Yorker, are preceded by unflattering photographs taken by
Lillian Ross. Among the subjects are Ingrid Bergman, Sophia Loren, Henry and
Jane Fonda, Sidney Poitier, Paul Newman, Michael Redgrave and John Gielgud. In
1962 our reviewer, Alex Szogyi, called the collection ''a deeply moving
experience. All essential facts are given; the interviews ring remarkably true;
one is continually amazed at the hardiness of the breed.'' Another film-related
classic by Lillian Ross is

PICTURE (Limelight, $6.95), the story of John Huston's and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's
making of ''The Red Badge of Courage'' (1951). Budd Schulberg observed a year
later in these pages that ''Picture'' presents ''Hollywood's more heroic
attitudes as well as its more foolish and familiar ones. . . . It plays back
with an unfailing ear some of the wise things that are said in that keyed-up,
pent-up industrial town.''

WISE VIRGIN, by A. N. Wilson. (Penguin, $3.95.) A. N. Wilson's sixth novel is
the first that was published here.  The British author begins with the sentence
'' 'Marry me,' said Louise Agar.'' The words are directed at a twice-widowed,
blind and bitter medievalist to whom Miss Agar has been attracted because of his
article on some early Middle English diphthongs. Our reviewer, Michael Gorra,
called the 1983 book ''one of those deftly comic English novels built upon a
foundation of stock characters and malice. The narrative is tightly organized
and its prose marked by a gay irreverence of phrase.''

BROTHERS AND SISTERS, by Ivy Compton-Burnett. (Allison & Busby/Schocken, $5.95.)
When Dame Ivy Compton-Burnett died in 1969, she had written 19 novels depicting
what one critic described as ''the damp, white underside of (English)
upper-class family life.'' She is noted for her burnished dialogue, with its
clever, sometimes oblique, wit, acute percipience, spiteful malevolence and
angry satire. ''Brothers and Sisters'' was originally published in Britain in
1929, and when the American edition appeared in 1956, William Goyen noted here
that it was ''a picture of the devious, devilish and intricate results of the
intermingling of brother and sister.'' He added, ''this extraordinary author
binds one of the tightest knots in literary history; but the labored loosening
of it is rewarded and its secrets at the core staggering.'' The ingeniously
plotted

DAUGHTERS

AND SONS (Allison & Busby/Schocken, $5.95) is practically all dialogue. It has
to do with adult siblings under their grandmother's firm rule. This book, Louise
Maunsell Field said in her 1938 review, ''has some shrewdness, a good deal of
sufficiently deft phrasing and a sort of acid cleverness which for all of its
self-consciousness is often entertaining.''

WITHOUT HONOR: Defeat in Vietnam and Cambodia, by Arnold R. Isaacs. (Vintage,
$9.95.) A Baltimore Sun correspondent in Indochina, Arnold R. Isaacs
concentrated in ''Without Honor'' on the later stages of the Indochinese war -
its spread into Laos and Cambodia, the Paris Agreements, the American troop
pullout and the final days of South Vietnam in 1975. Douglas Pike noted here
last year that this work is ''a meaty, fact- rich book, peppered with
interpretations, not judgments. . . . It deserves attention, for it offers vivid
recollections of key moments in the war, set down with honesty by a man who saw
and felt deeply.''

OVER BY THE RIVER: And Other Stories, by William Maxwell. (Godine, $8.95.) These
12 short stories were written during a 35-year period. Six take place in or near
New York, two in France and four in a fictional Illinois town. Nine stories
appeared in the New Yorker, where William Maxwell worked for more than 40 years.
Our reviewer, Nicholas Delbanco, commented in 1977 that the stories in ''Over by
the River'' are ''never less than competent, and often the language is
eloquent.''

THE CITIZEN KANE BOOK, by Pauline Kael, Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles.
(Limelight, $16.95.) This large-format book contains ''Raising Kane,'' a lengthy
essay by Pauline Kael on the making of the 1941 movie classic ''Citizen Kane'';
the shooting script by Herman J. Mankiewicz and Orson Welles; and a shot-
by-shot breakdown of the completed film. Mordecai Richler wrote in The Book
Review in 1971 that in ''The Citizen Kane Book,'' Miss Kael, ''with a fine ear
for the period and its absurdities, recounts how the film, made for the most
part in secret, miraculously completed for a mere $686,033, was very nearly
never distributed for fear of (William Randolph) Hearst and his minions.'' Mr.
Richler said, ''The script for 'Kane,' albeit clever, even technically
brilliant, is also superficial and without one quotable line. To Welles, then,
however vain and objectionable his manner, rococo his style, must go the
ultimate credit for the miracle of 'Citizen Kane.' ''

THE BRITISH CROSS, by Bill Granger. (Pocket, $3.50.) An espionage thriller set
in Helsinki. A Soviet prison administrator's intention to defect and bring with
him a long-imprisoned Free Irish patriot who was a pro-Nazi American agent in
World War II starts the spy world humming. And when the spy world hums, there
are hired assassins, computer scams, ''hitters,'' ''fixers,'' kidnappings, code
names, a double cross and maybe a triple cross. David Myers commented here
earlier this year that Bill Granger's ''British Cross'' has all the ingredients
- ''a little sex, more murder, an Irish priest, a tough-talking policeman, a
warmhearted prostitute and a truth-seeking journalist.''

COMBAT WW II: European Theater of Operations and

COMBAT WW II: Pacific Theater of Operations, edited by Don Congdon. (Arbor
House, $12.95 each.) In 1958, using some of the best writing available in
articles, books and regimental histories about World War II, Don Congdon
assembled two excellent anthologies of combat reporting from the European and
Pacific Theaters of action. Among the writers in the two ''Combat WW II''
volumes are John Hersey, Sgt. Mack Morriss, Hanson Baldwin, Chester Wilmot, Eric
Sevareid, Alan Moorehead, Farley Mowat, S. L. A. Marshall and Samuel E.
Morison.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHANISTAN'S FIVE-YEAR ORDEAL: GRIM OUTLINES OF A FEROCIOUS WAR

BYLINE: By WILLIAM BORDERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1906 words

DATELINE: PESHAWAR, Pakistan, Dec. 10


Five years after its troops swept into Afghanistan, the Soviet Union is fighting
a ferocious and largely secret war to subdue a fiercely resistant population.

High-altitude saturation bombing has demolished many villages in several regions
of the country. Many thousands of Afghan civilians have been killed and millions
have fled their homes in search of peace. And still, nearly every day, Soviet
fighter bombers and helicopter gunships streak across the Afghan sky, looking
for the guerrilla warriors who dominate the country's mountains and deserts.



A Grim Picture

Because the Soviet-dominated Afghan Government almost never lets Western
journalists into the country, a detailed and definitive description of what is
going on there remains impossible. But two weeks of investigation, including
dozens of interviews along the Afghan-Pakistani border and elsewhere, produce at
least the outlines of a grim and brutal picture.

''When an Afghan woman tells you she left home because Russian soldiers killed
almost everyone in her village, including her children, you wonder,'' said a
European doctor treating a 6-year-old Afghan girl with shrapnel wounds in one of
the first-aid stations that have sprung up along this side of the border.

''But over the months,'' he added, ''when two dozen more Afghan women from
various parts of the country come in with exactly the same story, it begins to
seem inescapably true.''



Several Conclusions

As the fifth anniversary of the Soviet move into Afghanistan approaches, here
are some other general conclusions:


- In the last year, Soviet soldiers have become personally much more involved in
the ground fighting, taking over from the conscript Afghan Army, which is badly
hampered by disloyalty and defections.


- In an attempt to flush out guerrilla bands, Russian and Afghan pilots have
increasingly destroyed livestock and crops, especially during the wheat harvest
two months ago. Like the bombing, this has forced peasants to leave the
countryside, large sections of which are now empty.


- In Kabul, the Government of President Babrak Karmal, who was installed in a
coup that coincided with the arrival of tens of thousands of Soviet troops in
the last week of 1979, is closely supervised by thousands of Soviet civilian
advisers who have since come to Afghanistan. The economic and cultural ties to
Moscow are growing rapidly.


- The guerrillas - tough, traditional tribesmen who call themselves
''mujahedeen,'' or ''holy warriors'' - seem to control most rural areas, judging
by the impunity with which they wander back and forth across the country. The
major cities, Kabul, Kandahar and Herat, are firmly under Afghan-Soviet military
control, but even there rocket attacks and ambushes by the guerrillas are
common.

Some of the news of Kabul comes from the few remaining Western embassies there.
Their cabled observations are relayed to journalists in regular briefings in
Islamabad and New Delhi. But those few diplomats have little contact with
Afghans. They are never permitted to travel in Afghanistan, and the section of
Kabul officially open to them was shrunk still further this fall.

Saturation Bombing

Other news comes from the three million refugees who have flooded out of the
country - about one-fifth of the Afghan population - though their stories also
cannot be verified. Especially in the last six months, they tell of saturation
bombing.

According to intelligence sources, the saturation bombing, also known as carpet
bombing, is done this way: A dozen or two dozen Soviet jet bombers fly over a
target area dropping bombs indiscriminately from an altitude of 18,000 or 20,000
feet. Such an attack can lay waste an area of several square miles, killing
anything within it.

Increasingly, the refugees also tell of retaliation killings on the ground. For
example, an account from a gray- haired and wrinkled man named Mahmud Hossain,
who came here Oct. 12 from Ghazni Province, a nine-day walk through mountain
passes thousands of feet high:

''It was maybe two months ago. Mujahedeen near our village ambushed a Russian
tank column. They hit three of the tanks and completely destroyed one of them.
So to get even, the Russians came in with machine guns and started shooting
everyone they saw. There was blood all over.''

Concern About Malnutrition

This winter, for the first time in the war, relief workers on this side of the
border are also concerned about malnutrition or even starvation in Afghanistan,
a country that was usually well fed. The bombs, it is feared, may have damaged
not only the crops, but also some of the intricate, manmade irrigation systems
that sustain Afghan agriculture.

The untamed Afghan-Pakistani border region, which has never been firmly under
the control of any government, is now dotted with 300 refugee camps - clusters
of brown mud houses that work their way up and down the hills.

Peshawar, a rough and ready frontier post, has become a key point in the
guerrillas' supply route for weapons and equipment, as well as a refuge for
them.

According to reliable Western intelligence, the Soviet Union has more than
100,000 troops stationed in Afghanistan, which means they outnumber, by more
than three to one, the 30,000-man Afghan Army they are ostensibly aiding and
advising.

Troops Along Border

There are thought to be about 40,000 more Soviet troops stationed just north of
the border between the two countries, including highly trained commando units
sometimes flown in and landed by helicopter on a strategic mountain pass or at a
besieged army post.

On the other side, the guerrillas are very loosely organized in several rival
bands, and no one knows their total number; estimates range upward from 30,000,
including many who fight part time, along with tilling the soil or tending their
herds.

They fight with rifles, machine guns, rockets and mortars, some captured from
the Soviet and Afghan troops, some brought in from Pakistan on the backs of
mules and camels - journeys that can take a week or two across scrubby mountains
and forbidding passes thousands of feet high.

Historical Perspective

These ferociously independent men recount with pride the way their ancestors
fought attempts at conquest by Alexander the Great, Genghis Khan, Tamerlane and,
in the 19th century, the British Army.

''No one has ever conquered the Afghan people,'' said Masood Jalid, one of the
thousands of guerrillas who drift in and out of Peshawar, which is 25 miles from
the border, just across the Khyber Pass.

The Afghan guerrillas are gratified that they have managed to keep the Soviet
Army mired for five years, and some of them make a comparison to the American
military paralysis in Vietnam.

But there are also fundamental differences between that guerrilla war and this
one. Unlike the United States in Vietnam, the Soviet Union does not have to
worry about press and television reports going back home and influencing public
opinion. This is a closed, private war.

Moreover, because it shares a 1,000- mile border with Afghanistan, the Soviet
Union can keep pouring in tanks, men and supplies with ease.

American Aid to Guerrillas

According to informed sources in Washington, most of the military aid to the
guerrillas is financed by the United States, which is said to have earmarked
$280 million for them in the current fiscal year, more than doubling the aid
flow over last year.

But the Pakistani Government, wary of further hurting its already sour
relationship with Moscow, insists on controlling all the American-bought
weapons, arms and supplies once they enter this country.

''We just get the weapons directly from the Pakistanis,'' said a guerrilla
commander named Abdul Haq, whose troops fight in Kabul Province, where he said
he had been just three weeks ago. ''How can we be sure that the Pakistanis are
giving us everything that the Americans are giving them, and not skimming off
some? We never have any direct contact at all with the Americans.''

In the shadowy world of arms dealing long familiar here in what used to be the
North-West Frontier of colonial India, some Afghan leaders are also suspected of
skimming off weapons themselves and simply selling them for profit.

Civilian Support Cited

Like guerrilla leaders from other parts of Afghanistan, Commander Haq said that
his fighters enjoyed almost total support from Afghan civilians, who are said to
give the men food and shelter despite the Soviet bombings.

That is a standard claim in guerrilla war anywhere. But knowledgeable people who
follow this war point out that if these guerrillas did not enjoy extremely wide
support in the countryside, their struggle would long since have ended in
defeat.

Afghanistan is a semi-desert land the size of Texas, and most of its terrain is
brown and naked. As a diplomat with long experience in the area put it: ''It's
not the sort of place where you could fight a five-year war against the Soviet
Air Force if the people on the ground were not with you.''

The guerrillas say the reason the people support them is that their fight is not
just a defense of the homeland, but a defense against unbelievers, the Russians.
Afghans are intensely religious, and Islam is the central force in their daily
lives.

'Allah Is on Our Side'

''We know that Allah is on our side, so we cannot lose,'' said Aminullah Wardak,
a tribal leader squatting on a rich red Afghan carpet here the other day as he
and a dozen of his men, all guerrillas recently returned from the war, shared a
lunch of lamb and rice.

But people who take a long view point out that Allah was also on the side of the
Basmachis, the Moslem fighters who 60 years ago resisted Soviet rule in what are
now the Soviet republics of Turkmenia, Uzbekistan and Tadzhikistan just north of
Afghanistan.

After a long struggle, the Soviet Army finally defeated the Basmachis militarily
in the 1920's and then, in the 1930's, liquidated much of the remaining Moslem
intelligentsia to consolidate Soviet rule. Whether or not that is an apt
parallel, the diplomats who take the pessimistic view cite it, and they talk
about what they call the generation-and-a-half theory of conquest.

''You see, the Soviets don't have to win over the present Afghan population,''
explained a deeply troubled Pakistani official in Islamabad, the newly built
capital in the Himalayan foothills. ''They just wait, keeping up the pressure.
Millions of Afghans leave the country, never to return. Others die. And then
there comes along a new generation, a more pliant one, and the Sovietization is
complete.''

The Next Generation

It is reported that thousands of young Afghans have been sent to the Soviet
Union for study in the last three years, and some fear that Moscow sees them as
the pro-Soviet leaders of the next generation. But the guerrillas are also
training young men in their camps and in their schools, so they think they have
a new generation of their own. One guerrilla leader put it this way:

''If you could see the way the little boys of just 6 or 7 years respect us when
we come to a village - the look in their eyes as they watch the mujahedeen, and
aspire to be like us. They'll pick up this struggle where we leave it off, I
have no doubt. The Afghan nation can wait, and it will prevail.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Afghan guerrillas (page A14); map of Afghanistan

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Trying to Avert a 'Vietnam'

BYLINE: By William E. Farrell and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 165 words


Abbie Hoffman, the Yippie protester of the Vietnam War era, will lead 68
journalists, teachers, students, executives and professionals on an eight-day
tour to Nicaragua beginning Friday. Mr. Hoffman said he had spent half the six
years when he was a fugitive from justice, charged with selling cocaine, in
Central America and that he had spent 10 days this summer in Nicaragua, so the
project is ''very natural.''

The tourists are paying a fee of $795 each for transportation, lodging and food,
leaving from Miami. Mr. Hoffman said the group would meet with leaders of both
the Government and the rebels and that the visit was designed to be educational
rather than ideological. His goal, he explained, was to give a number of
Americans exposure to the situation, with the hope that their understanding
would help prevent ''another Vietnam.'' The program will include a New Year's
Eve party in Managua's barrio and a forum on ''Nicaragua and the Media'' at the
Hotel Intercontinental.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HOW TV COVERS WESTMORELAND SUIT

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1169 words


The court battle between CBS and Gen. William C. Westmoreland almost certainly
is, as ABC told its viewers, ''one of the most important libel trials in modern
American history.'' It has everything, including the Vietnam War. Moreover, as
CBS reported, it raises ''questions for a judge and jury that could not be more
important.'' As an ongoing story for television, however, it has been deficient.
History may be in the making in Federal Court in Manhattan, but not much of it
has been seen on the evening news.

Obviously, television has one great disadvantage here: Cameras are not allowed
in the courtroom. At the same time, it might not make much difference if they
were. No matter how important, a libel trial is not visually gripping. If
cameras were allowed, they would probably be used to show random moments of
passion: General Westmoreland or the opposing attorneys, say, glowering or
indignant.

As it is, the 7 P.M. broadcasts have given us only intermittent updates on the
trial. Sometimes the story disappears for days. It made the ''CBS Evening
News,'' for example, only five times in November. Two of the five reports then
were only brief mentions by Dan Rather, the anchor. Even the ''MacNeil/Lehrer
Newshour,'' our most comprehensive television news broadcast, gave us only two
extended reports in November.

Meanwhile, the predominant television images of the trial have been made up of
artists' sketches and of correspondents - Eric Engberg of CBS, Jack Smith of ABC
and Bob Jamieson of NBC - doing stand-ups. The strictures of television work
against them. They must compress too many complexities into too little time.



Counting the Enemy

In his suit, General Westmoreland contends that he was defamed by ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' a 1982 CBS documentary. It alleged a
conspiracy at the highest levels of military intelligence to minimize enemy
strength and make it appear the United States was winning the war.

A tactic of General Westmoreland, the documentary said, was to insist on the
removal of Vietcong self- defense forces from the official listing of enemy
strength. The General argues that he favored the removal of the self-defense
forces because they posed no military threat.

Thus much of the testimony has involved measurements of Vietcong strength before
the Tet Offensive in 1968. How were statistics arrived at, and what did they
mean? General Westmoreland's integrity depends on the answers; to a lesser
extent, CBS News's does, too. The paucity of the television coverage, in a way,
has favored both sides.

For example, Brig. Gen. George A. Godding, the military's chief negotiator at a
1967 conference on the size of enemy strength, upheld General Westmoreland by
testifying that he had placed ''no ceiling'' on the estimate. The assertion did
not make the evening news. Under cross-examination a few days later, however,
General Godding said politics and public relations had been a factor in the 1967
conference. That statement, supportive of the CBS documentary, did not make the
evening news, either.



CBS Examines Larger Issues

In all this, CBS, as a defendant in the case, is clearly under a heavier burden
in covering the trial than the other networks. How does it report its own
alleged malfeasances? In general, it seems to be taking the high road, almost
distancing itself from the story.

For example, on Oct. 9, the day the jurors were selected, CBS looked to the
large issues. In interviews, Arthur Miller of the Harvard Law School and Anthony
Lewis of The New York Times said that public officials, General Westmoreland
presumably among them, had to withstand scrutiny, even when it's excessive and
possibly unfair. Richard Allen, the lone dissident, and once President Reagan's
national security adviser, said that was ''pusillanimous baloney.''

By contrast, ABC that same night presented an extended look at the details of
the case, including excerpts from a three-hour CBS interview with Walt Rostow,
who had been President Johnson's national security adviser. In the interview,
which was never used in the documentary, Mr. Rostow insisted that no one
concealed enemy troop figures from Mr. Johnson.

On Oct. 11, when the opening arguments in the trial began, Mr. Engberg reported
on CBS that the Westmoreland side ''will not focus on the Vietnam War alone, but
will also put on trial the techniques CBS used in producing the documentary.''
CBS then showed a brief excerpt from the Rostow interview, and also quoted David
Boies, the CBS attorney, on why it was not used in the documentary. He said Mr.
Rostow did not know about the ''key issues'' in the dispute.



McNamara's Testimony

When Mr. Rostow did appear as a witness on Oct. 15, Mr. Rather reduced his
testimony and cross-examination to a few sentences. Again, however, ABC was more
explcit. Once more it used an excerpt from the documentary, along with part of
the unused interview. ABC did not condemn CBS's original reporting in any way,
but it did give viewers more to examine.

Similarly, Robert S. McNamara, the former Secretary of Defense, almost
disappeared in the CBS coverage. On Dec. 6, Mr. McNamara testified that even
though he had disagreed with General Westmoreland, he believed him to be a man
of ''tremendous integrity.'' He also broke a 16-year silence and reviewed the
history of the Vietnam War.

By most journalistic standards the testimony was news, and ABC and NBC, using
their correspondents, treated it accordingly. On CBS, Mr. Rather, the anchor,
once again summarized. Mr. McNamara got five short sentences, one of which dealt
with the CBS cross-examination.

Meanwhile, CBS's most marked departure from the other networks came last
Thursday. That day, Judge Pierre N. Leval ruled that most of an internal CBS
study on the disputed documentary was inadmissible as evidence. The study said
the documentary had broken 10 CBS News standards. Among other things, it said,
the documentary had shown ''an imbalance in presenting two sides of the issue,''
coddled sympathetic witnesses and used distorted editing techniques.



Ruling Seen as Triumph for CBS

ABC and NBC saw the judge's ruling as a triumph for CBS. On NBC, Tom Brokaw
introduced Mr. Jamieson's report by saying that General Westmoreland had
''suffered a double setback.'' He noted that Judge Leval, in addition to ruling
out the internal CBS study had told the jury that ''it could not find CBS guilty
if it just thought that the network's documentary on the Vietnam War was
unfair.''

ABC also found this significant. Mr. Smith began his report by saying that CBS
had ''scored a major legal victory.'' CBS did not see it quite this way,
however, and in its broadcast it almost buried Judge Leval's ruling. It
characterized the ruling, deep in the program, as ''a victory for the CBS
lawyers.'' The ''CBS Evening News'' almost seemed embarrassed. It was not about
to dredge up reminders that the documentary had had its faults.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 17, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'DIAMONDS,' A REVUE ABOUT BASEBALL

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1053 words


An all-star team takes the field in ''Diamonds,'' the new musical revue about
baseball at the Circle in the Square Downtown. The roster of songwriters reads
like a hall of fame of the present-day musical theater; the sketches are by such
literary sluggers as Roy Blount Jr. and John Lahr; the veteran director is
Harold Prince, who, in an early season of his career, co-produced the all-time
champ of baseball musicals, ''Damn Yankees.'' So go figure why ''Diamonds''
proves too often a minor league affair. Even by generous estimate, the revue
connects in only 10 of its 35 segments. Check my arithmetic, but I think that
makes for a lowly winning percentage of .286.

Thanks to the names in the credits, a delightful indoor-stadium set by Tony
Straiges and some bouncy early material, ''Diamonds'' initially promises much
more. The cast of nine arrives on stage to the accompaniment of ''Winter in New
York,'' a joyous, anticipatory ode to spring fever by those masters of beguiling
musical-comedy opening numbers, John Kander and Fred Ebb. The sweet spirit is
upheld by two subsequent songs about the Walter Mitty- esque fantasies of fans.
In the Alan Menken-David Zippel ''In the Cards,'' a scrawny Little League
also-ran (Wade Raley) recounts the vicarious thrills of collecting baseball
cards. A Brooks Brothers-clad businessman (Scott Holmes) imagines himself a
heroic, ninth-inning clutch hitter in Craig Carnelia's ''What You'd Call a
Dream.''



A long slump sets in immediately thereafter, with a full-blown Kabuki enactment
of ''Casey at the Bat,'' staged by Mr. Prince as if he were parodying his own
past musical, ''Pacific Overtures.'' This item is soon and unaccountably
followed by another lengthy variation on the same strained theme: The performer
Chip Zien, impersonating a young Maurice Chevalier, leads the audience in a
Franglais singalong of ''Take Me Out to the Ball Game.'' A third strike arrives
next: a synthetic burlesque sketch by Ralph G. Allen, the author of ''Sugar
Babies,'' that even Mickey Rooney couldn't save.

There is, however, a compensating trio of numbers to perk up the end of Act I.
The composer Larry Grossman and the lyricist Ellen Fitzhugh, while also
responsible for three of the score's duds, provide an amusing gospel explanation
of how God created baseball (''He Threw Out the Ball''), sassily led by the
singer Jackee Harry. The Jonathan Sheffer-Howard Ashman ''Hundreds of Hats,'' a
lilting, nostalgic evocation of the sport's innocent early days, is matched by a
rueful Jim Wann folk ballad, ''1919,'' about the Black Sox scandal that ended
that innocence. Yet it's typical of the show's muddy thinking that ''1919''
would be chosen as the Act I finale: Not only is it the evening's gloomiest
number, but it's also likely to baffle theatergoers who aren't already
conversant with the arcanum it recounts.

In Act II, ''Diamonds'' takes a straight plunge to the cellar. The sketches veer
aimlessly from the stale (Mr. Lahr's Freudian examination of baseball lingo) to
the inadequately realized (Mr. Blount's monologue for a rookie major leaguer).
Aside from a closing Kander-Ebb song almost as cheering as the opener, the
numbers descend to the incoherent (''Song for a Hunter College Graduate,'' sung
by Loni Ackerman) and inane (a tribute to punk-rock and Hare Krishna bleacher
bums). Should you blink, you'll miss the sole (though twice used) contribution
by Cy Coleman, Betty Comden and Adolph Green - a roughly six-note- long song
fragment for pop corn vendors. A running gag about the television sportscaster
Warner Wolf turns ashen when baseball is likened to the Vietnam war and nuclear
holocaust.



It's a tough assignment to struggle with frail material, but, even so, one is
surprised by the uneven performance level of such winning players as Mr. Zien,
Larry Riley and Dick Latessa. Aside from Miss Harry, the most memorable
appearances are turned in by Casey Stengel and Ronald Reagan, whose baseball
ruminations are presented on film clips. Theodore Pappas's choreography is
routine, reaching its nadir in a mechanical Busby Berkeley fantasy for the Mets.
Mr. Prince's at first lithesome direction grows frantic after intermission,
until even Abbott and Costello's classic sketch ''Who's on First'' is diminished
by hurried comic timing.

The director does bring the audience to its feet at the curtain call - a
sleight-of-hand stunt accomplished by the playing of the National Anthem. A more
impressive move is Mr. Prince's choice of Mr. Straiges's environmental set.
Although neither the staging nor lighting (by Ken Billington) fully capitalizes
on the designer's work, the arena-shaped house has been transformed into a happy
jumble of verisimilitude and whimsy - complete with a playing field, floating
clouds and vintage Coca Cola billboards. Paul Gemignani's lively band is perched
in the upper right- field bleachers, but the musicians, like the audience,
rarely need worry about ducking home-run balls.

Play Ball


Hits and Errors

DIAMONDS, book by Bud Abbott, Ralph G. Allen, Roy Blount Jr., Richard Camp,
Jerry L. Crawford, Lou Costello, Lee Eisenberg, Sean Kelly, Jim Wann, John Lahr,
Arthur Masella, Harry Stein, John Weidman and Alan Zweibel; music by Gerard
Alessandrini, Craig Carnelia, Cy Coleman, Larry Grossman, John Kander, Doug
Katsaros, Alan Menken, Jonathan Sheffer, Lynn Udall, Albert VonTilzer and Mr.
Wann; lyrics by Mr. Alessandrini, Howard Ashman, Mr. Carnelia, Betty Comden,
Fred Ebb, Ellen Fitzhugh, Adolph Green, Karl Kennett, Jack Norworth, Mr. Wann
and David Zippel; choreography by Theodore Pappas; directed by Harold Prince;
setting by Tony Straiges; costumes by Judith Dolan; lighting by Ken Billington;
sound design by Tom Morse; associate producer, Len M.Collura; production stage
manager, Beverley Randolph; musical direction and orchestrations by Paul
Gemignani; assistant director, Arthur Masella. Presented by Stephen G. Martin,
Harold DeFelice, Louis W.  Scheeder, Kenneth John Productions, Inc., in
association with Frank Basile. At the Circle in the Square, Downtown, 159
Bleecker Street. WITH: Loni Ackerman, Susan Bigelow, Jackee Harry, Scott Holmes,
Dick Latessa, Dwayne Markee, Wade Raley, Larry Riley, Nestor Serrano and Chip
Zien.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM TO KILL 5 ACCUSED IN PLOT

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 226 words


HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, Tuesday, Dec. 18 (Reuters) - Five people today were
sentenced to death by firing squad after being found guilty of plotting to
overthrow the Vietnamese Government with the help of China, Thailand and the
United States.

The five were among 21 dissidents whose five-day trial on treason and espionage
charges ended Monday.

Judge Huynh Van Thang told a packed Supreme Court that the five were the
ringleaders of an antigovernment organization financed and armed by China and
backed by Thailand with help from the United States.

He said they were dangerous and had to face the maximum penalty.

On hearing his death sentence one defendant shut his eyes and appeared about to
faint. Another tried to speak, but a soldier clamped a hand over his mouth,
handcuffed him and hustled him away.

Others Given Jail Terms


Three other dissidents were sentenced to life imprisonment and the rest were
given jail terms ranging from 8 to 20 years.

Under Vietnam's penal code the five sentenced to death have seven days to appeal
for their sentences to be commuted to life imprisonment. There is no appeal
against the other sentences.

Government officials said the dissidents aimed to kill or kidnap foreigners in
Vietnam and create terror and confusion in the country to eventually bring down
the Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CRILE TESTIFIES ON ADVICE TO WALLACE

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1327 words


A. FARBER

Four days before CBS interviewed Gen. William C. Westmoreland for its now
disputed documentary on the Vietnam War, the producer, George Crile, wrote to
Mike Wallace that ''all you have to do is break General Westmoreland and we have
the whole thing aced.''

The note to Mr. Wallace, who conducted the interview on May 16, 1981, was
introduced in Federal District Court in Manhattan yesterday by General
Westmoreland's lawyer, Dan M. Burt, as he continued his effort to show that CBS
had favored some participants in the broadcast while seeking to ''catch'' the
general unprepared.

Mr. Burt suggested that, eight months before the documentary was aired in
January 1982, Mr. Crile had ignored a ''request'' by General Westmoreland to
''correct'' a statement about enemy infiltration he made to Mr. Wallace during
the three-hour on- camera interview.

But Mr. Crile - testifying for his sixth day at General Westmoreland's libel
trial, where the producer, Mr. Wallace and CBS are among the defendants -
insisted that the general had not made such a request and had been fully
''equipped'' to respond to the question when it was posed.

'We're Talking About a General'


''We're talking about a four-star general here,'' Mr. Crile told the jury in one
of the long, detailed answers that have characterized his testimony. Neither
Gen. George S. Patton nor Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower nor Gen. Douglas MacArthur
would have needed any more preparation, Mr. Crile said.

The 39-year-old producer described his May 12, 1981, note to Mr. Wallace as
''hyperbole'' and said he had only wanted Mr. Wallace to have sufficient
information for the interview at CBS studios in New York.

Mr. Crile, who had spoken by telephone to General Westmoreland at his home in
Charleston, S.C., and - according to a May 11 note - told Mr.  Wallace that he
''seems not to be all that bright,'' testified yesterday that he was afraid the
general would be evasive during the May 16 interview or try to ''stonewall'' Mr.
Wallace by ''denying the undeniable.''

Mr. Crile was called as a ''hostile'' witness by Mr. Burt in the $120 million
suit over the 1982 documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,''
which accused General Westmoreland's command of engaging in a ''conspiracy'' in
1967 to understate the size of the enemy. General Westmoreland led American
forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

Mr. Burt, who has attempted to show that the allegation was false and that CBS
either knew that or acted in ''reckless disregard'' of the truth, yesterday
contrasted Mr. Crile's pre-interview treatment of General Westmoreland with that
of Maj. Gen. Joseph A. McChristian, who was chief of military intelligence in
Vietnam until June 1967.

General McChristian was interviewed on March 19 and 20 at his home in Hobe
Sound, Fla. And, eventually, he would be seen on the broadcast saying that he
had informed General Westmoreland of a substantially higher estimate for
Vietcong irregulars in May 1967 and that General Westmoreland had been
''disturbed'' by the figures.

'A Political Bombshell'


''And by the time I left his office,'' General McChristian recalled, ''I had the
definite impression that he felt if he sent those figures back to Washington at
that time, it would create a political bombshell.''

What happened to that estimate - how it was evaluated and whether the numbers
were ''covered up'' - has become a key issue in the trial, now in its 11th week.
General Westmoreland, in his suit, contends that CBS defamed him by saying that
he had deceived President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about
this estimate and other figures on enemy strength.

Yesterday, Mr. Burt introduced two letters that had been sent to General
McChristian on Feb. 10, 1981, shortly after he was contacted about appearing on
the documentary and asked for a precis of the program.

One of the letters was sent by Mr. Crile. The other was sent by Samuel A. Adams,
a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst whose research provided the basis
for the CBS documentary and who served as a paid consultant for the broadcast.
Mr. Adams is also a defendant at this trial.

Mr. Adams's two-page letter outlined the specific ''sequence of events'' to be
included in the documentary. In Mr. Crile's own two-page letter, he said that he
had read ''Sam's description of the documentary and it conforms to my own
thinking on the story.''

From ''everything I can gather,'' Mr. Crile went on, General McChristian had
done ''his job.'' It was only after June 1, 1967, the producer wrote, that ''the
nature'' of intelligence reporting on the enemy ''changed dramatically and
clearly for the worse.''

The night before General McChristian's on-camera interview, Mr. Burt brought
out, Mr. Crile, accompanied by Mr. Adams, had dinner with the general in Hobe
Sound and provided him with information supplied by other former intelligence
officers they were interviewing.

''You didn't invite General Westmoreland to have dinner with you the night
before the interview, did you, sir?'' Mr. Burt asked.

Mr. Crile said he did not, and offered a lengthy explanation that General
Westmoreland ''in my opinion'' was ''going through the same process of
attempting to deny the debates and battles that had taken place'' over
intelligence estimates in Saigon in 1967.

The producer was cut off by Judge Pierre N. Leval, who has often had to urge him
to confine his answer to the question before him.

Judge Leval: ''I think the question is whether you invited him to dinner the
night before.''

''At that point,'' the witness said, ''I had had discussions with him and he, as
I recall, was coming into New York that afternoon or late that afternoon and I
did not - the answer is I did not have dinner with General Westmoreland the
night before.''

Mr. Crile broke into a grin, one of the few that have crossed his face while on
the stand.

''I'm sorry,'' he said, as the spectators in the courtroom reacted with
laughter.

Mr. Crile told Mr. Burt that the interview with General Westmoreland was
probably in the late morning of May 16, 1981.

Q. And neither you nor Mr. Adams, to the best of your understanding, had met
with General Westmoreland prior to this interview, correct, sir?

A. Well, just before the interview we talked for a while, but there was no
meeting other than the interviews I had had with General Westmoreland on the
telephone. There were several of them.

Mr. Crile said he had also sent General Westmoreland a two-page letter at the
Plaza Hotel in New York, where he was staying on the night of May 15. Days
earlier, the producer said, he read the letter to the general on the telephone.

The letter, which was introduced, summarizes five areas of interest for General
Westmoreland's interview, but was not as explicit as the letters to General
McChristian in February.

When Mr. Burt said that General Westmoreland had not been told, in advance of
the interview, that ''anyone was charging him with improper conduct,'' Mr. Crile
explained that he would then have been forced into telling the general, in
effect, ''that he was not telling me the truth, that he was lying.'' But the
''appropriate forum'' in which to ''challenge'' the general, Mr. Crile said, was
the on-camera interview.

Yesterday afternoon Mr. Burt played excerpts from an on-camera interview that
Mr. Wallace had done for the documentary with Walt W. Rostow, President
Johnson's national security adviser. Mr. Rostow warned Mr. Wallace that he was
in danger of getting his facts wrong about this ''rather complex war'' and was
''going to do great damage to the country.''

When the half-dozen television sets in the courtroom were turned off, Mr. Burt
pointed out that CBS ''didn't use one second'' of the interview in its
broadcast.

''We, of course, drew on it,'' said Mr. Crile, whose testimony will continue
today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AT WESTMORELAND TRIAL, A JUDGE IN FIRM CONTROL

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1098 words


There are judges garrulous or grave, imperious or benign, formidable or folksy,
who preside over and often set the tone for a trial. Pierre Nelson Leval is all
of these but the first: He is not a gabby judge. But he is firmly in command,
every minute, of the historic libel trial pitting Gen. William C. Westmoreland
against CBS, now in its 11th week.

What the six women and six men in the jury box are living through is a crash
course in the law and in the fundamental democratic process of never
patronizing. There are flashes of irony and fun. Early in the trial in Federal
District Court in Manhattan, which began Oct. 9, he said, ''I feel like I am a
law professor.'' When he is wrong, he admits it. ''Is my face red!'' he once
exclaimed.

The 48-year-old Judge Leval - one of the youngest men to be elevated to the
Federal bench, in 1977, when he was 41 - has told the jurors what the trial is
about and what it is not about. He has told them what their job is and his job
is. He has made up an ''X chart'' like a tic-tac-toe board to help them tell the
difference between ''truth'' and ''state of mind'' and how to weigh the
credibility of a witness. He has told them what is hearsay and what is
first-hand information, and what a lawyer's opening statement means. He has
lectured them on promptness and then apologized when he found no juror had been
tardy after all.

On the single occasion when Judge Leval was late he brought down the house by
saying: ''Members of the jury, I want to apologize for delaying you. I had to
deal with an emergency request to suppress counterfeit Cabbage Patch Kids.''

In a rare move, he has passed out pencils and paper to the jurors so they may
take notes during the lengthy and complicated proceedings. He has urged
witnesses to address the jury while explaining things instead of riveting their
gaze on their interrogators. He congratulates the jurors on their birthdays and
commiserates with them when they are feeling poorly.

Paces and Takes Notes


The judge is not planted on the bench. He paces, or perches on a railing, or
takes notes at a lectern or stands, tall and imposing in his black robes, beside
the witness. He stretches against a wall but does not yawn. He watches every
arrival and departure and directs a reproachful glare through his spectacles
toward whispering spectators.

After the jurors were picked in October, Judge Leval explained to them the
elements of a libel case. ''Now,'' he said, ''I want to tell you what the case
is not about.'' It was not about, he said, their feelings on the military, peace
and war, the Vietnam War, freedom of the press, whether press criticism of
government was good or bad, or whether they admired or disliked General
Westmoreland or CBS.

''Those questions are completely behind us,'' he told them, ''and you are not to
allow concerns and considerations of that kind to enter into your thoughts while
doing your job as the jury.''

Their job, he said, ''is to find the facts.'' His job, he said, is to apply
certain rules of law to the evidence and to explain those rules, and the issues,
to the jurors.

''If trials were to be decided by juries on the basis of personal attitudes we
would virtually have finished our job now,'' he said. ''Your decision is to be
based on the evidence that's received in this courtroom and nothing else.''

Trying to clarify the difference between ''truth'' and ''state of mind'' with
his X chart, of which he gave a copy to each juror, Judge Leval said: ''I feel
like I am a law professor. I don't know whether you understood that. It's not
easy.''

''I am hoping that this chart which I had prepared will help you to keep those
things sorted out,'' he said. ''Don't be upset or worried about your ability to
decide the case. I will repeat - I will point to the chart and remind you of
those issues.''

'A Grain of Salt'


He told the jurors they should take the opening statements by lawyers ''with a
grain of salt.''

He has several times admonished jurors for tardiness. In his opening remarks to
the neophyte jury Oct. 11, Judge Leval said: ''It is 20 minutes past 10. Court
was called to begin at 10 o' clock.'' Instead of 20 minutes being wasted, he
went on, it amounted to up to 10 hours being squandered because of the number of
people whose presence was essential at the trial who were kept waiting.

When the jury returned after a short recess that day, the judge apologized. ''Is
my face red!'' he said. ''The clerk tells me that you protested that all the
jurors were present at 10 o'clock. Perhaps one of you was in the bathroom or
hiding under the table when the clerk took his count.''

''I am as pleased as I can be that you were all present,'' he said. Then he
added, ''Don't disregard anything that I said'' about being on time.

He gently but unremittingly keeps the lawyers in line. He has given both
attorneys - David Boies for CBS, the defense, and Dan M. Burt for General
Westmoreland, the plaintiff - 150 hours to complete their cases. He checks on
their elapsed times with a stopwatch, down to the last second, and regularly
reports their totals. He has told them he is ''very eager to avoid'' too many
private bench conferences, or ''side bars,'' because ''they really are an
imposition on the jury'' and he does not like to spend ''20 minutes whispering
in the corner.''

This is Mr. Burt's first trial. He is getting plenty of guidance from the judge.
When he is interrogating a witness, Mr. Leval will say, ''I think you should
recast the question as to the witness's perception . . .'' or ''I will overrule
the objection if you modify the question to say . . .'' or ''I think it would be
useful first to elicit from this witness . . .''

Heavy Docket

The Westmoreland-CBS trial is not the only one on Judge Leval's docket. In fact,
his load includes 328 pending civil cases and five criminal cases, including
another complex one already nicknamed the ''Pizza Connection,'' in which 37
defendants are accused of using pizza parlors as a front for drug-running.
During an arraignment the other day following the end of a session in the
Westmoreland trial, Mr. Leval urged lawyers for both the United States
Government and the defense to prepare their cases with all speed.

That case is scheduled to be tried next, the judge said, when the Westmoreland
trial is over. He said he hoped that would be by the end of February. ''I've got
plenty to do,'' he told the lawyers.

After the Westmoreland trial is disposed of, he said, ''I may even want a day
off.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS PEOPLE;
Steckel Dismissed

SECTION: Section B; Page 18, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 221 words


Les Steckel , whose strict coaching techniques had been a constant source of
friction between himself and his Minnesota Viking players, was dismissed
yesterday after he refused General Manager

Mike Lynn 's request that he resign. Lynn said he had based his decision, in
which all the assistant coaches were also let go, on three criteria: ''image,
control of the team and maintenance of the football team.'' The coach, Lynn
said, failed in all three. Steckel, 38 years old, became the youngest head coach
in the National Football League when he stepped in after

Bud Grant 's resignation last winter. But younger was not necessarily better.
The Vikings finished the season at 3-13, the worst record in their 24-year
history, and many of the players attributed the mark to a strenuous conditioning
program instituted by Steckel, who had served as a Marine officer in Vietnam.
''The program wore us out,'' said

Scott Studwell, the linebacker. ''We ran out of gas. Under

Bud Grant , we were always strong at the end.'' . . . Another first-year coach
of a 3-13 team will get another chance.

Hugh Campbell , coach of the Houston Oilers, was criticized by General Manager

Ladd Herzeg for not having run an ''imaginative offense,'' but Herzeg said that
Campbell would return next season.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Les Steckel

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 18, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE FRAILITIES OF PARTY TALK

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 821 words


PETER G. PETERSON, banker and a former Secretary of Commerce, thanked his
hostess for ''a wonderful evening,'' collected his wife, Joan Ganz Cooney, and
left a formal dinner party highly amused. ''I don't know where those people get
their information,'' he said. ''Is it always like this?''

It was a rhetorical question. If anyone knows what it's like when the subject of
world affairs comes up among the rich and powerful at fashionable dinners, Mr.
Peterson does. What was troublesome this particular night, though he found some
of the conversation stimulating, was the less than careful manner in which his
companions talked about such issues as the national debt, the Russians, Central
America and national defense.

They didn't seem to understand the politics let alone the economic underpinnings
or how the issues were related. They dished up partisan opinion as fact, giving
little indication of knowing the difference. Yet everyone had a good time. And
it was only as Mr. Peterson headed out the door and into the real world again
that he couldn't resist an assessment. ''They really don't know what they're
talking about,'' he said.

Too true. Yet the partygoers were trying to grapple with the complex issues of
the day. That was more than the dinner guests among whom Richard M. Clurman,
former chief of Time-Life correspondents, recently found himself. ''They never
stopped talking about their decorators, their clothes and - you aren't going to
believe this - their servants,'' he said.

Mr. Peterson and Mr. Clurman weren't dining in provincial America. They were in
Manhattan, a small island, but an island often celebrated for its knowledge of
what's going on in the world. And their experiences are not unusual.

The food, flowers and fashions along the city's elite social circuit often live
up to their reputation for extravagant excellence. But as one well-informed
regular put it, the conversational fare is ''90 percent rubbish.'' Another
sheepishly admitted he went the lavish party route mostly for the gossip. A
third said aside from an oasis or two the circuit is ''an intellectual desert.''

Nor should anyone be too surprised. Cornelius Vanderbilt Whitney, industrialist
and owner of fine race horses, caused gilded forks to freeze in midair when, in
1971, he told a table of eight that the war in Vietnam might have been a
mistake. Recovering their composure, the guests rushed to resume their chitchat
as if nothing had happened.

That was in Palm Beach, Fla., forever derided as the last resort of sybarites
and philistines. Two years ago in that palmy playground, a retired yachtsman
chastised a fellow guest for bringing up the plight of migrant workers not 50
miles away. Both incidents could have occurred in New York.

The Countess de Romanones, an agent for the Office of Strategic Services in
World War II, saw ''the joy'' drain out of an especially knowledgeable tycoon's
face when she asked him how the Mexican economy was doing, and that was barely a
week ago. ''He took great pains to give me an intelligent answer,'' she said.
''But I had a sense that this was not the sort of thing to ask at a party.''

An ambassador recalls a discussion of cities during which a supposedly educated
beauty put Ottawa in Africa. But it was a man who ''almost turned his back'' on
Joan Cooney, chief of the Children's Television Workshop, when she tried to draw
him into an ongoing economics discussion.

A well-known labor leader is no longer surprised by those who have no idea whom
his union represents. Barbara Tuchman, two-time winner of the Pulitzer Prize for
historical works, remembers an evening when men and women talked nothing but
duck shooting. Could it be that party people are intellectually lazy? That they
don't bother to keep up? That they find world issues boring?

Marietta Tree, a former delegate to the United Nations, thinks this nightly
rejection of the serious is partly due to hard work, that people are tired at
the end of the day and want to relax. Felix G. Rohatyn, the investment banker,
argues that the capability for intelligent conversation is there, that it's the
noisy dinners for 40 with music and ''everybody watching for the next important
person to arrive'' that precludes them.

He has a point. Small is indeed better. But he is a kind man. And perhaps he
never sat through a little dinner at which some of the nation's leading shakers
and movers devoted themselves not to substance but to what other shakers and
movers were doing in their leisure time.

No complex subject has been banned at Mrs. Tree's table. Or Mr. Rohatyn's,
Brooke Astor's and or John Brademas's, which guests often leave feeling they
have learned something. Which is more than can be said of the corporate giant
grateful to be seated between women whose competence was somewhat less than
Jeane Kirkpatrick's. ''Oh good,'' he announced happily. ''Now I won't have to
work.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              382 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 19, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIA RETURNS FROM POL POT TERRORS

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 370 words


To the Editor:


Americans who value justice and fairness must be shocked by the remarks of the
civil-liberties lawyer Floyd Abrams and his delegation from the Lawyers
Committee for International Human Rights about conditions inside Kampuchea,
formerly Cambodia, (''Hanoi Linked to Cambodian Torture,'' Nov. 15).

Mr. Abrams visited the camps of the Khmer Rouge forces of the deposed Pol Pot
Government in Thailand and interviewed Ieng Sary, Pol Pot's Prime Minister and
successor as head of the bloody Khmer Rouge, but did not visit Kampuchea.
Nevertheless, he feels competent to say, ''In Cambodia, there simply does not
exist the recognition of civil liberties or human rights on a basis recognized
by the world community.''

As three attorneys who visited Kampuchea last summer as a delegation of the
National Lawyers Guild, we reached far different conclusions.

In Kampuchea today, the meager resources of the Government have been devoted to
rebuilding the social, economic and legal fabric of the society that had been
totally destroyed by Pol Pot. Our interviews inside the country and meetings
with Ministry of Justice and other officials (including ex-Khmer Rouge) who had
lived through these years of terror and human-rights abuses revealed a firm
commitment to guaranteeing a system of legality and individual rights to prevent
recurrence of the lawlessness of the Pol Pot era.  Starting with fewer than six
lawyers who survived the Pol Pot years, a constitution containing human- rights
guarantees similar to our own was enacted in 1980. In 1982, a court system was
established throughout the country. A penal code and other laws have been
passed, which provide for due process and the right of appeal. The use of the
death penalty has been severely restricted. In fact, we were informed that there
have been a total of two executions during the five years of the current
government.  It is regrettable that Mr. Abrams, who has represented the best
traditions of responsible journalism, would rely on sources such as the
self-serving statements of Ieng Sary and refugees under control of his
discredited Khmer Rouge.

VICKI ERENSTEIN JEFFREY HAAS, FRANKLIN SIEGEL New York, Nov. 26, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: LETTER

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              383 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 19, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

FOR AFGHAN REBELS, A HOLY WAR 'TO THE LAST MAN'

BYLINE: By WILLIAM BORDERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1737 words

DATELINE: QUETTA, Pakistan


Ahmed Rasool, a steely eyed giant of a man wearing a huge floppy turban and a
billowy brown pajama suit, walked in from Afghanistan the other day to visit his
family and take a break from making war against the Russians.

''But I'll go back there soon, you can be sure,'' he said. ''This is a holy war
and we are in it to the last man.''

Mr. Rasool, who is 24 years old, the father of four children and illiterate, is
typical of the tens of thousands of guerrilla fighters who have kept the Soviet
Army busily engaged for five years in the struggle over his ancient untamed
land.

Using rudimentary weapons against some of the most advanced aerial technology
that the Soviet Union has, these men constantly roam the bald and rugged
mountains that cover most of their impoverished country, attacking forts and
convoys and urban installations of the Soviet or Afghan Army. Often, they
successfully ambush a Soviet column; sometimes they manage to bring down one of
the Soviet helicopter gunships that clatter noisily all over the country nearly
every day looking for guerrilla strongholds.

A Victory Boast


''I was in a mission just two months ago in which we took out a whole Russian
patrol,'' Mr. Rasool boasted, as he nibbled nuts and raisins with four of his
fellow fighters, sitting in a dusty garden under a brilliant red bougainvillea
plant.

Was that particular claim true? It was impossible to know. The Soviet- backed
Government in Kabul almost never admits Western journalists, who could verify
such claims, and notorious boastfulness has long been an Afghan tradition. So
has the importance of military victory, as in this old Pushtu verse: My beloved
returned unsuccessful

from battle.  I regret the kiss I gave him last

night.

But according to intelligence estimates from various world capitals, perhaps
8,000 Soviet soldiers and airmen have been killed in the five years since Soviet
forces joined the battle in the last week of 1979, and 15,000 or 20,000 have
been wounded. In high-altitude saturation bombing, especially in the last year,
the Soviet and Afghan forces have killed many thousands of Afghan civilians, and
forced others to abandon their villages and flee into Pakistan or Iran or into
Afghanistan's cities.

Many Areas Deserted


This denuding of the countryside, in which entire valleys are now deserted,
their crops destroyed, has made life considerably more difficult for the
guerrillas.

''The villagers always used to welcome us with meals of lamb and dates when we
arrived,'' said Abdul Haq, a commander in the area around Kabul. ''But now in
some areas we have to take our own food with us, because when we get to a
village it is empty.''

According to officials in Washington, the aid that the United States is giving
the Afghan guerrillas this year includes, for the first time, money to buy food.
In a reversal of the traditional relationship of guerrilla warfare, the fighters
are now sometimes feeding peasants in some areas.

But most of the aid continues to be in the form of weapons and ammunition, sent
covertly into Pakistan and turned over to the Pakistani Government, which then
turns it over to guerrilla commanders in border outposts like this one.

Pakistani Policy Is Tolerant


Because Afghanistan is landlocked and because its only other neighbor, Iran, is
far less lenient with the guerrillas, much of their success in Afghanistan
depends on the tolerance of the Pakistani Government.

The guerrillas operate more or less openly here, in Peshawar and in other
Pakistani towns along the border. They train their troops near the frontier, and
they wander back and forth across it with ease. Their ancestors have been doing
that for centuries, since these are largely untamed mountain passes - the Khyber
and others - that have never really come under the control of any central
government. Even before the current war, the Pakistani Government had declared
much of this border territory a ''tribal area,'' with its own laws.

In the last few months, however, the Afghan forces have begun retaliatory
bombings across the border, making the Pakistanis very nervous about what might
come next. Several dozen people have been killed in the tiny Pakistani border
towns of Arandu and Teri Mangal.

Both towns contain large concentrations of young, unattached Afghan men who are
presumed to have been involved in attacks on Soviet-Afghan military posts just
across the border. The Soviet and Afghan aircraft are also making what seems to
be an increased effort to cut the guerrilla supply lines on the Afghan side of
the border.

Aid Is a Sensitive Topic


On this side of the border, the matter of aid to the guerrillas is so secret
that in Islamabad, Pakistan's sleek new capital, neither American diplomats nor
Pakistani officials would discuss any aspect of it, even to deny that the aid
exists.

The guerrillas say that a good part of their weapons - rifles, mortars, grenade
launchers, machine guns - has been captured or turned over to them by the
thousands of men who are believed to have defected from the conscript Afghan
Army over the years. Since the weapons supplied by the United States and a few
other countries such as Saudi Arabia are also of Soviet and East European design
- presumably to disguise the donors - it is difficult to tell which is which,
and therefore impossible to assess the effectiveness of the aid effort,
especially from outside the country.

But in interview after interview, guerrilla commanders and their strategists
stressed one point above all others: their most urgent need is for weapons that
can shoot down the planes and helicopters that attack them so relentlessly from
above.

According to Western intelligence sources, the high-altitude saturation bombing
is done by TU-22's, from altitudes of 18,000 feet or more. For their low-level
bombing, the Russians use a fixed-wing plane called the SU-25, which has guns,
rockets and antipersonnel bombs, and MI-24 helicopter gunships.

Sophisticated Weapons Wanted


The guerrillas have some SAM-7's, a lightweight Soviet-made antiaircraft weapon,
but not enough. In any case, they generally share the view of some Western
military sources that this type of missile is not particularly effective against
the kind of Soviet air power they face. They yearn for more sophisticated
Western weapons, and they toss around with ease such terms as Redeye and
Stinger, the names of two superior American, shoulder-fired, antiaircraft
weapons.

''Let my own experience describe to you the need,'' said Brig. Rahim Wardak, one
of the most respected of the guerrilla leaders, a big, hearty bear of a man who
during his career in the old Afghan Army took courses at Fort Benning, Ga., Fort
Knox, Ky., and Fort Leavenworth, Kan.

''This happened on Sept. 20 in Kabul Province near the capital,'' the brigadier
said, speaking with great precision.

''We had in place a 12.7-millimeter heavy machine gun. The Russian helicopter
above us was not even afraid of it, because they know its limitations. The
helicopter was firing rockets. Fortunately, the helicopter then came too low, an
error. When it was as low as 50 meters, then we brought it down, firing sideways
rather than straight up.

''But we cannot get along with only weapons that require the aircraft to be that
low,'' he said.

In Washington the planners point out that Afghanistan is one of the world's most
primitive societies and that most of the fighters - who call themselves
''mujahedeen,'' or ''holy warriers'' - are very backward youths, and they
maintain that sophisticated weapons are beyond them. Moreover, heavier weapons,
they say, would reduce the guerrillas' mobility in the mountain passes.

''Nonsense,'' replies Brigadier Wardak. ''We have fixed bases in which we could
use the heavier weapons. And in any case, I can move a 12.7 on a mule or divide
its weight among three men.''

In the continuing debate in Washington, there are some who say that while the
present level of aid will keep the Russians militarily engaged, thus making them
''pay a price'' for going into combat in Afghanistan, it is insufficient to
allow the guerrillas to win.

Asked about this view, a man in Pakistan who has intimate knowledge of the arms
supply line hotly took issue with it.

''Short of giving the mujahedeen the atomic bomb,'' he said, ''there is, of
course, no way at all that you could arm them sufficiently to defeat the Soviet
Army.''

Soviet in Control of Capital


By all accounts, the Soviet Army and its Afghan allies control Kabul and the
several other larger cities, although there are regular rocket attacks from the
outskirts, especially at night. They also control the major roads, although
their movements along them are usually heavily guarded with tanks and helicopter
gunships.

''By mustering enough force, the Russians can go anywhere they want in
Afghanistan, for a short visit,'' said a well-informed diplomat. ''But they just
can't stay and keep a fixed position in very many parts of the country.''

The guerrillas like to say that they have the Soviet Union stalemated, which for
them is something of a victory, five long years after the first troops began
pouring across the border from the Soviet Union.

There are similarities, some of them even say, between this situation and the
way that the United States got bogged down in the Vietnam War.

Accessibility Aids Russians


But the United States was fighting half a world away; the Soviet Union has a
1,000-mile border with Afghanistan and there is no limit to its ability to send
in troops and supplies.

Moreover, the Soviet Union is spared the problem of critical press and
television reports shaping public opinion back home.

Western military analysts say they believe that some of the Soviet attack planes
even take off from and land at bases north of the border in Soviet territory,
making them invulnerable to the kind of ground attack that the guerrillas have
staged, for instance, on the planes that are parked by the dozens at airfields
in Kabul and Kandahar, both of which are well south of the border.

A military man with long experience in this area summed up the situation this
way: ''The most that the mujahedeen can hope for is to keep it going the way it
is. For them there is no military solution.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of an Afghan fighter; map of Afghanistan

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              384 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 19, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS PRODUCER SAYS GENERAL PLAYED 'SHELL GAME'

BYLINE: By M. A. FARBER

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1199 words


George Crile, the producer of a disputed CBS documentary on the Vietnam War,
yesterday described the calculation of enemy strength by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland's command in 1967 as ''akin to an intelligence atrocity.''

Mr. Crile - testifying for the seventh day at General Westmoreland's $120
million libel suit against the network in Federal Court in Manhattan - said the
general's command had engaged in a ''shell game'' in its estimates of North
Vietnamese and Vietcong troop strength in the months preceding the Communists
Tet offensive of January 1968. He said the command's low figures for the enemy
misled American leaders and deprived them of the ability to reassess policies at
a ''critical juncture'' of the war.

His eyes fixed on the jury, his hands cupped and flapping in supporting
gestures, the 39-year old producer spent the afternoon being cross-examined by
David Boies, the lawyer for CBS. Mr. Crile had been called as a ''hostile
witness'' by Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's lawyer, who completed his
questioning of the witness at 11:30 A.M.

Using an August 1967 cable from General Westmoreland's headquarters to
high-ranking military and civilian officials, Mr. Burt attempted to show that
Washington had not been kept in the dark about Saigon's decision to delete the
Vietcong's self-defense forces from the official listing of enemy strength known
as the order of battle.

Cable Widely Distributed


Mr. Crile conceded that the cable had been widely distributed, even perhaps to
the White House, but insisted that it incorporated ''fake and dishonest
intelligence.''

Under cross-examination Mr. Crile was adamant that military leaders had provided
a ''distorted picture'' of a ''degraded'' enemy who soon showed his real
capabilities during the Tet offensive.

The offensive might not have been a military victory for the North Vietnamese
and Vietcong forces, Mr. Crile said, but it dealt a ''devastating
psychological'' blow to the ''aura of optimism'' fostered by the Administration
of President Johnson.

Many of Mr. Criles's replies to Mr. Boies - including an eight-minute answer
that was the longest given in the 11-week old trial - amounted to small lectures
on the history and importance of wartime intelligence and on the integrity of
the documentary he produced in 1982.

Mr. Burt had accused Mr. Crile of fabricating parts of that program, ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' and, yesterday, Mr. Boies picked up that
line of questioning.

Q. Did you make up anything in connection with the broadcast?

A. Absolutely not.

General Westmoreland, now 70 years old and retired, commanded United States
forces in Vietnam from January 1964 to June 1968.

In his suit, the general contends that CBS defamed him by saying he had deceived
President Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about the true size and nature
of the enemy in late 1967.

The broadcast alleged a ''conspiracy'' by General Westmoreland's command to
minimize the strength of the enemy to make it appear that America and its allies
were winning ''a war of attrition.'' It said that, for political and public
relations reasons, General Westmoreland had imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of
300,000 on reports of enemy strength - partly by dropping the part- time,
hamlet-based, self-defense forces from the order of battle.

The estimated strength of those units, previously figured at 70,000, was revised
to 117,000 in May 1967, when General Westmoreland decided to delete the category
from the order of battle. Some military intelligence officers also argued that
other categories of enemy forces, including Vietcong guerrillas and political
cadre, had also been underestimated.

At this trial, General Westmoreland testified that he ordered the self-defense
forces removed from the order of battle - and the political cadre listed
separately - because he did not believe these forces were a significant military
threat and because their inclusion would mislead the press and officials in
Washington into thinking the size of the enemy's ''real fighters'' had risen
substantially.

Besides CBS, the defendants in the case are Mr. Crile, Mike Wallace, the 66-year
old narrator of the broadcast, and Samuel A. Adams, a 51-year old former Central
Intelligence Agency analyst who served as a paid consultant for the documentary.


'Galloping Paul Revere'


Mr. Adams, who sits at the defense table making copious notes, was a C.I.A.
specialist on Vietnam in 1967, when the agency clashed with General
Westmoreland's command over the estimates of enemy strength in South Vietnam.
Mr. Adams, who once described himself to Mr. Crile as ''a galloping Paul
Revere,'' had argued for a total estimate of about 500,000 - nearly twice the
figure the military command was willing to accept as valid.

In 1975, two years after he resigned from the C.I.A., Mr. Adams wrote an article
about the dispute in Harper's magazine, containing many of the charges that
would be aired in the CBS documentary. The article was edited by Mr. Crile, who
then worked for the magazine, and it prompted an investigation by the House
Select Committee on Intelligence.

The committee, before which Mr. Adams testified, concluded that ''the numbers
game not only diverted a direct confrontation with the realities of the war in
Vietnam, but also prevented the intelligence community, perhaps the President,
and certainly members of Congress, from judging the real changes in Vietnam over
time.''

Yesterday, Mr. Boies questioned Mr. Crile about the committee's report. Judge
Pierre N. Leval cautioned the jury that it could not consider the ''truth'' of
the report's findings, but only whether Mr. Crile had relied upon them in
preparing the documentary.

The only relevance of the report, the judge said, was its influence on Mr.
Crile's ''state of mind'' in 1981.

Mr. Crile called the committee's report ''the foundation stone, or certainly the
jumping off point for our investigation'' and said it completely undermined the
''light at the end of the tunnel'' or ''end has come into sight'' intelligence
reporting of General Westmoreland's command in 1967.

The producer said that if the command had been correct in its low estimates of
enemy troop strength and the number of enemy troops killed during the Tet
offensive, ''we had not only won the war but killed more of the enemy than
existed.''

Mr. Crile said he agreed with the conclusion in a West Point textbook - shown to
him by Mr. Boies - that the Tet offensive was ''an allied intelligence failure
ranking with Pearl Harbor in 1941.''

The producer said his own research, and that of the House committee, clearly
established that the self-defense forces and other categories General
Westmoreland did not consider ''real fighters'' were, in fact, responsible for
many casualties in Vietnam.

In intelligence reporting, the Mr. Crile said, ''You begin from the foundation
and work up'' to arrive at a total of enemy strength. ''What you never do, and
which there is never any justification for,'' he said, ''is to begin with the
total and work down to make the evidence conform.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              385 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 19, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 66 words


Because of a technical error, an article yesterday about Judge Pierre N. Leval,
who is presiding over the CBS libel trial, omitted two lines. It should have
read: ''What the six women and six men in the jury box are living through is a
crash course in the law and in the fundamental democratic process of trial by
jury. Judge Leval is the teacher: patient, reassuring and never patronizing.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              386 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 19, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SHUTTLE SECRECY TROUBLES PRESS

BYLINE: By ALEX S. JONES

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


The military's stamp of secrecy on its space shuttle program has shaken the
balance that news organizations try to strike between not disclosing vital
military secrets and keeping readers fully informed, according to some leading
journalists.

While journalists generally agree that there is a need for government secrecy in
some situations, there have been expressions of concern that Pentagon officials
may be withholding material that is important to a national debate on the
militarization of space.

Richard D. Smyser, president of the American Society of Newspaper Editors, said:
''I find it a little difficult to believe that, if several major news sources
got the information, that it's not available to other nation's agents. So the
ones who are really unaware are members of the American public.''

Mr. Smyser, editor of The Oak Ridger in Oak Ridge, Tenn., added, ''I feel
cautious about revealing too much and cautious about revealing too little.''

Limits on Mission Information

On Monday, the Pentagon issued guidelines that, on national security grounds,
strictly limit information about the first classified shuttle mission, which is
scheduled for Jan. 23, and about future shuttle missions sponsored by the
Department of Defense.

NBC News, The Associated Press, and Aviation Week and Space Technology confirmed
Monday that they would comply with Pentagon requests not to release information
they had regarding the mission's payload.

''It's always a very difficult situation when two values collide,'' said Louis
D. Boccardi, A.P.'s executive vice president. ''On one hand is the freest flow
of information and on the other are legitimate concerns for national security.

''Every time it comes up, it's a specific situation and a specific story,'' he
said. In his commentary on the ''NBC Nightly News'' last night, John Chancellor
described NBC's decision as a ''dangerous precedent'' because NBC killed a
broadcast on the mission based on a request by the Pentagon, rather than on the
basis of a full understanding of the security issues at stake. He added that NBC
News would be ''doubly cautious'' should the Pentagon ask again that a story be
killed for national security reasons.

Decisions for Journalists

Other journalists were reluctant to second-guess the organizations' decisions to
comply with the Pentagon request and said that they could have made a similar
decision if persuaded the information was vital to national security.

A. M. Rosenthal, executive editor of The New York Times, said: ''The military
has the right to keep material secret it considers of a confidential nature. But
this has to be weighed against the right of the public to know about certain
information that might become part of a great discussion on outer space.''

Many journalists have criticized what they perceived as the Pentagon's effort to
quiet speculation about the mission, and generally agreed that such speculation
would appear in the news media despite Pentagon wishes.

Edward M. Fouhy, Washington bureau chief for ABC News, said, ''They're going
beyond their legitimate area of concern when they tell people not to speculate,
though they can make a fairly strong case for not releasing information.''

An Air Force spokesman's assertion Monday that the Pentagon might investigate
such speculation was perceived as largely a threat to Federal employees who
might leak information, rather than to news organizations themselves.

Some See Greater Secrecy

Some journalists saw the new tightened security measures as part of a broad move
by the Government toward more secrecy. As examples, several cited efforts by the
Reagan Administration to amend the Freedom of Information Act to limit access
and the Pentagon's policy barring the press from the early stages of the
invasion of Grenada.

Several journalists also said that the Pentagon frequently leaked classified
information when its own aims were furthured. ''They love the selected leak of
classified information,'' said James D. Squires, editor of The Chicago Tribune.

In matters of national security, news organizations have historically cooperated
with the Government. For instance, it was common in World War II for news
dispatches from the front to be censored by the military authorities.

But in the Vietnam War, news reporting was largely independent of governmental
control, and vivid, sometimes negative, coverage was later cited by some leaders
as being instrumental in forcing a withdrawal.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              387 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BIG DROP FORESEEN IN INFANT DEATHS

BYLINE: By JO THOMAS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1153 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Dec. 19


Unicef reported today that its effort to revolutionize children's health care,
begun two years ago, was starting to save lives in dramatic numbers.

It said there was now hope that over the next 10 to 15 years, infant death rates
in many third world countries could fall by as much as 5 percent or more a year.

The report, which is issued annually, was made public in London today. It comes
at a time when 15 million children in Africa, Asia, and South America are
thought to die each year - about 40,000 a day - from malnutrition, measles,
tetanus and other vaccine-preventable diseases because of a lack of basic health
services.



'The Silent Emergency'


''The loud emergency - the Ethiopia famine - hits the news, but the 'silent
emergency' takes the great majority of these 15 million small children's lives
each year,'' James P. Grant, executive director of Unicef, the United Nations
Children's Fund, said at a news conference today.

The worldwide cost of putting into effect the immunization and health education
techniques for what Unicef calls a ''child survival revolution'' is $1 billion,
Mr. Grant said. ''Basically,'' he said, ''what we're talking about is a billion
dollar bargain.''

The report, titled ''The State of the World's Children 1985,'' noted that Unicef
began a campaign in 1982 aimed at enabling parents themselves to cut the child
death rate in half by using four simple, inexpensive techniques.

These include breast-feeding for at least the first six months of life, a simple
10-cent growth chart that enables a mother to keep track of a child's weight and
detect malnutrition and a full course of immunization that would, according to
Unicef, cost $5 a child.

Only 20 percent of the developing world's children are now immunized, the report
said. Preventable diseases kill five million each year and leave five million
others with serious disabilities, it said.

The fourth technique, called Oral Rehydration Therapy, uses a solution of salt,
sugar and water to replace vital fluids lost through diarrhea. The solution can
be made cheaply at home, using ordinary household ingredients. The packet of
salts used in the preparation costs 10 cents.

The report estimated that this simple treatment for dehydration caused by
diarrhea - the biggest single killer of children - has saved the lives of
500,000 children this year.

An Optimistic Forecast


''The child survival revolution is no longer a theory,'' the report said. ''Many
thousands of children's lives are being saved. And there is now a realistic
basis for hope that, over the next 10 to 15 years, infant death rates will fall
by as much as 5 percent or more a year in countries such as Tanzania, Nigeria,
Algeria, Turkey, India, Pakistan, Indonesia, Haiti, Nicaragua, Brazil and
Colombia.''

The Unicef report said dramatic efforts to inaugurate these four health measures
had been seen this year in some of the countries that need them most.

In India, which has more children than all the nations of Africa together and
where one child in seven dies before reaching the age of 5, successful local
child immunization campaigns have led several state governments to move to
immunize all children, it said.

Unicef's regional office in New Delhi, the report said, estimates that if all
state governments adopt such a policy, India can achieve its goal of vaccinating
85 percent of all infants by 1990.

Progress in Pakistan Cited


In Pakistan, where 500,000 children die each year from diarrheal dehydration and
preventable diseases, a new, accelerated health program has lifted the
immunization rate from 5 percent to almost 50 percent, produced 30 million
packets of oral rehydration salts and trained more than 12,000 traditional birth
attendants in these low-cost techniques.

In Colombia, more than 800,000 young children were immunized on each of three
National Vaccination Days this year, the report said, while in Baguio, the
Philippines, a campaign centering on the recommended techniques has helped
reduce infant and child death rates by 50 percent in five years.

In Haiti, where half of all child deaths are from diarrhea, the number of
mothers using oral rehydration rose from 2 percent to 34 percent after a
six-month information campaign, much of it by radio.

In Brazil, a program using more than 400,000 volunteers this year achieved
immunization of two million infants and small children against measles, a
million and a half against diphtheria, whooping cough and tetanus and almost all
the nation's children against polio.

Better Refrigeration Utilized


In Nigeria, where 800,000 children die each year, a national vaccination
campaign has been begun in an effort to repeat the success of an effort in one
locality that used improved refrigeration techniques to preserve vaccines and
drew on community leaders, teachers, the churches and sound trucks that went
from village to village. The percentage of children immunized rose from 9
percent last year to more than 80 percent.

In Turkey, where the low-cost techniques reduced infant deaths in Van Province
by 65 percent in four years, a five-year nationwide program will begin in 1985.

'Not a Grandiose Plan'


''In short,'' the report said, ''we are faced not with a grandiose long-term
plan dependant upon a thousand doubtful premises, but with a few specific tasks
which most nations could reasonably expect to achieve within the next few years.

''It is extraordinary that four such apparently simple propositions could so
dramatically improve child health as to halve deaths, disabilities and
malnutrition. But this is the opportunity which present knowledge has opened up.
And we are therefore left with a bare question - have we the will to do it?

''The cost certainly does not exceed a fraction of 1 percent of the world's
gross international product,'' the report said. ''If the will to accept that
challenge is missing, then perhaps it will never be there. For in all realism,
it is unlikely that there will ever again be such an opportunity to do so much
for so many, and for so little.''




 Deaths From 'Controlled' Diseases


for which immunization was available.

 India298,000

Pakistan 132,000

Bangladesh 119,000

Indonesia 71,000

Nigeria 64,000

Mexico 31,000

Ethiopia 16,000

Zaire 21,000

Philippines 12,000

Brazil 28,000

Burma 20,000

Thailand 10,000

Vietnam 12,000

Kenya 9,000

Egypt 16,000

South Africa 11,000

Sudan 8,000

Afghanistan 11,000

Iran 17,000

Algeria 10,000

Morocco 10,000

Turkey 8,000

Colombia 9,000

Tanzania 6,000

South Korea 5,000

Other181,000

 TOTAL

 Source: World Health Organization









LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              388 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Books: Merton Portraits

BYLINE: By Kenneth A. Briggs

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1020 words


THE SEVEN MOUNTAINS OF THOMAS

MERTON. By Michael Mott. 690 pages.

Illustrated. Houghton Mifflin. $24.95.  MERTON. By Those Who Knew Him Best.

Edited by Paul Wilkes. 171 pages.

Harper & Row. $12.95.  THE apparent contradictions alone are enough to make
Thomas Merton a tantalizing subject more than 15 years after his death. Here was
a Trappist monk on the path of self-abnegation and anonymity baring his soul
through his public writing. A man of heroic passion for earthly pleasures, he
placed himself under the severe restraints of a monastery.

Michael Mott, a poet and teacher at Bowling Green University in Ohio, documents
these paradoxes with resources available previously to no other biographer of
Merton. With the permission of the Merton Trust and the Monastery of Our Lady of
Gethsemani in Kentucky, where Merton lived for 27 years, Professor Mott had
access to the monk's private diaries and journals.

Though Merton sometimes seemed to have published his every thought in 60 books
and scores of articles on a wide array of subjects, the new materials amplify
and supplement a great deal. ''The journals,'' Professor Mott notes, ''at times
were a method of sabotaging the ideal Merton.'' The author steps discreetly out
of the impulsive monk's way and lets the interweaving take place with grace and
felicity. He neither idolizes Merton's formidable talents nor exploits his
glaring weaknesses. It is the most complete portrait of Merton to date.

Despite his most serious intentions, Merton was never truly a monk's monk.
Outwardly, he kept the discipline in exemplary fashion and was a designated role
model in his capacity as master of novices at Gethsemani. Yet there was too much
else going on for him to be contained by the rules or contented by the routines.
His poetic spirit longed for freedom, his rascally side tested his solemn
surroudings and his daunting intellect too readily found the limits of church
thought.

For those and other reasons, Merton remains a curious, intriguing figure. He
embodied major conflicts of the modern age: the struggle between egotism and
selflessness in a time of great flux, the clash between the individual and
authority and, most of all, the possibility of faith in an age of unbelief.

His life was a classic ''before and after'' Christian conversion story in the
tradition of St. Augustine. Born in France, educated in England and at Columbia
University, he had begun to enter the intellectual world of New York,
accompanied by such friends and admirers as Mark Van Doren and Robert Giroux.
Jazz, drinking and women were all part of his social carousing and he set his
sights on being a writer. He had shown his prowess in the secular world, then
experienced a radical turn toward religious belief and practice. In 1941, after
rejection by the Franciscans, he joined the Trappists with the goal of
sainthood.

In Professor Mott's portrait, Merton stands out as a paradigm of the
individual's contemporary spiritual quandary and its resolution. The prodigal
came home, but more to the point, the thinking renegade returned. In contrast to
religious figures who were incubated in the church from the first, Merton is an
example of a latecomer toward whom secular waverers, people of the world with a
troubled conscience, cast a curious eye. In low-key fashion, Professor Mott
seems especially aware of that potential for evangelism.

''The Seven Storey Mountain,'' Merton's autobiographical account in 1948 of his
journey, was an enormous success, in part on those grounds. Like so many other
projects, it earned substantial sums for the monastery and the abbot, Dom James
Fox, with whom Merton wrangled over censorship and obedience. The two men were
locked into a long, tempestuous, symbiotic relationship that forms much of the
story.

Disputes over his writing and his restless hankering to bend the rules were
nearly constant. Tensions rose even more when, during the 1960's, Merton became
a celebrated contributor to campaigns against racism, nuclear weapons and the
war in Vietnam.

Merton died in a freak accident on Dec. 10, 1968, after delivering a lecture to
a group of Catholic and Buddhist monks in Bangkok, Thailand. He was 53 years old
and in the throes of discovering more about Eastern religion and the lessons it
held for faltering Christianity. He had attained a long-sought goal of living as
a hermit on the Gethsemani grounds and had emerged from the most painful and
illuminating love affair of his life.

She is called simply ''S,'' and Merton met her during one of his many trips to
the hospital in Louisville (he was often afflicted by various ailments). She was
a student nurse. So stricken was the monk, the journals reveal, that he schemed
to spend time with her and talk with her on the monastery phone. He spoke of
marriage but discovered the power of his vocation of solitude. When it ended,
after much anguish, Merton believed the mystery of human love had been revealed.

Professor Mott develops his portrayal along literary and psychological lines.
The theological and spiritual elements are largely taken for granted. Perhaps
Merton's relative reticence in writing about these areas is part of the problem.
In a day when a spiritual profile often draws more attention than the thought
behind it however, this aspect of Merton may have been somewhat neglected.



As a campanion volume, ''Merton: By Those Who Knew Him Best,'' makes for good
reading. Merton had a legion of friends, many of whom, such as Boris Pasternak,
he knew only through correspondence. Among them were some, such as Joan Baez,
whom he knew at one stage or another in their own lives. Twenty have contributed
their thoughts to this volume. They include Lawrence Ferlinghetti, the poet;
Flavian Burns, who served as Merton's abbot; Miss Baez, and Ernesto Cardenal,
Nicaragua's Minister of Culture.

Collectively, they celebrate Merton as an essayist, poet, humanitarian and
friend. They praise him, psychoanalyze him, thank him and, in a tribute to
Merton's breadth of character, miss him in a multitude of very personal ways.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              389 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 20, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. FOUND TO BREED MANY SPIES, BUT EVEN MORE AREN'T PROSECUTED

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section D; Page 29, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1064 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, Dec. 19


With a record number of people facing spying charges, Federal investigators say
that an even larger number of Americans committed acts of espionage in the last
year but were not prosecuted.

The reasons, they said, range from legal technicalities to the Government's
unwillingness to disclose what secrets had been offered to foreign agents.

''There are a considerable number of cases of espionage that are not
prosecuted,'' said George L. Mozingo, who supervises the Federal Bureau of
Investigation's counterespionage activities in the high-technology area south of
San Francisco.

A New Breed of Spy


And experts say they may be contending with a new breed of spy: a person with
access to classified information who has no historical sense of patriotism and
is inspired by novels and films about spies.

On Tuesday, after the Justice Department announced the arrest of the fifth
American charged with espionage this year, William H. Webster, Director of the
F.B.I., said, ''We have more people charged with espionage right now than ever
before in our history.''

The man arrested Tuesday, Thomas Patrick Cavanaugh, a 40-year-old engineer
employed by the Northrop Corporation here, was charged with offering to sell
information about a new, highly secret Air Force bomber to agents of the bureau
posing as Soviet spies.

He was the ninth person, including four Americans, to be charged with espionage
in the United States this year. His arrest brings the number of people charged
with espionage since 1979 to 22, including five last year, according to bureau
officials.

Security experts offer several theories to explain why America seems to be
producing so many spies these days.

Some F.B.I. officials attribute the increase in cases in large part to the
bureau's expanded efforts to catch spies, a factor that may be true in some
recent instances but not all of them.

Indeed, several Americans charged with espionage in recent years had dealt with
foreign agents for long periods before being caught as a result of their own
mistakes, not the bureau's vigilance or investigation, investigators said.
Richard Miller, one of the Americans charged recently with spying, was himself
an F.B.I. counter- intelligence specialist.

'O.K. to Be Disloyal'


A security executive at a California defense plant, commenting on condition that
he not be named, said:

''What people forget is that you have a lot of people working in sensitive
positions now who weren't alive during World War II, when everybody shared a
real sense of patriotism, a love of country. A lot of the people we're getting
now were in college during the Vietnam era, when it was O.K. to be disloyal to
your Government.''

Another reason for the increase, security specialists say, is that never before
has there been such a high-stakes international conflict under way in which
knowledge and technology were so important.

Many of the recent spy cases have occurred in California, where thousands of
people at hundreds of plants are developing new missiles and other weapons,
space satellites and advanced electronic components.

The malcontent, the adventurer, the alcoholic or the drug abuser who passes the
generally superficial background security checks the Government conducts before
allowing them access to classified documents can discover quickly that a few
sheets of paper can be traded to Soviet agents for a stack of $100 bills.

Money as a Prime Factor


According to espionage historians, most spies in the past were motivated by one
of two factors: ideology and money. A somewhat different pattern has emerged in
recent years, according to counterespionage specialists.

Money, they say, is still by far the biggest factor that lures Americans into
committing espionage, despite what one retired intelligence officer says is
ample evidence that the Soviet Union has little sympathy or loyalty toward such
mercenary spies and ultimately abandons most of them, allowing them to be caught
when their usefulness is gone.

If there is one factor that makes an American with access to Government secrets
susceptible to becoming a spy, Mr. Mozingo said, it is a desperate need for
money.

While money is still a prime factor in espionage, investigators say relatively
few of America's known recent spies have been motivated by ideological factors,
as was the ring of pro-Soviet Americans who sent many of America's atomic bomb
secrets to Moscow in World War II and the immediate postwar era.

Fictional Fantasies Come Alive


Instead, specialists say, a dangerous new breed of spy has emerged in recent
years: the man or woman with access to classified information who is excited by
the action and intrigue of spy novels and movies and decides to live out
fictional fantasies.

Time and again in recent years, investigators say, in searching the homes of
people accused of being spies they have found stacks of spy novels and other
evidence showing how otherwise ordinary people turned to espionage not just for
money but also for excitement.

Also common among those recently convicted of espionage has been a tendency to
rationalize the decision to sell out their country. ''They may say to
themselves,'' one security specialist said, ''that 'the Russians can read all
about this in the aerospace trade journals anyway, so why shouldn't I make some
money on it?' ''

Revenge is another common motivating factor; several of the recent American
spies have justified their behavior to themselves by contending they had been
wronged by an employer or the Government and were thus entitled to some
reparations by selling American secrets.

Despite the recent increase in espionage arrests, investigators say there are
undoubtedly many more spies still active within the military and intelligence
establishments and that some may never be caught.

Expanded counterespionage operations, improved background checks and polygraph,
or lie-detector, tests for employees in the most sensitive jobs can limit the
damage but not end the problem, investigators say.

''You can put someone through the greatest background check in the world,'' one
security official said, ''but you can't read his mind and predict what he will
do under every circumstance. It all boils down to trust. When you put somebody
in one of these jobs, you have to trust him.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              390 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BURT DELAYS CALLING 2 DEFENDANTS IN CBS CASE

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 467 words


Dan M. Burt, the lawyer for Gen. William C. Westmoreland in his libel trial
against CBS, decided yesterday not to call two defendants - Mike Wallace and
Samuel A. Adams, a CBS consultant - as part of the plaintiff's case.

Both men, however, are scheduled to testify as witnesses for the network, when
CBS begins its own presentation in Federal District Court in Manhattan in
mid-January. They can be cross-examined by Mr. Burt then.

Mr. Wallace was the narrator of the 1982 CBS Reports documentary - ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' - that led to the $120 million suit. Mr.
Adams, a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst, served as a paid consultant
for the program. The broadcast charged a ''conspiracy'' by General
Westmoreland's command in 1967 to ''suppress and alter'' critical intelligence
on the enemy.

Mr. Burt originally had planned to put Mr. Wallace and Mr. Adams on the stand as
''hostile'' witnesses, just as he recently called another defendant, George
Crile, the producer of the documentary.

Questions About Time

However, Mr. Burt, conducting his direct examination, has consumed more than 100
of the 150 hours allotted to him by Judge Pierre N. Leval. And, on Wednesday,
after court was adjourned for the holidays until Jan. 3, Judge Leval questioned
whether Mr. Burt had his time budget ''well in control'' and whether it ''made
sense'' for all the defendants to be called by each side.

According to legal authorities, defendants in libel cases are not normally
called as witnesses by the plaintiff.

Mr. Burt had been concerned that, if he did not call the defendants and
establish not only that the program was false but also that they knew it to be
false or were ''reckless'' about the program's truth or falsity, CBS would move
for dismissal of the case at the end of the plaintiff's presentation. But David
Boies, the lawyer for the network, has now agreed to reserve such a motion until
the conclusion of his own presentation.

The testimony of Mr. Crile, whom Mr. Boies plans to re-call as a witness for
CBS, has already taken close to 30 hours, and will last at least a few hours
more on Jan. 3. During cross-examination of the 17 witnesses the plaintiff has
called in the last 11 weeks, Mr. Boies used about half of his 150-hour
allotment.

Mr. Burt - who decided earlier last week not to call two other CBS executives,
Howard Stringer and Andrew Lack - notified Mr. Boies yesterday of his decision
not to call Mr. Wallace and Mr. Adams. But he said, in a brief interview
yesterday, that if CBS decided later not to put Mr. Wallace and Mr. Adams on the
stand, he had reserved the right to do so.

Mr. Burt said he had only one further witness for the plaintiff, Ira Klein, a
CBS film editor who worked on the documentary.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              391 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FOR MIKE WALLACE, A WELCOME PAUSE FROM TRIAL

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 32, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1100 words


Mike Wallace said he was feeling better yesterday. His flu was nearly over. He
didn't have to go downtown to the courtroom where Gen. William C. Westmoreland
was suing CBS for $120 million. And he learned that the general's attorney would
not be calling him as a witness.

The CBS correspondent had spent most of the last week sick in bed and admittedly
depressed by the prospect of having to appear as one of the first witnesses when
the trial of General Westmoreland's $120 million libel suit over a disputed
documentary resumes Jan. 3.

Yesterday, however, General Westmoreland's attorney, Dan M. Burt, said he would
not call Mr. Wallace as a witness.

The 66-year-old correspondent said this put him in a better mood, since it meant
he would not have to study over the holidays to ''refamiliarize'' himself with
the facts of a documentary he ''stood by'' and ''believed in,'' and that he
would not appear on the stand until the CBS attorney, David Boies, called him.

''Well, sooner or later I'll have to do it,'' Mr. Wallace said yesterday, ''but
at least it frees me to do some work.''

Charges of Conspiracy


For much of this year, Mr. Wallace said, he has felt unable to commit himself to
his work. He has been a restless man, he said, trapped in the wood-paneled
United States Court House at Foley Square where he is a defendant - along with
George Crile, the producer of the documentary; Samuel A. Adams, a consultant on
the program, and CBS - accused of libeling General Westmoreland in the
documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' The 1982 program, on
which he was the correspondent, asserted that the general ''conspired'' to
deceive President Lyndon B. Johnson and the Joint Chiefs of Staff about enemy
troop strength in Vietnam in the months before the Tet offensive of January
1968.

Few dispute that Mr. Crile was the moving force behind the CBS Reports
documentary, and so far the producer has been on the stand longer than any other
witness except General Westmoreland.

Mr. Boies said Mr. Crile's function as a witness was to ''explain the details of
the broadcast, how things were edited and why, to talk about the various
positions intelligence officers had evaluating the significance of one number
compared to another, the kind of detail that requires a great deal of
immersion.''

'The Central Themes'


Mr. Wallace's role, the lawyer said, will be ''to talk about the basic
substantive issues, the significance of the key players, the central themes.''

''In the broadcast itself,'' he said, ''Mike's role was not to get into the
details, or what was the significance of troop numbers or why some conference
happened one month instead of another.''

Mr. Wallace narrated the documentary as well as questioning some, but not all,
of the subjects. Mr. Crile did some key interviews himself.

Mr. Burt said yesterday that he would continue his policy of not discussing the
trial with reporters. But it is known that Mr. Burt's strategy will be to try to
show that Mr. Wallace's grasp of the material was inadequate.

For the last several days, Mr. Wallace has been ill in his new East Side
apartment. He said he moved there from the town house he sold several months
ago, when he and his wife, Lorraine, informally separated.

Prepared 6 Segments


''He is a defendant in what is billed as 'the libel suit of the century,' ''
said Richard Clurman, the former chief of correspondents for Time-Life and a
friend of Mr. Wallace.

''He has uprooted himself, he is working on '60 Minutes' when he can,'' Mr.
Clurman said, ''Why shouldn't he be under strain?''

''I knew the trial would be taking up my time,'' Mr. Wallace said, ''so I set
about doing enough pieces to create a bank from which I could draw.'' He said
that he had prepared six ''60 Minutes'' stories before the trial began and that
he was working on others on off days and off hours.

Last month, he had to ask the court for permission to go to Ethiopia for nine
days to work on a ''60 Minutes'' segment on the famine. ''When the opportunity
came for me to go to Ethiopia,'' he said, ''I jumped at it because it would be a
discrete amount of time away. I would get to go do the piece, edit it and get it
on the air. In a strange way, in spite of the horrors we saw, it was a
respite.''

Host of 50's Talk Show


Since the trial began Oct. 9, he has maintained, he says, a ''two-thirds''
attendance record in room 318 at the courthouse. And he has nevertheless found
time to keep working at the network where the once-controversial interviewer -
Mr. Wallace had been the host of a syndicated talk show in the 1950's called
''Night Beat'' - became, according to William Leonard, the former president of
CBS News, ''a terrific newsman.''

Since ''Night Beat,'' Mr. Wallace has continued to be a controversial figure in
broadcast journalism. His unconventional professional journeys have taken him
from narrating ''The Lone Ranger'' on Detroit radio to playing the lead on
Broadway in ''Reclining Figure,'' a comedy by Harry Kurnitz. It was, however,
his undeferential ''Night Beat'' interviews with gangsters and movie stars that
made his crisp voice and jutting finger nationally known. In 1963, he asked
Richard S. Salant, the president of CBS News, to make him a correspondent, and
he became the host of ''The CBS Morning News With Mike Wallace.'' In 1968 he
moved on to ''60 Minutes.''

''Mike is really an individual who operates in surges,'' Van Gordon Sauter, the
CBS executive vice president in charge of news and stations, said yesterday.
''Once I was coming home from Europe, and at Charles De Gaulle Airport in
France, I stopped and there was Mike: asleep on a bench. And I said, 'I don't
know what you're doing here, but how can I help?' The guy was down, he was
exhausted. He said he was on his way to Teheran. I said to myself, that will
never be a great interview.''

Nevertheless, he said, Mr. Wallace had pulled it off.

''Right now,'' Mr. Sauter continued, ''he is sleeping on a bench. Only it's in a
courtroom, not an airport lobby. But the principle is the same.''

In court, Mr. Wallace's hours of passive observation have mostly consisted of
passing notes between CBS lawyers. In the early days of the trial, he mingled
with other journalists, slapping backs, making a joke of looking over their
notes. But as the trial plodded on, Mr. Wallace seemed to look on, day after
day, with bridled impatience.

Today, he said, he begins a five-day vacation on an island ''down where the sun
shines.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              392 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE SCREEN: ALAN PARKER'S 'BIRDY'

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 676 words


THE most unusual thing about ''Birdy,'' Willam Wharton's novel about a boy who
develops an overwhelming erotic fascination with avian life, is its lack of
allegorical implications. The story of Birdy, who actually reaches the point of
imagining that he has fathered a family of canaries, can be taken at face value.
So can the parallel tale of Al, the boyhood friend who years later, after
suffering grave wartime injuries, returns to coax the adult Birdy out of his
madness.

Like Mr. Wharton's novel, Alan Parker's film of ''Birdy,'' which opens today at
the Beekman Theater, works best when it concentrates on the friendship, and on
Birdy's amazing eccentricities. The material is so odd and so powerful that its
particulars are of much greater interest than its larger implications. It is
some measure of just how compellingly Mr. Parker has set forth this tale that
when, barely 20 minutes into the movie, Birdy and Al don feathered pigeon suits
for a nocturnal adventure, the episode seems neither silly nor incredible.
Birdy's intensity is so captivating, and Al's discomfiture so believable and
funny, that their story becomes irresistibly involving.

The film takes the form of a series of flashbacks. Its present-day sections are
set in a military hospital, where Al (Nicolas Cage) tries desperately to elicit
some human response from his friend. Birdy (Matthew Modine) has finally
transformed himself into one of the creatures of his dreams. He stares at Al
with one eye, birdlike, and perches naked and motionless on the railing of his
hospital bed. These scenes are contrasted with glimpses of the younger,
happy-go- lucky Al, whose interests are girls and weight lifting, and the
delicate, grinning Birdy, whose obsession has not yet drawn him away from human
contact. Mr. Modine's performance is exceptionally sweet and graceful; Mr. Cage
very sympathetically captures Al's urgency and frustration. Together, these
actors work miracles with what might have been unplayable.



Mr. Parker has for the most part directed the film deftly and unobtrusively.
Every so often, though, he introduces the kind of overstatement ''Birdy'' didn't
need, as in a shot of Birdy lying Christlike on the floor of his hospital room.
The disco music accompanying Birdy's first dream of flight, the adolescent sex
scenes played bluntly for laughs and the combative ending seem similarly
unnecessary, as does the updating of the story from the World War II of the
novel to the Vietnam era. Fortunately, the heavy-handedness is in limited
supply. Most of ''Birdy'' is enchanting.

The film contains many brief but memorable vignettes, particularly those
involving the boys' families; Sandy Baron is especially good as Al's blowhard
father, and George Buck has a touching scene as Birdy's father, who works as a
janitor at a school and is there cleaning bathrooms on the night his son attends
a prom. In addition to its human players, ''Birdy'' has a large animal
contingent, with some remarkable footage of canaries being hatched. To the
extent that any film could translate Birdy's obsession into visual terms, this
one has. Mr. Parker, in filling the film with animals and studying their motion
without giving any of the canaries speaking lines (the book's Birdy has a winged
''wife'' who eventually begins talking to him), has been wise to leave well
enough alone.



Airborne Dreams

BIRDY, directed by Alan Parker; screenplay by Sandy Kroopf and Jack Behr, based
on the novel ''Birdy'' by William Wharton; director of photography, Michael
Seresin; edited by Gerry Hambling; music by Peter Gabriel; produced by Alan
Marshall; released by Tri-Star Pictures. At Cinema 1, Third Avenue and 60th
Street. Running time: 120 minutes. This film is rated R. BirdyMatthew Modine Al
ColumbatoNicolas Cage Doctor WeissJohn Harkins Mr. ColumbatoSandy Baron Hannah
RourkeKaren Young RenaldiBruno Kirby Mrs. PrevostNancy Fish Birdy's FatherGeorge
Buck Birdy's MotherDolores Sage Joe SagessaRobert L. Ryan Mario ColumbatoJames
Santini


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              393 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 22, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

DR. STANLEY MILGRAM, 51, IS DEAD; STUDIED OBEDIENCE TO AUTHORITY

BYLINE: By DANIEL GOLEMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 681 words


Dr. Stanley Milgram, a psychologist widely known for his experiments on
obedience to authority, died of a heart attack Thursday night at the Columbia
Presbyterian Medical Center. He was 51 years old and lived in New Rochelle, N.Y.

Dr. Milgram, who was a professor of psychology at the Graduate Center of the
City University of New York at the time of his death, conducted experiments
examining the degree to which ordinary people would comply with the orders of an
authority when those orders went against conscience.

The experiments showed that people would inflict a painful shock to a person
they believed to be a helpless victim if urged to by an experimenter.

The experiments, conducted at Yale University in the early 1960's, made Dr.
Milgram one of the best-known social psychologists of the modern era. His book
''Obedience to Authority,'' published in 1974, was translated into many
languages. A CBS-TV drama, ''The Tenth Level,'' was a fictionalized version of
this work.

A Furor Over Study


The original reports of Dr. Milgram's study in the early 1960's created a furor,
both over its method and its results. More than 60 percent of the volunteers,
from all walks of life, administered what they thought were painful shocks to a
purported victim - actually a trained actor - believing the test to be part of a
study on learning and memory.

They did so even when they heard shouts of pain from the victim. The volunteers
were prompted by an experimenter in a white lab coat who said, ''The experiment
requires that you continue.''

Psychologists and the general public alike were appalled by the findings, which
seemed to suggest that ordinary people, out of obedience to authority, would
commit acts that would otherwise violated their sense of decency. Public
discussion of the findings tied them to a range of events, including the trial
of the Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann, the My Lai massacre and the Watergate
scandal.

Inventive Approaches


Known for his inventive approaches to the study of social psychology, Dr.
Milgram repeatedly broke new ground in his field.

For example, after his mother-in- law, a woman in her 70's, complained
indignantly that no one had offered her a seat on the subway, Dr. Milgram sent a
team of 15 graduate students to experiment with different requests for getting a
subway seat.

The most successful proved to be: ''Excuse me, I'd like to sit down. Could I
please have your seat?'' Half of the subway riders asked surrendered their seat
to that request, but only 37 percent did so when a reason for the request was
given.

In 1965 Dr. Milgram was awarded the annual sociopsychological prize of the
American Association for the Advancement of Science for his work on obedience.

Dr. Milgram's research, in addition to his work on obedience, examined such
diverse aspects of social life as crowds, television violence, urban living,
mental maps and photography.

Six Scientific Films


He also produced six scientific films, among them ''The City and the Self,''
which won a silver medal at the International Film and Television Festival in
New York.

He was born in the Bronx in 1933 and attended Queens College, where he majored
in political science. Upon graduation he received a Ford Foundation fellowship
to Harvard University, where he earned a doctorate in social psychology in 1960.

Dr. Milgram taught at Yale from 1960 to 1963 and then at Harvard University
before coming to the City University Graduate Center in 1966. He was made
Distinguished Professor of Psychology at City University in 1980.

Dr. Milgram was a member of Phi Beta Kappa, a Fellow of the American Association
for the Advancement of Science and the American Psychological Assocation, and
last year was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.

He is survived by his wife, Alexandra; a daughter, Michele Sara, and a son, Marc
Daniel, all of New Rochelle.

Services will be held tomorrow at 11 A.M. at the Riverside Memorial Chapel,
Amsterdam Avenue at 76th Street.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dr. Stanley Milgram

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              394 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 22, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CLASH ON DISCLOSURES: REAGAN TACTICS

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1163 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 21


While the Reagan Administration has increased its pressure on news organizations
not to publish classified information, it has also been moving more quietly to
build a legal basis for imprisoning Government employees who give reporters such
information.  This Administration, even more than earlier ones, has been
frustrated by the publication of Government secrets and its inability to stop
the disclosures. Congress last year blocked its plan to subject more Government
employees to polygraph, or lie-detector, tests and lifelong censorship, and it
is unclear whether a new overall strategy has been developed to curb disclosure
of official secrets.

Recently, in addition to direct appeals to news executives not to publish
particular information, the Administration has undertaken an effort to set a
precedent for subjecting Government sources to the same penalties as foreign
spies. That effort involves a criminal prosecution of a Navy intelligence
analyst and part-time journalist who is accused of selling classified satellite
reconnaissance photographs to a British military magazine.

An additional tack was suggested earlier this month by Fred C. Ikle, Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy, who said the Administration was likely to seek
legislation making it easier to punish officials who gave classified information
to news organizations.

Fight Against Disclosures

''We have decided to fight it on all fronts,'' he said of the stream of
disclosures.

Although an internal Government report suggested that the Government had legal
authority to prosecute reporters who published classified information, the
Administration has shown no interest in doing so.

Government lawyers say such prosecutions would raise major, unresolved First
Amendment issues and would be politically controversial, and that it would be
difficult to prove that a reporter knew that information he had received from an
official was classified.

Rather than resorting to legal compulsion, Defense Secretary Caspar W.
Weinberger this week asked some news organizations to censor themselves by
withholding publication of details of the next space shuttle mission.

When The Washington Post later published some details of the military mission,
Mr. Weinberger suggested that its article had directly damaged national
security. The Post said the article posed no security risk, that it was based
largely on information already made public and that it had received no request
from Mr. Weinberger not to publish the report.

In comments since then, military officials seemed particularly annoyed that The
Post was not willing to defer to their assessment of what would harm national
security.

Earlier administrations have persuaded major news organizations to withhold
publication of particular information on national security grounds. But such
requests have been rare in recent decades, and a few have been defied on the
basis of decisions that the material's newsworthiness outweighed any danger it
presented.

Confrontation in 1971

In 1971, for example, The New York Times and other news organizations published
the classified Pentagon Papers study of the Vietnam War despite Nixon
Administration objections that this would endanger national security. The
Supreme Court rejected a Government lawsuit seeking to prohibit publication.

Since that time the Government has concentrated its efforts to keep its secrets
by stopping disclosures at their source. But officials acknowledge they have had
little success, both in this and in prior administrations. The sources are hard
to catch, and no Government employee has ever been convicted of a crime for
disclosing classified information to a reporter.

In addition, high-ranking officials frequently disclose classified information
to reporters in order to further Administration policy or their own bureaucratic
priorities.

A 1982 report by an interdepartmental group of Administration lawyers found that
the Federal Bureau of Investigation was reluctant to look for the source of
disclosures, in part because such inquiries ''frequently involve high-ranking
Government officials who may be uncooperative.''

It went on, ''Sometimes a time-consuming investigation is undertaken, only to
reveal that the source of the leak was a White House or Cabinet official who was
authorized to disclose the information.''

The report advocated sweeping new legislation to make it a crime for a
Government employee to disclose any classified information to a reporter or to
anyone else without authorization.

There are a few specific, narrow laws on the books that appear to make it a
crime to disclose or publish classified information about atomic weapons,
communications intelligence, cryptographic activities and the identities of
undercover intelligence agents.

But the United States has no such sweeping criminal official secrecy legislation
as the 1982 report recommended, and no specific plans to seek such legislation
have been made public.

Meanwhile, however, the Justice Department is pushing in a pending case for a
judicial interpretation of World- War-I vintage espionage laws that would have
much the same effect as a sweeping new official secrets act.

In October it charged Samuel Loring Morison, a Navy intelligence analyst who was
a part-time journalist, with espionage and theft of Government property for
selling classified satellite reconnaissance photographs of a Soviet aircraft
carrier under construction to a British military magazine.

There was no allegation that Mr. Morison was a spy for a foreign government or
intended to harm national security. He has pleaded not guilty and his lawyers
have moved to dismiss the prosecution as unconstitutional.

Earlier Case Was Dismissed

The only previous such case was brought by the Nixon Administration against
Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo for providing the Pentagon Papers to The New
York Times and other newspapers in 1971. That case was dismissed because of
prosecutorial misconduct.

The 1982 internal Administration report said two general provisions of the
espionage laws ''would be violated by the unauthorized disclosure to a member of
the media of classified documents or information relating to the national
defense.''

These two sections ''could also be used to prosecute a journalist who knowingly
receives and publishes classified documents or information,'' the report said.

The American Civil Liberties Union has challenged this interpretation. It says
the general espionage laws were designed only to bar clandestine transfers of
Government secrets to foreign powers, and would be unconstitutional if
interpreted to prohibit disclosures of classified information to the news media.

This debate could be resolved by the Morison case, with far-reaching
consequences for the Government's power to suppress information it does not want
foreign adversaries - or the American public - to have.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              395 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ACCOUNTS OF RUSSIAN'S CHINA VISIT SUGGEST EXPECTATIONS ARE LIMITED

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Dec. 22


Official accounts today of the visit to China by a senior Soviet official
offered new indications of the limited expectations both Governments appear to
have for the occasion.

The official, Ivan V. Arkhipov, a First Deputy Prime Minister, is the most
senior Soviet official to come here in 15 years. His visit is being closely
watched for signs of any thaw in the chilly political relations that have
prevailed for nearly a quarter of a century between Moscow and Peking.

But so far, after two days, both sides have taken care to emphasize the
differences that have prevented an improvement in their relations. At the same
time, they have stressed their readiness to expand trade, economic and
scientific exchanges, and to continue their search for better overall ties.

For both sides, the most important fact about the the visit is probably that it
is taking place at all, after a last- minute postponement in May when Moscow
evidently wished to show its displeasure over Chinese troop clashes with Vietnam
and over the warmth displayed when President Reagan came to Peking in April.

Won't Return for Funeral


The symbolic importance of the Arkhipov visit was underscored today when the
Russian remained here rather than return to Moscow for the funeral of Defense
Minister Dmitri F. Ustinov, as unofficial reports from the Soviet capital Friday
had suggested he might.

The Chinese wariness toward the visit was suggested by the coverage given in
today's editions of People's Daily, the Communist Party paper, which put
accounts of Mr. Arkhipov's arrival here and the banquet given for him Friday
night on the bottom of its back page. Important official visitors from friendly
countries are generally accorded front-page display.

At the banquet, Mr. Arkhipov and his host, Deputy Prime Minister Yao Yilin,
struck a cordial personal note in their speeches that reflected an acquaintance
dating back to the Russian's years here heading the Soviet aid program in the
1950's.

The two officials also spoke of their nations' common interest in better ties,
Mr. Yao saying China ''sincerely hoped'' for improved relations and Mr. Arkhipov
responding that it was in the fundamental interests of both nations ''to put
these relations into the orbit of friendship and good-neighborliness.''

But the account given by the official New China News Agency said both men had
also referred to the ''differences'' that had impeded normalization. The agency
said Mr. Arkhipov had ''mentioned'' those involving ''major international issues
and relations with certain other countries.''

Since political consultations between the two capitals were resumed in 1982,
five sessions here and in Moscow have failed to bridge differences over the
Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan, Moscow's backing for the Vietnamese
occupation of Cambodia and the high troop levels each side maintains on their
common frontier.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              396 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CynthiaCoggeshallBecomestheBride Of Richard Ten Broeck Trask, Banker

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 38, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 241 words


Cynthia Coggeshall, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs. Bayard Coggeshall of Mendham,
N.J., and Richard Ten Broeck Trask, a son of Mrs. John J. Trask of New York and
the late Mr. Trask, were married yesterday. The Rev. Albert Niesse performed the
ceremony at the Episcopal Church of St. John on the Mountain in Bernardsville,
N.J.

Nancy S. Gerrity was the maid of honor and John J. Madden Jr. the best man.

Mrs. Trask, who is to receive a B.S.-R.N. degree from the New York University
School of Nursing next month, graduated from the Westover School and Wheelock
College. Her father is an attending pediatrician at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial
Hospital. The bride is a granddaughter of Laurence Achilles of Manchester, Vt.,
and the late Mrs. Achilles, and of the late Mr. and Mrs. Murray H. Coggeshall of
Morristown. Mr. Coggeshall was a member of Coggeshall & Hicks, New York
stockbrokers.

Mr. Trask, a vice president of Citibank, graduated from the Taft School and the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. After service in the Army as a
first lieutenant with the 101st Airborne Division in Vietnam, he received an
M.B.A. degree from Columbia University. His father was a member of the New York
Stock Exchange and a partner in du Pont Glore Forgan.

Mr. Trask is a grandson of the late Mr. and Mrs. Donn Barber and of the late Mr.
and Mrs. Frederick Kingsbury Trask, all of New York. Mr. Barber was an architect
and Mr. Trask a banker.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Cynthia Trask

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              397 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILM VIEW;
SEEN IN 1984, THE FUTURE LOOKS BLEAK

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1464 words


The other Saturday afternoon at Movieland theater on Broadway, where I saw
''Dune'' with what was clearly a crowd of aficionados of the Frank Herbert
sci-fi novels, the letters on the screen spelling out the film's title were so
widely spaced that the left side of the ''D'' and the right side of the ''e''
were cut off. This may have been the fault of the projection, but I prefer to
think it was a conscious comment on the things that were about to come.

''Dune,'' adapted and directed by David Lynch (''The Elephant Man,''
''Eraserhead''), simply does not fit onto the screen. It's not too big. It's
just misshapen, like many of its characters and all of its monsters, including a
great blob of flesh called ''the Spacing Guild Navigator.''

Whether or not the other members of the audience knew that's what the blob was
called, I've no idea. I found out only later by going through the film's press
kit. The blob may well have been identified on screen, but by the time it
appeared, my mind was already reeling with the immense amount of impenetrable
exposition with which the film lurches to its beginning.

Set in the year 10191, ''Dune'' takes place on a number of planets, including
the arid one that gives the film its title, and is about a struggle among
several feuding ruling houses, whose tangled alliances make an in-depth account
of the Wars of the Roses seem as simple to follow as the directions on a box of
Jell-O.

It's not been an especially good movie year for the future. ''Dune,'' which is
probably the most elaborate and expensive of the science-fiction offerings, is a
total mess. ''2010,'' Peter Hyams's sequel to Stanley Kubrick's classic, ''2001:
A Space Odyssey,'' is adequate, meaning that it's nothing to get excited about -
you've seen most of it before.

''Supergirl,'' which is advertised as being ''from the producers of the Superman
movies,'' is a good-natured but perfunctory spinoff from the spectacles starring
Christopher Reeve, designed, perhaps, to take up the slack if Mr. Reeve decides
that enough is enough. ''Star Trek III: the Search for Spock,'' is just more of
the same, which, I suppose, is exactly what the ''trekkies'' want, though the
rest of us are becoming restive.

It must be significant that the only halfway decent sci-fi films of the year
have been those that never quite lose touch with the manners and mores of earth,
1984.

These would include W. D Richter's farcical ''Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai'';
Aaron Lipstadt's minuscule-budget ''Android,'' which is virtually a one-set
(read one spaceship) movie about a robot named Max, who has all the problems of
a nice but none-too-bright teen-ager; Nick Castle's ''Last Starfighter,'' an
adventure-comedy about a video-game whiz who gets kidnapped by representatives
of another galaxy to help settle its problems, and, by far the best of them all,
John Carpenter's ''Starman,'' which is essentially a romantic comedy about a
grown-up ''E.T.''



Our science-fiction film literature now appears to be divided into four fairly
distinct categories:

(1) Those that attempt to create their own universes from scratch, complete with
their own histories, religions, languages, laws and bizarre rules of behavior.
If the brightest, most successful films of this sort have been George Lucas's
three ''Star Wars'' movies, ''Dune'' must be the absolute worst.

Coming somewhere in between, but nearer the bottom than the top, was Ralph
Bakshi's animated ''Lord of the Rings'' (1978), based on the J. R. R. Tolkien
trilogy. Possibly because anything is possible in an animated film, the audience
for the Bakshi movie never quite lost itself in the wonderment that the special
effects in a live-action film can prompt.

(2) Live-action cartoons, some of them based on comic strips, like the three
''Superman'' movies and the new ''Supergirl.''

(3) The out-and-out space adventure film, defined best by the ''Star Trek''
movies but also including Mr. Hyams's ''2010.'' These films are not especially
witty and depend almost entirely on special effects and the ''look'' of
futuristic technology.

(4) Those that are essentially contemporary comedies, like ''The Adventures of
Buckaroo Banzai,'' the just-opened ''Starman'' and John Sayles's ''Brother From
Another Planet.'' Though these pictures may use special effects, they don't
necessarily depend on them.

Standing just a little apart from these four categories are the pre-space-age
fantasy movies, like the ''Conan'' films, which are set so far in the past they
could represent the future, and those movies like ''Repo Man'' and ''Liquid
Sky,'' which use sci- fi elements but are not really sci-fi films.



In the 1950's and 60's, our science-fiction movies played on our lingering,
post-World War II, Cold War paranoia by presenting us with visions of
Armageddon, best represented by a movie like ''When Worlds Collide'' (1952), or
cautionary fables in which malignant creatures, either come to earth from outer
space or created on earth by atomic radiation, gobble up our civilization.

In the 1970's, perhaps because everyone was sick of Vietnam and was longing for
some magical force that could straighten out our earthly muddles, our sci-fi
films took a sudden turn toward the benign. This switch in direction is best
exemplified by Steven Spielberg's 1977 ''Close Encounters of the Third Kind,''
in which the visitors from outer space display a kind of holy innocence that, we
are led to believe, can be achieved only by evolution to a higher intelligence.
These creatures are not only benign, but they possess powers that in an earlier
movie era were exclusively associated with biblical epics.

Though the black extraterrestrial in ''The Brother From Another Planet'' cannot
speak, he can heal wounds with the touch of his hand. When he loses a foot, he
grows a new one. Mr. Carpenter takes these powers a little further when
''Starman's'' title character, played with what might be described as beatific
humor by Jeff Bridges, successfully raises creatures from the dead.



Though ''Starman'' has a lot in common with Mr. Spielberg's ''E.T.,'' it has its
own easy-to- take, understated charm and a lot of humor, being about an E.T. who
has come to earth in answer to the invitation ''to come on down'' extended to
space by Voyager 2. At the film's beginning, Starman is a disembodied presence
who, when his spacecraft is thrown off course and drops him into Wisconsin,
materializes in the form of the recently dead husband of a pretty young woman,
Jenny Hayden, played by Karen Allen.

Though initially scared out of her wits by this clone of her husband, killed in
an accident, Jenny, being the spunky type she is, agrees to help Starman get
from Wisconsin to Arizona, where he is to rendezvous with his mates and go home.
If he misses them, he is destined to fade away and, unlike an old soldier, to
die.

Most of the film is occupied with their cross- country journey, which, though
they are pursued by scientists whose principal interest is dissecting the
visitor, becomes a sort of space-age ''It Happened One Night.'' One of Mr.
Carpenter's funnier variations on Mr. Spielberg's ''E.T.'' myth is that Starman,
even as he recognizes the superiority of his civilization to that of earth,
knows that he's going to miss the excitement of our imperfect world.

When Jenny Hayden asks him if his world is beautiful, he says it is, but it's
also different, and the ways in which it is different - no singing, no hunger,
no dancing, no wars, no laughter, just perfection - make heaven sound as boring
as many of us suspect any ideal state would be.



It's going to be interesting to see if the fanatically loyal fans of the
''Dune'' novels will be able to turn this gigantic turkey of a movie into a
financial success. I've not read a word of Mr. Herbert's prose, and this movie
is not the kind to make you rush off to buy some - does it sell by the pound?

Unlike Mr. Lucas's fictitious universe, which brings to mind the legend of King
Arthur and the knights of the Round Table, ''The Wizard of Oz,'' ''The Gospel
According to St. Matthew,'' ''Ivanhoe'' and ''Buck Rogers,'' among other things,
''Dune'' is not only witless but as tedious to follow as second-rate comic
strip. It has no associations to anything that I recognize, which may be why
it's called ''escapist.'' Its imagination is limited to strange character names
- Padishah Emperor Shaddan IV, Nefud, the Beast Rabban, Shadout Mapes - and to
landscapes and decor that suggest not another age and civilization but the
memories of someone whose concept of splendor was epitomized by the interior of
the old Roxy theater.

If ''Dune'' suggests anything - which I doubt - it's that we are retrogressing
toward the future.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              398 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'BIRDY,': A DIFFICULT JOURNEY TO THE SCREEN

BYLINE: By LESLIE BENNETTS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 19, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1716 words


He is in love with his wife, Perta; they have 11 children. He teaches the babies
to eat and to sing; they bathe together. When Perta is pregnant, she asks him to
sing to her. He sings gloriously about their love, ''living as one, in life just
begun.''

The problem is that he is a teen- aged boy, and Perta is a canary. In his dreams
at night, he flies free, making his life with Perta and soaring in joy. But
during the day, in a life that becomes less and less real to him, he is confined
to the ground, to a grim life in lower-middle-class Philadelphia, oppressed by a
shrewish mother and depressed by a defeated father. More than anything in the
world, he wants to become a bird, and to fly.

In his first published novel, a pseudonymous author named William Wharton made a
much-heralded debut with ''Birdy,'' the strange and compelling story of a boy
obsessed with birds. Set just before and during World War II, the novel
alternates between the consciousness of Birdy himself and their stories as told
by Al, his best friend, a high-school wrestler who loves Birdy but is more
interested in chasing girls than learning everything there is to know about the
aerodynamics of flight.

When ''Birdy'' came out six years ago, Alan Parker, the film director, read the
story and scribbled a note to his producer, Alan Marshall: ''Great book. Don't
know how to do it.'' And for the next few years, Mr. Parker didn't even think
about trying, preoccupied instead with making such films as ''Fame'' and ''Shoot
the Moon.''

Finally, however - despite the firmly held conviction of much of Hollywood that
it was impossible, and Mr. Parker's own original opinion that even if it could
be done, he himself couldn't do it - the story of Birdy and his dream has become
a movie directed by Alan Parker. Starring Matthew Modine as Birdy and Nicholas
Cage as Al, ''Birdy'' opened Friday at the Cinema 1.

For a long time the difficulties of translating into film a novel that takes
place largely inside an increasingly mad mind discouraged every effort. But by
last year, two Los Angeles-based screenwriters had become entranced with the
project, and when their script was sent to Alan Parker he was impressed.

''I had thought it was too difficult to do,'' he admits. ''So much of the story
happened inside the boy's head, and the poetry of the book was literary. To make
it cinematic - I didn't know if I could make the jump. And it wasn't just that
it was inside his head, but what happened inside his head, for instance in his
dream, when he's flying. In the book, it was two or three lines of poetry. To
write poetry, all you need is a pencil. But to shoot it is infinitely more
difficult.''



Although much rewriting remained to be done before arriving at a finished
screenplay, the original version by Sandy Kroopf and Jack Behr convinced Mr.
Parker that the project was feasible. Mr. Kroopf and Mr. Behr had decided early
on that to transform ''Birdy'' into a film, the various threads of subplot as
well as the complex symbolic dimensions of the book should be simplified to make
the screenplay revolve around the strong central story of the friendship between
Al and Birdy. For example, two different female canaries Birdy falls in love
with in the book are combined into one bird in the movie, and while he does make
love with her in his dream life, they do not have what the novel's Birdy refers
to as his children.

''There's really a lot of the book we didn't even try to do,'' Mr. Behr
explains. ''What attracted us to it was the friendship story, which I think is
the heart of the book - the story of these two guys in Philly whose lives are
kind of screwed up and oppressed, and who have these ways of coping. When we
read the book, it inspired us to want to make a movie to do the part of it we
liked. When you're doing an adaptation of a book, you don't have the scope of a
book, or the ability to meander about and do as many subplots. You can meander a
lot less in a movie; you have to pick a strong through-line and go with it.''

Of course, the central metaphor of flying anchors the film, as it did the novel.
To Matthew Modine, it represented ''freedom,'' he says. ''Birdy wanted to lift
himself up from the existence he lived in. As horrible as a bird's life may be,
they can always escape by flying away. That's what Birdy did; he removed himself
from something that was really horrible. But you can't really fly away, can you?
You have to come down. And when he came down, there he was; all he had done was
temporary. What he realizes is that we can't escape from life - that life has to
be lived.''



Among other changes, Mr. Behr and Mr. Kroopf decided to set the screenplay
during the Vietnam War instead of World War II. ''We were in high school in the
mid-1960's,'' Mr. Behr says, ''so growing up then was our experience.''

Structuring the film required the screenwriters to weave together the
alternating scenes of past and present that tell the boys' story. In addition,
however, the writers had to manufacture much of the movie's action, as well as
almost all of its dialogue, from anecdotal fragments mentioned by Al in his
sections of narrative. ''We really created our own story line,'' Mr. Behr says.
''There are a lot of scenes in the movie that aren't direct scenes in the book,
although I think every scene is inspired by the book. And there is very little
dialogue in the book.''

Such problems notwithstanding, their enthusiasm for the project was so great
that Mr. Behr and Mr. Kroopf found the actual writing of the screenplay a picnic
compared to selling the idea. ''The hardest part for us was trying to get
someone in Hollywood to do it,'' Mr. Kroopf reports. ''We went around for almost
a year, talking to people and trying to explain how this story could be a movie.
We had some really bizarre meetings. We always felt the story was really
accessible, but we'd have these conversations in which people would say, 'The
guy thinks he's a bird? You mean he really thinks he's a bird?' They just didn't
get it.''



The young actors assigned to star in the movie had their own problems to contend
with. ''I was terrified of the role of Al, because it was like nothing I'd ever
done before, and I didn't know how to get to the places the role was asking me
to go emotionally,'' says Mr. Cage. ''With a couple of those monologues - like
at the end, when Al says, 'I'm just going to sit in this room forever' - how
does somebody really come to that decision and mean it? I didn't know if I
wanted to feel that way, or could feel that way.''

Mr. Cage went to unusual lengths to identify with his character, particularly
for those scenes that take place after Al has come back from the war with one
side of his face blown off. In all those scenes, Al is seen with his face
swathed in bandages. During the filming, says Mr. Cage, ''I could have taken
those bandages off, but I didn't. I left them on for five weeks. I slept in
them. I'd wake myself up in the middle of the night and say, 'Don't sleep on
that side; that's the side that was hurt.'''

Mr. Cage also lost 15 pounds, ''because I felt that having his face damaged, Al
might have had trouble eating,'' he explains.



While weight can be regained, some of the actor's other choices were
irrevocable, such as having two of his front teeth pulled out. ''I wanted to
look like I was hit by a bomb,'' he says. ''It gave me a feeling of something I
had lost.'' He shrugs off the sacrifice: ''I felt this was a once-in-a-lifetime
part, and it deserved that much.''

At least Mr. Cage had words to work with. For Matthew Modine, the challenge was
even more formidable, since Birdy, silent by nature, returns from the war
totally mute, refusing to talk to anyone or do anything but squat in his cell in
a military-run mental institution, cocking his head like a bird and rejecting
even food unless he is spoon-fed by an attendant, like a baby bird being fed by
its mother.

''So much of Birdy's experience in the book is literary and introspective, and
Alan Parker was faced with the problem of cinematically filming someone's ideas
and thoughts,'' Mr. Modine observes. ''For me, it was a question of
physicalizing the person William Wharton had created. Suddenly Birdy doesn't
have any lines! I kept asking Alan what I was going to do about all the things
that are described when I get to the hospital. How do you show what Birdy was
thinking about without talking? Alan kept saying, 'We'll talk about it later.'
Finally I just did it, I don't know how. It wasn't something I could copy or
borrow from anything I'd seen. Birdy's pain was unique.''



Nevertheless, Mr. Modine was helped by his sense that Birdy's pain was also
universal. ''I thought of Birdy as any person or veteran who'd ever been hurt or
damaged in a war,'' he says. ''I was trying to show the kind of pain of anyone
who's ever suffered. It was for every war that's ever been fought, every person
who's ever tried to run away. It was much bigger than me. So it wasn't Matthew
Modine trying to act; it was all those people's spirits coming and giving me a
hand.''

The book's author, who lives on a houseboat in Paris, says he has neither read
the screenplay nor seen the finished movie. He professes not to mind the
liberties taken with his work.

''I couldn't care less,'' says Mr. Wharton. ''I know they pushed it up to
Vietnam. Nobody's interested in World War II, and everybody's interested in
Vietnam. They have to sell 60 million tickets to break even, so they did what
they had to do. It's a different art, and they obviously had to hype it a bit.
It must have been very difficult to put into a screenplay. I don't know how they
got a workable screenplay out of it, going back and forth from inside Al to
inside Birdy. I think it's pretty impressive they did it. And how could I have
negative feelings about getting so much money? Anyway, the book is intact; they
can't touch that.''

Ultimately, whatever the differences between Mr. Wharton's novel and his own
film, Mr. Parker believes that his movie is ''very truthful to the spirit of the
book. And in the end,'' he adds, ''it's only the spirit of a book you can be
truthful to, because your film has to take on a life of its own.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Alan Parker, Nicholas Cage and Matthew Modine

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              399 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
GETTING THE MESSAGE

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 727 words


MEXICO CITY Even in the democracies, powerful national leaders seldom suffer
direct, face-to-face criticisms of their governments and policies, leveled at
them in public by respected private citizens.

But that's exactly what happened the other day in the Court of Honor in Mexico's
magnificent Palacio Nacional. Pablo Gonzalez Casanova, receiving the National
Prize for History, Social Sciences and Philosophy from President Manuel de la
Madrid Huerta, responded with a tough speech about ''a new concept of democracy
which is emerging in Latin America,'' and pointedly declared:

''Our country fails to reinforce the necessary institutions which would allow
for the sovereignty of the Mexican people, the sovereignty to express itself in
the electoral system, in government, in cultural and economic policies, mainly
in those having to do with social justice.''

Professor Gonzalez Casanova of the Universidad Nacional also pointed out what he
called ''a contradiction between our foreign and domestic policies'' - that
Mexico ''curiously enough'' understands the desire of the people for power
''when it refers to what is new in Central America, but does not always seem to
understand it with the same clarity when it refers to what is new in Mexico.''

President de la Madrid, flanked by members of his Cabinet, listened with a
rather grim expression on his face, but smiled, applauded heartily and shook
hands with Mr. Gonzalez Casanova at the end of the speech. Its tone and content
could not have been unexpected since the professor's views are said to be
well-known, and since the President does not have to agree to a jury's award of
the prestigious National Prizes - another of which, for language and literature,
went to the novelist and diplomat Carlos Fuentes.

An invited audience, including many of Mexico's leading intellectuals, attended
the awards ceremony, and also applauded vigorously at Mr. Gonzalez Casanova's
outspoken response. Afterward many in the audience were eager to assure guests
from the United States that the speech proved that dissent and criticism, even
at the highest level, are acceptable in Mexico.

The event reminded one norteamericano of President Lyndon Johnson's invitation
to artists and intellectuals to meet with him at the White House during the
Vietnam War. When some of his guests responded with criticism of the war, the
supersensitive Mr. Johnson was not pleased, to say the least. No other parallel
comes immediately to mind; but it was rather as if a leading American academic,
accepting a Presidential award from Ronald Reagan, were to criticize to his face
Mr. Reagan's economic or arms control policies.

The speech appears to have been particularly timely in Mexico, where the
Institutional Revolutionary Party (P.R.I.) has been in power since 1929, winning
every presidential and gubernatorial election since then, as well as the vast
majority of local offices. Critics call the P.R.I. authoritarian, despite
Mexico's rather open society; the party's great achievement over the years has
been to maintain political stability in a nation once torn by factional
violence. Now, however, the strongest challenge in years is being mounted by the
conservative National Action Party (PAN), and more political ''pluralism'' is a
much- discussed issue.

Mr. Gonzalez Casanova spoke scathingly of ''a lacerating reality of people
without organizations, without rights, without services or social benefits,''
paid less than the minimum wage, ''who are hungry, who have a high rate of
morbidity and early mortality.'' And he insisted that ''the people want power .
. .  it is no longer sufficient to improve political systems'' - apparently
meaning the centralized control of the P.R.I.

Politically, he said, the need was for the nation to accept ''democracy with all
its consequences, letting win not only the liberal and right-wing parties when
they do win, but also those parties and coalitions which attempt to represent
the working people in its popular, democratic and socialist project.''

All this demanded, Mr. Gonzalez Casanova conceded, a certain idealism - ''an
enormous receptivity to what is new in Mexico.'' How much such receptivity the
P.R.I. can or will muster remains to be seen; but President de la Madrid, at
least, could hardly have received the message more directly.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              400 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SPORTS OF THE TIMES;
EARL BLAIK IS PROUD

BYLINE: By George Vecsey

SECTION: Section 5; Page 5, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1113 words


PONTIAC, Mich.

AT the United States Military Academy, Earl (Red) Blaik is revered as highly as
the West Point graduates who became generals and Presidents and battlefield
heroes. Blaik was the head football coach at the academy for 18 years, yet he
never got to do what Jim Young did yesterday: lead Army into a bowl game.

It was not for lack of success that Blaik or Tom Cahill, whose hopes were dashed
in 1967, never reached a bowl game. The academy never saw fit to send a team to
a postseason game until yesterday when Jim Young's second team ground out a 10-
6 victory over Michigan State in the first Cherry Bowl, to finish with an 8-3-1
record.

Back home in Colorado Springs, the most famous coach in the history of the
academy, called yesterday's game ''the best picture I've seen all year on
television.''

The 87-year-old former coach raved about the determined way Nate Sassaman ran
from quarterback in the wishbone formation: ''It didn't make any difference what
happened, he always got up. I'll tell you, those Cadets can go to chapel tonight
and give thanks for Sassaman.''

Blaik's devotion to the academy is still strong, as shown by the letters he has
written to Young, who formerly coached at Arizona and Purdue. And Blaik has
declined to criticize the policies that kept Army from bowl games in the past.

''It was a different time,'' Blaik said last Friday. ''Things are different
now.''



Long removed from the 121 victories, 33 losses and 10 ties from 1941 through
1958, he said: ''This just proves they had the ability. They had a boy like Doug
Black playing intramural ball and a boy like Sassaman playing defense. Their
coach was very bold to go to a wishbone without any experience in it. It's
amazing, but it just shows that coaching can get more out of them.''

When Blaik was coaching, there were far fewer bowl games. Yesterday's ''first
annual'' Cherry Bowl was yet another made-for-television pairing to entertain
winter-bound sports fans, fortunate to attract two name teams.

But the Cherry Bowl is not, emphatically not, the Rose Bowl or the Orange Bowl
or the Cotton Bowl or the Sugar Bowl. Red Blaik could have had any of those in
his time, if the academy had been interested.

''We almost had the Rose Bowl, before they went to the Big Ten-Pacific- 8
setup,'' Blaik said, recalling his best Glenn Davis-Doc Blanchard teams of
1944-45-46 that were tied only by Notre Dame in 1946.

''But we thought the schedule we carried demanded a lot from our boys,'' Blaik
added. ''We didn't think we should ask for more. They would have had to give up
their Christmas leave, and that was very important to them. Today, they have
more options.''

Blaik said he had always intended to retire ''around the age of 50 because,
let's face it, this is a young man's business,'' but he stayed to coach his son,
Bob, the quarterback, in the early 50's. However, his 1951 team was decimated
when 37 players, including his son, left school because they had violated the
honor system in not reporting cheating by a handful of cadets.

''After those difficulties, I felt I had to bring the program back,'' Blaik
said. ''I thought 1958 was a culmination of it.''



In 1958, his unbeaten team won eight games and was tied by Pittsburgh, with Pete
Dawkins being voted the Heisman Trophy winner as the best player in the country.
But while Army fans were whipping up enthusiasm for a bowl bid, none was
courted.

''At the time, there was a difference of opinion,'' Blaik recalled. ''Many of
the players did not want to go. We were never asked.''

Dawkins, who left the Army a year ago to pursue a career on Wall Street, said
last week: ''At one stage, we took a poll, a written ballot, but the talk was
premature. When we realized we weren't going, we were disappointed. I know I
was, and there was grumbling in the locker room.

''But it was a different era. You accepted the legitimacy of authority. Nobody
challenged the officials' right to make that decision.''

Earl Blaik resigned after the 1958 season, leaving Army near the top of college
football. But dozens of other schools passed the academy in the 60's, as West
Point retained its high entrance requirements and the mandatory service hitch of
five years during the Vietnam War.

Nevertheless, in 1967, Tom Cahill managed to assemble an Army team that won
seven of its first eight games. The Sugar Bowl officials and Louisiana
politicians made a pointed inquiry to West Point, but the Secretary of the Army,
Stanley Reasor, ruled that the Cadets could not play a bowl game in the carnival
atmosphere of New Orleans while a war was going on.

As soon as that decision was learned, every bowl of sugar in the West Point mess
hall disappeared. They were later stacked in a pyramid in Washington Hall, along
with a sign that said: ''No Sugar Bowl for Army football team, no sugar bowls
for corps of cadets.'' Army barely beat Pittsburgh and lost to Navy in a
disheartened finale.

''The players and staff were deeply hurt,'' Tom Cahill, who coached Army from
1966 through 1973, said before covering yesterday's game for a radio station in
Beacon, N.Y. ''It was like training a race horse to run a mile and a quarter and
pulling him up a furlong short.''



Cahill said he thought Secretary Reasor's decision had affected the football
program for years because ''we lost the opportunity for national exposure and
recruiting, and we also lost the chance for a large check that could have helped
the program. But you can't be sure how much that hurt because we were also at
the height of the Vietnam War and that hurt recruiting, too.''

This year's team was only the fifth winning squad since Cahill's sugar- free
team of 1967. The academy has recently upgraded conditions in diet, weight
training and class and duty schedules to make life slightly easier for the
players.

When Jim Young arrived in 1983, he tried to use the Army tradition for
motivation, but several players told him, ''What do 30 years ago have to do with
us?'' This year, Young said, the players were eager to watch ''the old films of
Davis and Blanchard and Dawkins.''

In two seasons, Jim Young brought pride back to Army football, but he never
forgot the tradition. After the Cherry Bowl yesterday, Jim Young said: ''Colonel
Blaik and Tom Cahill and other former coaches could have played in almost any
bowl they wanted. Colonel Blaik has helped at the academy, with his astute
comments. We're just happy the academy let us go to a bowl game.''

And in Colorado Springs, Earl Blaik said: ''This is a good thing for Army. Their
fortunes were down. This enhances the fact that they have come back.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Pete Dawkins and Earl Blaik

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              401 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 23, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A KOREAN EXILE'S LONG JOURNEY HOME

BYLINE: By Sanford J. Ungar; Sanford J. Ungar, a Washington journalist, is
editing a collection of essays on postwar American foreign policy for the
Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4985 words


AS A MAN NAMED KIM Dae Jung sets out on a planned 7,000-mile journey home to
South Korea next month, he will undoubtedly be thinking about Benigno Aquino.
Kim did not know Aquino well. Indeed, they met only once, on March 10, 1983, in
Cambridge, Mass.

But the parallels between their lives are remarkable. As leading opposition
politicians in the Philippines and South Korea, they were jailed, put under
house arrest and sentenced to death by authoritarian East Asian governments that
had American support. In May 1980, Aquino was released to come to the United
States for medical treatment; Kim arrived two and a half years later for the
same reason.

Aquino had recently completed his stay at Harvard University's Center for
International Affairs, where Kim was soon to follow. Over breakfast at Aquino's
home and lunch at the Harvard Faculty Club, they exchanged political ''war
stories'' and advice. The encounter was intense.

Kim remembers that Aquino ''expressed serious dissatisfaction with the American
Government and its support of the dictatorship in his country.'' Indeed, Aquino
confided that he found his own efforts to undercut American support ineffective
and that, despite threats from Philippine President Ferdinand E. Marcos and his
wife, Imelda, he had decided to go home to try to unite the democratic
opposition to the Marcos regime.

Kim and Aquino never saw each other again, because moments after stepping off a
plane at the Manila airport on Aug. 21, 1983, Aquino was shot to death. A year
later, an official commission concluded that Gen. Fabian Ver, the Philippine
armed forces chief of staff and a close associate of Marcos, was responsible for
Aquino's assassination.

With Aquino in mind, Kim's friends have asked the Reagan Administration to
guarantee his safety.

''A CRISIS IS COMING IN KOREA,'' SAYS KIM over lunch, explaining his decision to
give up comfortable exile for almost certain arrest, imprisonment or worse at
the hands of his country's current military leader, Gen. Chun Doo Hwan. Kim
raises his voice slightly, as if to make up for his thick accent: ''If the
situation continues for several more years, South Korea may become another
Philippines . . . and the Philippines is already on its way to becoming another
Vietnam.''

Kim believes that for all the outward signs of stability, economic growth and
international acceptance, South Korea is bound to explode unless its people are
granted fundamental democratic rights. Under Chun, labor unions and farmers'
cooperatives are banned. Conscription into the armed forces is a common
punishment for students who protest restrictions on academic freedom and civil
liberties. The press has been silenced, and only the token opposition parties
approved by the Government may participate in politics. The genuine opposition
forces, Kim says, are becoming more desperate, more radical.

For two years, since Kim and his wife arrived from Seoul, he has carried this
message to church groups, student audiences and large gatherings of Korean-
Americans in various cities. But, Kim acknowledges with a grimace, he has not
succeeded in persuading the United States to press for democratization in South
Korea, ''so I should not stay here anymore.''

Lee Hee Ho, Kim's second wife (his first, the mother of two of his three sons,
died in 1959), has accepted, with a permanent look of worry, his decision to
return. The former general secretary of the Y.W.C.A. movement in South Korea and
herself a well-known dissident, she was, like her husband, on the Chun regime's
list of 99 individuals banned from politics. (On Nov. 30, Chun restored the
political rights of 84, including Lee Hee Ho and Kim's eldest son, but not Kim
himself.) DETESTED BY THE military regime, distrusted by influential business
interests, and resented for his popularity in the United States, Kim must return
to South Korea soon if he is to have any role in its future. Even now, with his
61st birthday approaching, he may find himself regarded as a man whose time has
passed.

Certainly, the decision to go home was affected by the incongruity of Kim's
current situation. Since he finished at Harvard last June, he has languished in
the suburbs of Washington, a few miles from the Pentagon - an unusual place for
''a permanent client'' of Amnesty International, as he calls himself.

Kim's Korean Institute for Human Rights - a counter- Korean Embassy of sorts -
is in a commercial town house in Springfield, Va., across the street from a
Citgo station. A small staff of Koreans and an American editor churn out
speeches and articles.

His home is a spacious, $950- a-month, 16th-floor corner apartment in a new
building, with a security system that might foil even the Korean Central
Intelligence Agency. At the apartment, paid for by sympathetic Korean
businessmen, he holds court over a steady stream of visiting Korean dissidents.

The apartment is filled with Kim's many plants, a hobby developed during his
last stay in a Korean prison. ''My flowers lived longer than anyone else's,'' he
says with a smile. In the soil beside his favorite plant is a small rock that he
brought with him from the prison yard in 1982.

Kim sometimes retreats to his study to work on his calligraphy, large scrolls
and canvases with bold black Chinese characters. Selling for as much as several
thousand dollars apiece, they have become his major fund-raising device. When
Kim feels nostalgic, he watches videotapes of Korean folk dances or of his own
speeches; occasionally, he watches Johnny Carson, although he finds many of the
jokes cryptic.

The Korean activist dresses in well-tailored three-piece suits and penny
loafers. Seated in the back of a maroon Oldsmobile, Kim is driven on his rounds
by Lee Keun Pal, a former Korean diplomat who is now a crony of Kim's and
doubles as his occasional interpreter and press secretary. The car has
Pennsylvania license plates because the monthly payments are made by
Korean-American businessmen and professionals from Philadelphia.

This life is fine for a time, Kim says, but ''my people are suffering.'' With
his name and picture rarely published or broadcast in South Korea, it is likely
that his people are unaware of his efforts. So, he says: ''I must join their
ordeal and struggle. They need my encouragement.''

Kim sighs and runs his hands through his thick, straight black hair. His eyes
light up. ''Even if I am in prison,'' he says, ''that will augment my people's
courage. They will fight for my release, and that will become a new issue of
conflict with the Government.'' KIM DAE JUNG looks like a man in his late 40's.
Actually, he was born into a land- owning family on the island of Hayido, off
the southwestern coast of Korea, on Jan. 6, 1924, during the period of Japanese
colonial rule. After his family moved to the mainland port of Mokpo, in South
Cholla province, he graduated from a commercial high school at the top of his
class. (He later studied for a master's degree in economics at Kyung Hee
University in Seoul.)

During the 1940's, Kim worked for a shipping company and was publisher of a
provincial daily newspaper. ''I was fairly rich,'' he admits, and not especially
concerned with politics until Korea was liberated from Japan at the end of World
War II. In 1946, as Koreans debated how to govern themselves for the first time
in 40 years, he joined a nationalist organization with both pro-Communist and
anti- Communist members. But Korea's division into a Communist North and
pro-Western South was already under way, and Kim says he quickly soured on the
Communists.

Kim was caught in Seoul on business at the time of the North Korean invasion in
June 1950, and he spent 15 days walking home to Mokpo, only to find himself
arrested there as a ''reactionary capitalist'' by the Communist occupying
forces. The North Koreans massacred political prisoners as they retreated before
United Nations troops; of the 220 held in Mokpo, Kim was one of 80 who escaped.

In 1954, after the Korean War, he lost an election for the South Korean National
Assembly. He moved to the capital of Seoul anyway, determined to ''agitate for
democracy'' against the autocratic President Syngman Rhee, who had been
installed by the United States a decade earlier.

Kim lost two more Assembly elections, but he became the official party spokesman
for Prime Minister Chang Myon, or John M. Chang - who had influenced Kim's
decision to become a Roman Catholic in 1956 - during the brief period of
democracy after student demonstrations forced Rhee from power in the spring of
1960. Finally, in 1961, Kim won a seat in the Assembly; but two days later, that
body was dissolved as Gen. Park Chung Hee took power in a coup.

Ever since, Kim has been a thorn in the side of the soldiers running his
country. His civil rights have been officially taken away several times. In a
political system thick with intrigue, outrage and mayhem, Kim has generally
stood out as a man who prefers jail to compromise.

Kim frequently cites the religious basis of his political philosophy. He
believes God has directly intervened on five occasions to save his life, and in
one letter to his wife while he was under a death sentence in 1980, he wrote
that ''no matter how much punishment the authorities mete out . . . I believe
that the Lord . . . will sustain me always.''

Three more times, Kim was elected to the National Assembly, where he
relentlessly opposed Park. In 1971, at the apex of his political power, Kim was
the major opposition candidate for president against him. Alan Krause, who was a
political officer in the American Embassy in Seoul, recalls that Kim ''put on a
great campaign,'' focusing on local issues on which the Government was genuinely
vulnerable. Traveling to provincial towns, he held rallies lasting three or four
hours, giving emotional speeches that were interrupted only by the vast crowds'
laughter and applause.

Officially, Kim won 46 percent of the vote, against Park's 54 percent, and he
has never wavered in his conviction that the presidency was stolen from him by
governmental manipulation.

The close call apparently convinced Park that Kim was even more dangerous than
he had thought. The events of the next several years sound like something out of
James Bond.

Just after the 1971 election, a large truck smashed into Kim's car, causing hip
injuries that are the source of continuing medical problems today, including a
severe limp. Korean officials later acknowledged that the K.C.I.A. was
responsible for this incident.

But the most bizarre event occurred in August 1973, while Kim was in Tokyo
organizing the Japanese branch of a Korean democratic movement. He was kidnapped
from his hotel room and, five days later, turned up outside his home in Seoul,
battered and blindfolded.

In the interim, Kim says, he had been beaten, drugged and taken by car to a
Japanese port, where he was put aboard a ship, tied and bound, with weights
attached to his hands and feet. Just as he thought he was about to be thrown
into the sea, according to Kim, the ship was buzzed by unidentified planes, and
frightened sailors loosened his bonds. His kidnappers ostensibly changed their
minds about killing him and took him home instead. When he got there, he was
punished for his overseas agitation with house arrest.

In October 1979, Park was assassinated by his K.C.I.A. director, and in the
months that followed, the democratic forces - especially Kim Dae Jung and his
archrivals, Kim Young Sam and Kim Jong Pil - quarreled bitterly. The vacuum was
gradually filled by a new faction of the military, represented by Chun Doo Hwan

As students took to the streets in the spring of 1980, Chun instituted an even
more Draconian form of martial law and arrested Kim Dae Jung. Those steps in
turn provoked a 10-day popular uprising in Kwangju, the capital of South Cholla
province. Once Chun had brutally suppressed the insurrection in Kwangju - at
least 1,000 people were killed, hundreds injured - and consolidated his power,
Kim and various protest leaders were charged with being Communists and
attempting to overthrow a legally constituted Government. A military court
sentenced them to death; it was only through the public intervention of both
President Jimmy Carter and President- elect Ronald Reagan, Kim believes, that
his life was spared. The Reagan Administration further credits its ''quiet
diplomacy'' for Kim's release from prison in 1982.

ACCORDING TO ONE American official who was in Seoul at the time, Chun commuted
Kim's sentence in exchange for an invitation to be one of the first foreign
leaders to visit the newly inaugurated President Reagan early in 1981. The
invitation was valuable to Chun, who, as a nonelected leader in a Confucian
society, was struggling to establish his legitimacy.

The relationship between the United States and South Korea is complex and
ambivalent. Most South Koreans over 30 tend to feel profoundly grateful for the
American-led intervention in the Korean War. But younger South Koreans are
resentful of continuing American support for repressive Korean regimes: A 1982
Gallup poll showed that only 28 percent of those age 18 to 24 rated the United
States as the country they ''like most.'' In recent years, American cultural
centers in Pusan, Taegu and Kwangju have been the objects of violent attacks,
not all of which can plausibly be laid to North Korean agents.

For most Americans of all ages, the Korean War is a more hazy, or even
explicitly negative, memory - a withering, inconclusive military engagement that
cost 33,629 American lives but accomplished very little; a precursor, of sorts,
to Vietnam. It is no accident, perhaps, that there is still no national memorial
to the American servicemen who died in Korea.

United States policy in Korea has increasingly been shaped in the Pentagon,
where there is sympathy for Chun's view that security considerations preclude
reckless experiments with democracy. There are still some 41,000 American troops
in Korea, and service along this ever-tense frontier remains a valuable route to
promotion.

In the final year of the Carter Administration, when America seemed embattled
everywhere, the United States military chief in Korea, Gen. John A. Wickham Jr.
(now Army Chief of Staff), released Korean regiments under his command for
''security work'' in Kwangju. Wickham later suggested publicly that the Koreans
were not yet ready for democracy. President Reagan's ambassador in Seoul,
Richard L. (Dixie) Walker, a former professor of international studies at the
University of South Carolina, ridicules anti-Government protesters as immature.
He has maintained a generally acquiescent attitude toward the Chun regime's
crackdown, which has reached a point that gangs of thugs have been sent out to
attack strikers or ''kill Communists.''

Tong Soo Chung, a young, influential Korean-American lawyer in Los Angeles,
traveled to South Korea last summer at the expense of the Seoul Government,
which wanted to impress him with its achievements. Instead, Chung returned
convinced that opposition was building. Describing his meetings with university
students, he says: ''The situation is very grave. An extreme leftist faction is
gaining ground on the campuses.''

Student protests are a permanent feature of Korean politics, but when they
become very large - as they have recently - they are often a sign of profound
discontent in a society that can express it in few other ways. The Chun
Government has adopted a new get-tough policy, sending thousands of policemen
onto campuses: police brutality is now a new cause of discontent. Most
significantly, one massive demonstration at Seoul National University was joined
by 2,000 laborers.

South Korea's economic performance has, experts believe, bought temporary
political stability. Although it is the fifth-largest borrower in the world,
with a public and private foreign debt of $43 billion, the country's growth rate
has lately hovered impressively around 7 percent a year. But South Korea ''has
not yet achieved a stable political system,'' says Bruce Cumings, associate
professor in the University of Washington's School of International Studies and
a leading authority on Korea. Cumings believes that Kim's prediction of an
imminent political explosion is premature; but he does expect a crisis by 1988,
when the succession to Chun coincides with South Korea's playing host to the
summer Olympics.

IF THE CHUN GOVERNment treats Kim's return as a nonevent, it may minimize public
sympathy for him. Of course, if Kim were assassinated on his arrival, the regime
would be the obvious suspect, and it might come crashing down. (One convoluted
theory, encouraged by the South Korean Government and the State Department,
holds that the North Koreans may attempt to kill Kim - for precisely that
reason.)

South Korea has declared that if Kim comes back he must serve the remaining 17
1/2 years of his 20-year sentence. The Korean Embassy in Washington refuses to
discuss publicly Kim's planned return, but one official there confides that ''my
Government will react with a sense of equanimity and maturity. It will show
political sophistication.'' The best that could mean for Kim is house arrest.

Despite America's strong influence on South Korean affairs for four decades, the
Reagan Administration says it cannot become involved with Kim's plans. His
overtures for a meeting with the President have been ignored. No American
official has tried to dissuade him from going back, but no one has promised to
send even a private message to Chun expressing concern for Kim's well-being.

The State Department stands by the Carter Administration's assertion in 1980
that the sedition charges against Kim were ''far-fetched.'' This year, it has
expressed the modest hope that Kim's ''return will be trouble-free, insofar as
his personal situation is concerned.''

One American career diplomat spoke bluntly: ''We've bailed Kim out at least
three times. How much do we have to do for this guy? Every time he jumps back
into the pot, do we have to keep him from cooking?''

ONE OF THE MAIN differences between Kim and his rival Kim Young Sam, who has
remained in South Korea, is that Kim Dae Jung has adamantly positioned himself
on the left. The two Kims recently formed an alliance, and they promised not to
undercut each other, but few expect it to hold.

Kim Dae Jung has long advocated a radical redistribution of income, along with
tighter controls on big business. He points out that 10 individuals dominate 53
percent of the country's gross national product, while 59 percent of laborers
receive below-subsistence wages of $100 a month or less. He also advocates a
system of local autonomy; since 1961, every official at every level in South
Korea has been named by the president.

Kim does support the current policies of rapid economic growth and heavy
exports, vigilance toward North Korea and friendship with the United States.
However, ''under a democratic government,'' Kim says, ''South Korea would become
so strong, because of the people's support, that we would not need U.S. troops
indefinitely. They could be gradually withdrawn.'' The next step, Kim adds,
would be to negotiate with the Communist Government in Pyongyang for peaceful
reunification of the two Koreas, or at least for a modus vivendi of the sort
that now prevails between East and West Germany.

To many, that is a hopelessly naive proposition, a misreading of South Korea's
inability to defend itself and of North Korea's hostility - as evidenced by
repeated efforts to send saboteurs to the Blue House, South Korea's presidential
headquarters, and by the bomb attack in Rangoon, Burma, in 1983 that killed 17
key figures in Chun's Government.

On the other hand, North and South Korea have been talking again in the ''truce
village'' of Panmunjom, in the demilitarized zone that divides them. South Korea
accepted flood relief aid from the less-populated North during the fall, and
there is discussion of resuming trade, transport and other economic relations
that have been suspended for 35 years.


But only days after North and South Korean officials had agreed to discuss the
reunion of families separated by the Korean War, Northern soldiers charged
across the military demarcation line to chase a Soviet student trying to defect.
The ensuing gunfire killed three North Koreans, one South Korean and injured at
least six others, including an American soldier.

A North-South detente has great urgency for South Korea, because it would
facilitate the success of the 1986 Asian Games, scheduled for Seoul, and the
Olympics there in 1988. Already the Soviet Union is complaining that the
Olympics should be moved to a more desirable location. The best insurance
against a boycott would be North Korean participation.

Such developments would provide an enormous boost for Chun. Never a popular
figure, and further damaged by financial scandals involving his wife, he has
announced plans to step down in 1988, after completing the seven-year term to
which he was named by an electoral college in 1981 in the absence of a popular
election. Many are skeptical of his intentions, but Chun himself pressed for a
constitutional amendment limiting the presidency to a single term.

Kim believes that if a fair election were held tomorrow, he would be elected
president by a substantial margin. His advocates in the United States admire
that confidence and Kim's previous record, including his long advocacy of
reduced tensions on the Korean peninsula. ''He is absolutely committed to the
kind of philosophy and ideals that the United States stands for,'' says
Representative Barbara Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, co-sponsor of an appeal
on Kim's behalf to the American and South Korean Governments. Donald S.
Macdonald, research professor of Korea studies at Georgetown University,
believes that Kim is ''very much alive as a symbolic opposition figure in Korea.
. . . Given an opportunity, he could rebuild his organization quickly.''

That assumption is not universally accepted. One State Department official
insists, ''His popularity was last tested in 1971, and he's been out of touch
for a long time. . . .''

Some other high-ranking American diplomats question Kim's sincerity, suggesting
that if he came to power he would be as authoritarian as most other Korean
leaders have been. However, William H. Gleysteen Jr., American Ambassador in
Seoul from 1978 to 1981, believes that Kim ''is not a phony. He's not just using
democratic lingo to disguise a traditional Korean despot.''

But Tong Soo Chung of Los Angeles, who says he instinctively admires Kim,
believes that the Chun Government's ''extensive propaganda campaign against him
has discredited him somewhat,'' to the point that many South Koreans believe
that Kim has pro-Communist sympathies. The Government's efforts, Chung observes,
have combined with a new questioning of Korean traditions to write off an entire
generation of political leaders who were important 10 years ago.

An official at the Korean Embassy in Washington puts it more simply: ''The South
Korean people are getting rich. They're not so interested in politicians
anymore.''

There are other negative factors Kim must face. His origins in South Cholla
province work against him. It is a relatively poor and overpopulated region with
a tradition of radicalism, especially since a peasant uprising there in 1894.
There is a strong regional prejudice against people from Cholla, who are mocked
as earthy and stubborn.

Kim is also anathema to the South Korean military, which accuses him of being
soft on North Korea and not supporting adequate defense expenditures. In
addition, the giant conglomerates that dominate the Korean economy fear his
notions of industrial democracy and a more equitable distribution of wealth.

Many South Koreans may blame Kim for their bad memories of two particularly
chaotic periods in recent history - that of the Chang Myon Government following
Rhee's resignation in 1960 and the unrest after Park's assassination in 1979. In
the former case, recalls one American official, democracy flourished to the
point that ''seventh graders were out on boycott; the press was so free that the
newspapers were blackmailing people.'' In early 1980, insists Ambassador
Gleysteen, Kim refused to counsel moderation among protesters, and therefore
''has some responsibility for the clampdown'' that followed.

Furthermore, some Korean intellectuals who have long revered Kim are now
offended by his appeal for American sponsorship of his return. For them, his
tactics arouse centuries-old nationalistic resentment of sadae chuui (literally,
''serving the great''), or the reliance upon powerful external forces to
influence events inside Korea.

NONETHELESS, IT IS impossible to gauge the potential influence of Kim if he were
again allowed to operate freely inside South Korea. If ''Koreatown,'' the vast
exile community in Los Angeles - at 250,000, the largest concentration of
Koreans outside the Orient - is any indication, he is still quite popular. This
is a community with public schools in which most of the children speak Korean,
with Korean-style spas and a Korean channel on cable television. At least six
newspapers and magazines (mostly Korean-language) address the concerns of
Koreans and Korean-Americans.

According to Yung Chul Lo, secretary general of the Korean Federation of Los
Angeles, the majority of overseas Koreans do not accept the legitimacy of Chun's
rule over their homeland. ''If a man rapes a woman, he does not automatically
become her husband,'' Yung said. ''We do not recognize Chun as president.''
Speaking personally, not for his organization, Yung called Kim Dae Jung the
''spiritual leader'' of his people.

Other admirers are concerned about whether it is realistic of Kim to believe
that his program would really work in a divided Korea. Said Miri Kim, a
24-year-old teacher: ''Can you really have a democracy in Korea like the one in
the United States, or does it require an adjusted form?'' KIM HAS CALLED
ATtention to his impending return with a swirl of appearances, meetings,
speeches and interviews. As the countdown shortens, he is even more direct about
requesting what he calls ''moral support.'' He tells audiences: ''Please impress
your Government, Congressmen and the public to support our people's cause.''

During what may be his last weeks of freedom, Kim seems both exhausted and
exhilarated. Answering questions after delivering a speech, he displays the
English-language version of the fiery oratory that was his trademark in Korea.
He uses his cane less often now, and his limp has turned into a kind of wobble.
Sitting down with a Harvard mug filled with coffee, he seems to relax as he
talks to visitors with the aid of a well- thumbed Korean-English pocket
dictionary.

In expansive moments, Kim reflects on the problems that beset leaders of the
American and French Revolutions. Benjamin Franklin, he observes pointedly, never
became President, but is still regarded as ''a very great man.''

If Kim proceeds as planned at this writing, he will be back in Korea before the
military regime's legislative elections in February. And he hopes his return
will be something of an international media event, with an entourage including
Corazon Aquino, the widow of his Philippine counterpart.

So far, the Chun Government appears in no mood to compromise with Kim. In a
letter to Senator Edward M. Kennedy at the end of October, the Korean Ambassador
to Washington, former Gen. Lew Byong Hion, wrote that Kim's ''past activities .
. . have negatively influenced national harmony and political development in
Korea.'' In the United States, he said, Kim had ''spread false, distorted and
exaggerated views of the political and human-rights situation in Korea.''

ON A FRIDAY NIGHT in November, the Kims held a ''farewell party'' at their
apartment for two dozen American friends and supporters - the priest who had
sheltered them in his convent when they first arrived, human-rights activists
who had traveled to Korea and lobbied with the State Department on Kim's behalf,
a number of old Korea hands and a few members of Washington's permanent protest
community.

After a feast of kalbi and other Korean delicacies, Kim put on the inevitable
videotape of Korean folk dances. Later, the guests were urged by Pharis Harvey,
executive director of the North American Coalition for Human Rights in Korea, to
find new ways to persuade the Reagan Administration and the Chun regime that
Kim's well-being was now ''in the national interest'' of the United States. More
than 60 representatives had signed a letter on Kim's behalf, he noted, and the
recruiting of signatures was under way in the Senate; former Secretaries of
State would be asked to lend their prestige to Kim's cause, and prominent
Americans were being recruited to accompany the Kims to Seoul.

Even without a guarantee of safety, Kim said, ''My return itself will be a very
significant event for my people . . . I have no desire to provoke social chaos .
. . I only hope not to meet Aquino's fate.''

As the evening wore on, there was talk of finding a way to threaten South
Korea's trade relationship with the United States if Kim were again harmed or
imprisoned. It was generally agreed that it would be useful to
''internationalize'' Kim's cause by recruiting more active support for him in
other parts of the world. Finally, one guest urged the group not to be somber,
but to ''look forward to the day when President Kim Dae Jung invites us all to
dinner at the Blue House.'' Everyone applauded faintly and then stood. Each
person had his photograph taken with Kim, put on his coat and shoes, and went
home.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kim Dae Jung

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              402 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INMATE RELEASE HITS A SNAG IN HANOI

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1142 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, Dec. 23


Vietnam may not agree to release inmates of ''re- education'' camps for
resettlement in the United States unless Washington promises to curtail what
Hanoi describes as anti-Vietnamese activities among exiles in America, officials
here told two American Congressmen this weekend.

The Foreign Ministry statements have raised an unexpected obstacle to a Reagan
Administration plan, announced in September by Secretary of State George P.
Shultz, to admit 8,000 to 10,000 inmates of the camps. Many of the inmates were
imprisoned because of their ties to the United States or the American-backed
former Government of South Vietnam.

On Saturday Phan Doan Nam, an assistant to Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, met
with the two visiting Congressmen, Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who
is chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific
Affairs, and Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey and a member of the
committee. Mr. Nam told them that ''over the last few months'' Hanoi had
concluded that Vietnamese living in the United States and Western Europe were
supporting and organizing attacks on Vietnamese abroad and plotting subversion
at home.

Four Sentenced to Death


In Ho Chi Minh City last week Vietnam tried 21 people and sentenced four of them
to death for plotting rebellion. Nearly 100 more suspects are reported to be
under arrest. Hanoi has charged that they were trained by China and Thailand and
that at least some had links with the United States Embassy in Bangkok.

China, Thailand and the United States have denied the allegations.

Today the two Congressmen and their aides met privately with Foreign Minister
Thach to discuss a range of issues. Mr. Solarz said after the meeting that Hanoi
appeared to be less willing to cooperate with the United States in arranging the
resettlement of political prisoners than it was in October, when the two nations
met on the subject in Geneva under the auspices of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. The idea of sending re- education camp inmates to the
United States was first proposed by Vietnam.

Hanoi is now saying it wants concrete assurances Washington will curb Vietnamese
exiles, Mr. Solarz said. He added that Hanoi sought to curtail not only what it
regarded as activities directed against Vietnam, but also attacks ''against our
friends in Central America.'' Some Vietnamese-Americans are reported to have
joined rebels fighting the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua.

'All Over the United States'


Mr. Nam, who is considered a rising star in Hanoi's Foreign Ministry, said on
Saturday that there appeared to be anti-Vietnamese organizations ''all over the
United States.''

He said these activists had been responsible for attacks on the Vietnamese
Mission to the United Nations in New York and on a Vietnamese writer slain in
Los Angeles.

(In Washington, a State Department official said the United States was not aware
of any violent attacks on the Vietnamese Mission. He said that there had been
demonstrations in recent years but that they had been orderly. The official said
he had no details on the possible slaying of a writer.)

''These people are criminals,'' Mr. Nam said of past and present political
prisoners. ''In this case, how can we let them go? It is impossible to hand over
weapons to be fired against us.''

Mr. Nam made clear, however, that Hanoi did not believe rebellion within Vietnam
was being directed from the American Embassy in Bangkok, despite what he said
was evidence of meetings subversives had there with United States diplomats. He
and other officials place most of the blame on China.

Hanoi's demands that the United States curb anti-Vietnamese dissent posed
problems, Mr. Solarz said, ''because their definition of subversive activities
could include anything from writing articles or taking part in demonstrations to
sending arms.''

Optimism on Amerasians


He said that while Congress and the American public were strongly in favor of
seeing existing laws on illegal activities against foreign governments enforced,
Hanoi had to understand that there were certain American freedoms that must be
respected.

In talks with the Congressmen this weekend, Hanoi reportedly remained willing to
move quickly on another refugee matter, the resettlement in the United States of
children fathered by Americans in Vietnam. ''They are already U.S. citizens,''
Mr. Nam said Saturday. ''And you should look after them. We would give them all
up in six months.''

Mr. Solarz and Mr. Torricelli are on a six-day visit to Hong Kong, Thailand,
Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos. Mr. Solarz also visited Bhopal, India, to talk to
officials about the disaster at the Union Carbide pesticide factory there.

The stop in Cambodia, scheduled for Monday, has brought criticism from members
of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which does not recognize the
Vietnamese-backed Government of Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh. The United States
also does not recognize the Phnom Penh Government.

Thailand's Foreign Minister, Siddhi Savetsila, said that the Congressmen's visit
to Cambodia ''would send the wrong signal to Hanoi.'' Vietnam has 150,000 to
180,000 troops in Cambodia to support the Government, which it installed in 1979
after invading the country in late 1978 tooverthrow the Government of Pol Pot.

Mr. Solarz has told Vietnamese officials that better ties between Hanoi and the
United States, which now have no diplomatic relations, depend on Vietnamese
willingness to withdraw from Cambodia. He is going to Phnom Penh, he said, to
assess the position of the Government there on various proposals that could lead
to Vietnamese withdrawal.




U.S. Hopes for Formal Talks




WASHINGTON, Dec. 23 - State Department officials said today that the United
States hoped to have formal talks with Vietnam to gain the release of inmates in
re-education camps.

The officials said Vietnam had not yet formally told Washington why it had
delayed the release. The United States, one official said, views resettlement of
the inmates as a humanitarian gesture with little political cost to Hanoi.

Another official said the Administration could not limit the rights of
Vietnamese exiles in this country to call for an end to Communist rule. ''There
are obviously free speech guarantees,'' he said. ''If the Vietnamese are worried
about advocacy, we wouldn't be able to satisfy them.''

The official added, however, that American laws against arms shipments by
private citizens to resistance movements elsewhere could and would be enforced.

Administration officials have been skeptical for several months that Vietnam
would follow through on its promise to release the political prisoners held in
the camps.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              403 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 24, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


MONDAY, DECEMBER 24, 1984 International

Chinese-Soviet cooperation pacts have been agreed on by Peking and Moscow, China
announced. The four agreements include the first long- term trade pact that the
two Communist powers have negotiated since their break a quarter of a century
ago. (Page 1, Column 6.)

Knives and forks for China, instead of the chopsticks that have been used for
3,500 years, have been urged by one of China's leaders. (1:5.)

At least 25 people were killed and more than 40 wounded when two explosions
ripped through an Italian train as it passed through an 11.6-mile tunnel 31
miles north of Florence, heading for ski areas in the Alps. The blasts set off a
flurry of claims and denials by anonymous telephone callers who said they were
speaking for right-wing and left-wing terrorist groups. (1:4.)

French Socialism has not worked out as planned in President Francois
Mitterrand's three and a half years in office. The Socialist Government's
embrace of ideas and procedures that were anathema to it until a year or two ago
has brought disappointment to leftist militants, praise for pragmatism from
non-Socialists outside France, and bewilderment among many French. (1:2.)

Vietnam may not agree to release ''re-education'' camp inmates for resettlement
in the United States unless Washington promises to curtail what Hanoi describes
as anti-Vietnamese activities among exiles in the United States, two Congressmen
who visited Hanoi were told. (3:1.) National

Governors facing a cut in Federal aid under President Reagan's budget and tax
proposals are criticizing his budget and tax plans. They say they would lose
billions of dollars of Federal support at a time when they have been asked to
take greater responsibility for domestic programs. The Federal-revenue sharing
program would be elminated under one of the budget proposals tentatively
approved by Mr. Reagan. (1:5.)

William J. Schroeder's strokes were not caused by his artificial heart, the
chief medical spokesman at his hospital in Louisville said. The conclusion was
reached after a highly specialized test found no clots in Mr. Schroeder's
artificial heart or in the arteries of his chest, neck or brain. Blood clots
were suspected as the cause of the strokes. (1:1.)

The first artificial comet should be seen throughout much of Western North
America if early morning skies are clear tomorrow. The comet will be
artificially produced in the southern sky by the release of barium vapor from a
West German spacecraft 70,000 miles above the Pacific off Peru. (1:3.)

The mine on fire in Utah in which at least 25 miners died, was being sealed up
to try to extinquish the fire that trapped the miners and prevented the removal
of their bodies. The bodies of 12 miners were found Saturday at the Wilberg Mine
near Huntington, dashing hopes that any of the 26 men and one woman had survived
after the fire broke out Wednesday. Thirteen bodies were found Friday. Two other
workers are presumed dead. (6:1.)

The Republican Party's influence is stronger than it has been in many years,
with about as many people now identifying themselves as Republicans as
Democrats, according to recent New York Times/CBS News Polls. (9:1.)

The Giants beat the Rams, 16-13, in their first test in the National Football
League playoffs in Anaheim, Calif. (25:6.) Metropolitan

Increased subway police patrols were requested by Mayor Koch for holiday crowds
as detectives searched for the gunman who shot four young men on a subway train
in lower Manhattan Saturday. The sharply increased patrols placed more than
3,000 city and transit police officers on duty from Sunday afternoon to midnight
tonight. (1:1.)

Morality should be the driving force among real estate developers to provide
low-income housing for the poor, Archbishop John J. O'Connor, head of the Roman
Catholic Archdiocese of New York said. On a television interview show, the
Archbishop said that, if moral suasion fails, then ''maybe government
intervention would be the way to go.'' He also said a change in the wording of a
mayoral order prohibiting job discrimination against homosexuals might resolve a
dispute between the archdiocese and the city over that policy. (23:5.)

HOLIDAY TOMORROW

Tomorrow is Christmas Day. Following are holiday schedules:

Parking - Sunday rules.

Sanitation - No collections; no street

cleaning.

Federal, state and municipal offices

- Closed.

Post offices - Closed; special delivery and express mail only.

Banks - Closed.

Stock and commodity markets -

Closed.

Transportation - Subways, buses,

Long Island Rail Road and Metro-

North on Sunday and holiday schedules; some N.J. Transit schedules

changed.

Libraries - Closed.

Schools - Closed.


Page 33

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              404 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 26, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM ATTACKS CAMOBIA REBELS NEAR THAI BORDER



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, Dec. 25


Vietnam mounted an offensive against at least four Cambodian resistance camps
along the Thai-Cambodian border today, sending 63,000 civilians fleeing into
Thailand, Thai military officers and international relief officials said.

Backed by tanks and artillery barrages, Vietnamese troops seized a section of
Rithisen, the largest Cambodian resistance camp, and drove against another at
Ampil, Lieut. Gen. Pichitr Kullavanijava told reporters in Bangkok. Fighting was
also reported at Obok and Nong Chan.



3 Major Resistance Groups

The Vietnamese, who invaded Cambodia on Dec. 25, 1978, are fighting three major
resistance groups: the Communist Khmer Rouge they deposed, the non-Communist
Khmer People's National Liberation Front and a faction loyal to Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the former Cambodian head of state.

International aid sources here said they could not estimate the number killed
because the fighting made it impossible to reach the camps, which are inside
Cambodia near the Thai frontier.

Thai military sources said casualties among the Cambodians were heavy because of
intense howitzer and mortar barrages. They also said Soviet-built T-54 tanks
were used against Rithisen and Ampil.

''It is an emergency situation,'' Jean- Paul Fallet, chief of the International
Red Cross in Thailand, said.



59 Are Reported Evacuated

Mr. Fallet said 59 wounded Cambodians were evacuated from three camps to be
treated by doctors for the International Red Cross in Thai frontier hospitals.

Mr. Fallet said 61,000 Cambodians, virtually the entire population of Rithisen,
had sought refuge from aid officials in the nearby town of Nern Din Daeng. They
were given food, water and shelter, he said.

In addition, he said, the entire population of Obok, some 2,000 people, had fled
into Thailand while more than 20,000 residents of Ampil were prepared to get
out.

(The Vietnamese set fire to the Nong Samet camp after seizing it, Reuters quoted
a Thai Army commander as saying. Maj. Gen. Salya Sripen said the camp was
destroyed after being occupied by about 1,000 Vietnamese troops supported by
artillery, tanks and armored personnel carriers, the news agency reported.) The
attacks were described as being Hanoi's most intense since this year's dry
season campaign in mid-November.

All four camps cited in Thai military reports today are controlled by the Khmer
People's National Liberation Front, which has increasingly been regarded as the
most viable opposition to Hanoi and the pro-Vietnamese regime in Cambodia.
Prince Sihanouk's group is small, and the Khmer Rouge left at least a million
people dead after its rule.

Early Morning Attack


Thai military sources said Rithisen was being defended by 3,500 to 4,000 Khmer
People's National Liberation Front soldiers while Ampil had 4,000 to 5,000
defenders.

General Pichitr said units of Vietnam's 9th Division started the attack against
Ampil at 3 A.M., and the assault on Rithisen began almost three and a half hours
later. The camps are within 12 miles of each other along the central tier of the
Thai-Cambodian border, as is Nong Chan. Obok is farther north.

The guerrillas at Rithisen were forced to pull back from front-line positions in
face of the attack by some 1,000 infantrymen, supported by artillery strikes and
at least four tanks, General Pichitr said.

Reporters near Rithisen saw smoke rising over the camp, and Thai commanders near
the scene said the Vietnamese were burning down sections of the sprawling
encampment.

General Pichitr said the fighting had not spilled over into Thailand, but he
noted that residents of two Thai villages near Rithisen had moved deeper into
Thai territory.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Cambodia

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              405 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

             December 26, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

DISTILLING THE YEAR INTO TV MOMENTS

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 30, Column 4; Cultural Desk


The networks are now melting down the hundreds of hours of videotape they have
shot into year-end summaries - a few minutes of television memory that will run
on the nightly news programs on Dec. 31. The task of creating a video time
capsule of the year has become, say the producers and editors working on them,
increasingly Herculean as the number of video images created in America and
around the world grows exponentially.

''You take three pictures or four pictures lasting 15 seconds, and that's what
you can give to the tragedy of Bhopal,'' said David Guilbault, the ABC producer
assigned to create the network's year-end review from boxes containing 3,600
videocassettes. ''You have to take the entire campaign and do it in 25
seconds.''

''In what we're doing there are no captions,'' said Frank Shanbacker, the NBC
producer who reviewed 500 hours of videotape for his fourth annual year-end
summary, ''and we have far less time for the viewer to look at a given picture
than he would in a magazine. These pictures have to be identifiable, and they
have to have a connective tissue to tell the story of 1984 by themes.''

Evoking events with a few seconds of film was not unlike shooting a movie of the
year, the two producers said. ''You are getting a sense of the mood of the
year,'' said Mr. Guilbault. ''While 1983 was a very somber year, this year is a
mix.



A Choice of Moments

''You start with President Reagan at the State of the Union,'' he said. ''We go
on to the beginning of the campaign, look at the superpowers, the Marines in
Beirut, the embassy bombings.'' He began ticking off the film images he had been
looking at. ''The recognition of Vietnam veterans, the Tomb of the Unknown
Soldier, Duarte, Gandhi, the McDonald's massacre, the conventions, the election,
Miss America, John DeLorean, Baby Fae, William Schroeder, the Mexico City Fire,
the space shuttle, the Olympics, Ethiopia.''

Mr. Guiltbault said the tape he was preparing would be six minutes long.

The Cable News Network, unlike the major networks, has almost limitless hours in
which to review the year. ''We have prepared 32 year-end reviews for the next
two weeks,'' said Stacy Jolna, a CNN producer. ''Each one is three to four
minutes.'' The CNN news bureaus reached into the videotape files to which they
had access to review subjects that stretched in detail from the Democrats to
home entertainment. ''We've prepared summaries of the year's events in capital
punishment, terrorism, the auto industry, AIDs, the Supreme Court and
Hollywood,'' said Mr. Jolna. ''Television makes stories instantly memorable.''

He said television had created striking images of the year: ''Bill Shroeder
drinking a beer, pictures of war in Lebanon, the shuttle images from outer space
- space always grabs me in the gut - any of the pictures from the campaign
trail, Geraldine Ferraro dancing with her kids.''



Emotional Height

But of all of them, Mr. Jolna said, ''the Ethiopian pictures, that's it. As far
as emotion and drama, the pictures of starving Ethiopian children were it for
1984.''

So far as image of the year in America, the one picture that stood above the
others was ''the Democrats all holding hands at the conventions: the emotion of
a long, hard battle of very differing people and viewpoints coming together in
an American media tradition.''

For a long time, the visual evocations of a year's passage have belonged to
photographers in magazines whose freedom and use of color allow them to create a
new annual memory of the world's events year after year. But with the
improvement of technology, the video image has become not only as pervasive as
film photography, but has achieved the power to create its own record of the
year.

Despite its eloquence and power, television has some built-in limitations: ''We
are not going to use Mr. Reagan's age comment from the debate,'' Mr. Schanbacker
said. ''So many events from the campaign are so fresh in people's minds. They've
seen them time after time. And we've only got four-and-a-half minutes.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              406 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 27, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

VIETNAM'S TROOPS IN CAMBODIA TAKE A BIG REBEL CAMP



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1126 words

DATELINE: NONG SAMET, Thailand, Dec. 26


Vietnamese troops overran the largest rebel camp in Cambodia today in an attack
that Thai officials said caused scores of casualties, many among civilians.

The attack at the Rithisen camp came a day after Vietnamese troops, in the most
intense fighting of the current dry season, attacked at least four Cambodian
rebel camps including Rithisen. The attacks were estimated to have sent 63,000
civilians fleeing into Thailand, including about 61,000 from Rithisen.

Westerners who have been following developments in the border area said the
fighting today continued as the rebels mounted counterattacks. They predicted
that the combat would spread as Vietnamese forces tried to wipe out other
guerrilla bases before the start of the spring monsoon season.

Tanks Reported Inside Camp


Thai military and Cambodian guerrilla sources said the Vietnamese had positioned
tanks inside the Rithisen camp and were warding off the guerrillas'
counterattacks.

(In Washington, the State Department criticized the Vietnamese action, calling
it ''contemptible.'')

Sawanit Kongsiri, a spokesman for Thailand's Foreign Ministry, described the
Vietnamese attack today as ''cruel, savage and brutal,'' saying Hanoi's troops
had employed artillery and tank guns against civilians, including children.

He said that the fighting had not spilled over into Thailand but that Thai
military officers were closely watching the situation along the frontier.

Reliable casualty figures were not available. Bun Soi, a guerrilla leader, said
10 guerrillas had been killed and 14 wounded in the fighting at the Rithisen
camp, which had been controlled by guerrillas of the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front.

Thais Put Dead at 55


But Thai military officials said 55 guerrillas had been killed and 47 wounded,
while casualties among Rithisen's civilians were put at 63 killed and 87
wounded.

The International Red Cross, offering emergency medical services along the
border, said 59 wounded civilians were treated Tuesday and today. From the aid
stations established by international relief agencies across the border in
Thailand, the civilian refugees who had fled from Rithisen could see smoke from
their former homes, set ablaze by the Vietnamese.

The Vietnamese attacks have focused on the anti-Communist Khmer People's
National Liberation Front and, to a lesser extent, the Communist Khmer Rouge.
There is also a third, smaller rebel group that is loyal to Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, the former chief of state.

The three groups are allied in a coalition against the Vietnamese, who invaded
Cambodia in late 1978 and set up a pro-Hanoi Government in Phnom Penh, the
capital. Battles along the Thai-Cambodian border, where20 rebel camps are
situated, have continued for the last five years.

''The Vietnamese are trying to pin the resistance down at the border now, and
then try to semiseal it to stop infiltration into the interior,'' said one
Westerner who has been following the fighting. The non-Communist Khmer
Liberation Front has said the Vietnamese are circulating leaflets stating their
goal of wiping out all guerrilla camps along the Thai-Cambodian border.

Dry Season Aids Vietnamese


The Vietnamese prefer to fight in the dry season, when their tanks and trucks
can roll, while the guerrillas prefer the monsoon season, which begins as early
as March each year. During the last rainy season the guerrillas penetrated
deeply into Cambodia's interior.

The Westerner who has been watching developments in the border area said the
Vietnamese had been building roads and improving bridges in recent months to
make it easier for them to operate during the heavy rains.

Lia Ne, the Khmer People's National Liberation Front commander at Rithisen, told
reporters that the defenders had split up into groups of 20 to 30 guerrillas
each for the counterattacks. He said his forces had been able to retake a
northern section of the sprawling camp.

The guerrilla chief said the fighting involved 1,500 infantry soldiers and five
tanks on the Vietnamese side, while there were 3,500 to 4,000 guerrilla
fighters.


U.S. Condemns Attacks

By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

WASHINGTON, Dec. 26 - The State Department today condemned the Vietnamese
attacks on Cambodian camps alongside the Thai border as ''contemptible'' because
of the effect on the thousands of Cambodian civilians who were forced to flee
into Thailand.

The department noted, in a statement, that the Vietnamese attacks on Tuesday
fell exactly six years after Hanoi's forces, in a similar Dec. 25 attack,
invaded Cambodia. The statement said it was time for Vietnam to stop acting in
defiance of the United Nations General Assembly, which has regularly called for
it to withdraw from Cambodia and allow free elections to be held.

At the same time, President Reagan, in a statement issued by the White House,
denounced the continuing Soviet military occupation of Afghanistan. Marking the
fifth anniversary of the large-scale Soviet military movement into Afghanistan
on Dec. 27, 1979, Mr. Reagan said that ''the presence of Soviet occupying forces
in Afghanistan constitutes a serious impediment to the improvement of our
bilateral relations.'' The President called for ''a prompt, negotiated end to
this brutal conflict.''

State Department officials, in discussing the latest Vietnamese attacks on the
border camps in Cambodia, said the Vietnamese were clearly trying to inflict a
major military and psychologial blow to the anti-Communist Cambodian resistance
groups.

Guerrillas Based in Camps


More than 85,000 Cambodian civilians have been living in the primitive camps
along the border, together with several thousand armed Cambodian guerrillas who
oppose the Vietnamese- backed regime of Heng Semrin. The State Department
officials said that the raids were apparently directed chiefly against the camps
loyal to the anti-Communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front, led by
former Prime Minister Son Sann, who is backed by the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations and the United States.

Mr. Son Sann, and the former Cambodian chief of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk,
have formed a coalition with Pol Pot, the Communist leader, whose ruthless
Government was overthrown by the Vietnamese in 1978. The United States and most
other nations continue to support the seating of the coalition group in the
United Nations, although Washington has nothing to do with Mr. Pol Pot's
organization, which receives military and other aid from China.

Mr. Son Sann has repeatedly sought American military aid for his several
thousand guerrillas, but has been turned down. Instead, he is said to get arms
from such countries as Singapore and China.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: December 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
 A front-page picture caption from United Press International on Thursday, about
the Vietnamese attack on a rebel camp in Cambodia, misidentified the body of
water the refugees were crossing. It was an antitank ditch.

GRAPHIC: photo of soldier (page A6); photo of refugees

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              407 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 27, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI IS FAULTED ON CAMBODIA WAR

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 679 words

DATELINE: VIENTIANE, Laos, Dec. 26


A Congressional delegation that completed a tour of Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos
today has concluded that Vietnam has not yet demonstrated a willingness to begin
serious talks to end the civil war in Cambodia.

Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who is chairman of the
House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Asian and Pacific Affairs, said in an
interview today at the end of the five-day trip that he told the Vietnamese that
the unresolved issue of Cambodia stood in the way of improved ties with
Washington. Vietnam, the strongest military power in Southeast Asia, and the
United States have no formal diplomatic relations.

It was important, Mr. Solarz said, for Hanoi to hear from members of the
Democratic Party that ''American policy toward Vietnam enjoys broadly based,
bipartisan support.''

Vietnam, which invaded Cambodia in 1978 to overthrow the Khmer Rouge Government
led by Pol Pot, still has about 180,000 soldiers in the country. Hanoi says
these are necessary to the security of the Heng Samrin regime, which it
installed and which is under attack by three rebel groups.

Change in Stand on Cambodia


Mr. Solarz, who was accompanied on the trip by a member of his committee,
Representative Robert G. Torricelli, Democrat of New Jersey, said that Hanoi
seemed to have altered its position since 1981, when it rejected any change in
the status quo in Cambodia.

He said the Vietnamese now seemed more willing to consider the withdrawal of
troops as well as moves toward self-determination for the Cambodian people.

''But,'' Mr. Solarz said after a meeting Tuesday in Phnom Penh with the
Cambodian Foreign Minister, Hun Sen, ''if Vietnam and Cambodia were really
serious about seeking a settlement, they would be willing to meet with Son Sann
and Prince Sihanouk. Or they would be willing to spell out in more detail the
kind of political arrangement they would be willing to consider in order to
achieve national reconciliation in Cambodia.''

''Failure to do either,'' Mr. Solarz continued, ''suggests that what they are
engaged in is an effort to drive a wedge between China, and Asean and the
West.''

Backing for Rebel Factions


The United States, other Western nations and Asean - the Association of Southest
Asian Nations, comprising Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Brunei and
the Philippines - support, to one degree or another, the non-Communist Cambodian
rebel factions of Mr. Son Sann, a former Cambodian Prime Minister, and Prince
Norodom Sihanouk.

China, while aiding the three-part rebel coalition, has been almost alone in
continuing to back the Khmer Rouge.The Vietnamese and the Heng Samrin group,
while saying they would consider talking with the leaders of the two
non-Communist groups, insist on a repudiation by them of Pol Pot, who headed a
Government that was responsible for the death of at least a million Cambodians
from 1975 to 1978.

Peking says it will not withdraw its support from Pol Pot as long as Vietnamese
troops remain in Cambodia.

The Congressional delegation, which met today in Vientiane with the Laotian
Foreign Minister, Phoum Sipaseuth, said that Laos, where the United States has
an Embassy, remained the most receptive to the Americans.

''They appeared cooperative and determined to go forward with a committment they
made some time ago to carry out a joint excavation of the Pakse site,'' Mr.
Solarz said, referring to the scene of a wartime crash in which Americans were
reported killed. Their bodies have not been recovered.

In Vietnam, the Congressmen said, they were given reason to be hopeful that
Hanoi would soon release an American yachtsman, William M. Mathers, whose
parents live in Locust Valley, L.I. Mr. Mather was sailing his craft near
Vietnamese waters when he was detained in July.

And in Phnom Penh, the Congressional group was told that an 11-year-old
Cambodian boy, Mau Sophal, whose parents live in Queens, would be able to come
to the United States to be reunited with his family after years of separation.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Cambodia

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              408 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 27, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 889 words


THURSDAY, DECEMBER 27, 1984 International

Many Cambodian civilian casualties were reported after Vietnamese troops overran
the largest rebel camp in Cambodia. Officials in neighboring Thailand said there
were scores of casualties, many among civilians. Vietnamese artillery and tank
guns focused on Rithisen, a day after Vietnam mounted an offensive on at least
four Cambodian rebel camps, including Rithisen. An estimated 63,000 Cambodian
civilians fled into Thailand. (Page A1, Column 6.)

Japan's huge U.S. trade surplus was discussed with American reporters by Prime
Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone in Tokyo. Mr. Nakasone, who is preparing for a
meeting with President Reagan in Los Angeles next Wednesday, said he did not
want to commit Japan to importing specific amounts of American goods as a way to
reduce the surplus. He said that recent suggesitons that Japan establish import
targets were ''not realistic and not advisable.'' (A1:2.)

Many reports from Nicaragua of atrocities against civilians by United
States-backed rebels have been received by members of Congress and others in
Washington as a result of the Congressional investigations of the Central
Intelligence Agency's manual on guerrilla warfare, according to Americans who
said they have received the reports. (A1:5.)

Child scavengers in Chad symbolize the devastating drought that is turning most
of Chad into an extension of the Sahara. Chad and relief organizations put the
shortfall of staple grains in Chad at 300,000 tons. (A1:1.) National

The 24 nuns facing expulsion from their orders by the Vatican have refused to
recant their statement on abortion that led to the expulsion threat. The nuns,
who work in universities, prisons, government offices and shelters, signed a
statement saying in part that a diversity of opinions regarding abortion exists
among Roman Catholics. (A1:3.)

Whether the Bell System's breakup was a good idea is still being questioned by
many Americans as the first anniversary of the American Telephone and Telegraph
Company's divestiture of 22 Bell operating companies approaches. Supporters of
the breakup say that it has already produced lower long-distance rates, a
telephone industry teeming with competitors and a rush of new communications
technologies that will give American companies an edge over foreign rivals.
Opponents say the lower long-distance rates mainly benefit big business and are
already forcing households to pay higher local rates, and they are skeptical
about the technical revolution. (A1:5.)

Nebraska's Attorney General quit after his conviction two weeks ago for lying
about his business dealings with a savings company. Paul Douglas said his
resignation, which takes effect Jan. 1, was linked to his concerns about his
family and about the ''image of this office.'' (A14:1.)

Geriatric evaluation units designed to make elderly hospital patients well
enough to to live on their own could keep 200,000 people a year out of nursing
homes and prevent many needless deaths, a Veterans Administration report said.
These wards have been common for many years in Britian but are new to the United
States. Doctors at one of the first units established in the United States found
that patients who spent time in the special ward were less than half as likely
as other old people to be sent to nursing homes after their discharge, and that
their death rate was halved. (A22:1.)

A heavily armed anti-Semitic group that has ''declared war'' on the United
States appears to be part of a much larger racist alliance, according to Federal
investigators monitoring the ultraright. They said the anti- Semites appeared to
have adherents in a half-dozen Western and Southern states. United States
attorneys from Alabama, California, Colorado, Idaho, Oregon and Washington met
in Seattle to discuss strategies for a continuing investigation. (B7:1.)
Metropolitan

The ''real cost'' per prison inmate in New York City last year was $40,000,
significantly higher than the $26,000 estimate by the city's Correction
Department, according to a new study. The $40,000 figure, calculated in a report
by the Correctional Association of New York, includes such ''hidden'' costs as
pension and fringe benefits for City Correction Department employees, debt
charges on past capital improvements for the jail system, and jail services
provided by city agencies other than the Correction Department. (A1:1.)

13 Cubans ''absconded'' from a Queens hotel where they were being held,
immigration officials said. The 13 were among 77 Cubans detained by immigration
authorties at Kennedy International Airport last week. Those who fled were among
those supposed to appear in New York for hearings yesterday on their requests
for political asylum. The officials also said that because of a lack of space in
the New York detention center, 26 others were sent to a center in Houston on
Christmas Eve without notice to their lawyers or relatives. (A1:4.)

Mayor Koch said he was shocked by reports of misuse of private developer funds
in a neighbhorhood-rehabilitation program supervised by the city and ordered his
aides to investigate. ''There's going to be a total examination of this whole
program,'' Mr. Koch said. (B5:1.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              409 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN REBELS IN COUNTERATTACK

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: NONG SAMET, Thailand, Dec. 27


Cambodian guerrillas carried today counterattacked Vietnamese forces that
overran the Rithisen rebel camp near the Thai border on Wednesday, Thai military
authorities and guerrilla sources said.

According to Thai Army reports, the guerrillas were armed with rifles, mortars
and some recoilless rifles, and the Vietnamese had tanks, artillery and other
heavy weapons.

The sources said Vietnamese troops were now moving toward the headquarters of
the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a non-Communist rebel group that
had been in control of the Rithisen camp.

Col. Anusorn Kissanasareni, deputy spokesman of the Thai Army, said that the
Vietnamese were in position near the rebel headquarters camp at Ampil and that
the guerrillas were carrying out night raids against the Vietnamese.

Capture of Ampil Would Be Blow

The capture of Ampil would be a blow to the Khmer Liberation Front and the
Cambodian alliance formed to fight the Vietnamese, who invaded Cambodia in 1978,
toppled the Khmer Rouge regime and installed a pro- Vietnamese Government.

Ampil, which is said to be defended by 5,000 guerrillas, was shelled on
Christmas Day when the Vietnamese forces drove into Rithisen.

Rithisen's commander, Lia Ne, told reporters that the opposing troops had closed
to distances of 20 to 50 yards. He said his men killed at least 50 Vietnamese
today and wounded about 100. Such assertions are impossible to verify, since
reporters do not have access to the battlefield.

Colonel Anusorn, the Thai Army spokesman, said the guerrillas had split up into
small groups and were trying to cut supply lines and hit weak points of the
Vietnamese force.

The more than 60,000 civilians who fled Rithisen are being cared for by
international aid agencies at Red Hill, two and a half miles inside Thailand.

(In Washington, a State Department spokesman, Alan Romberg, said the Vietnamese
held the eastern half of the Rithisen camp and the guerrillas the west. He said
that the Vietnamese forces were supported by Soviet-built T-54 tanks and had
burned about half the camp.)

Reporters saw several wounded Cambodian guerrillas dressed in camouflage
fatigues being carried by fellow fighters. Ambulances took the wounded to the
nearby refugee camp of Khao-i-Dang, where the Red Cross has a hospital.

The Khmer People's National Liberation Front says it now has 4,500 guerrillas in
the Rithisen area after reinforcements were sent in from the nearby Nong Chan
camp. The Vietnamese force has been estimated at 1,500.

An official of the Khmer Liberation Front, Bora Kanthoul, said in an interview
in Bangkok: ''This is our policy. When the enemy moves in, we move out and then
establish a new defense line to fight back.''

He said the Vietnamese would find it difficult to remain in Rithisen because of
extended supply lines.

The recent attacks have been concentrated against non-Communist Khmer Liberation
Front strongholds, but the Vietnamese have also made moves against camps of the
Communist Khmer Rouge guerrillas.

Thai military officers said today that the Khmer Rouge camp at Khao Din, 12
miles south of the Thai border town of Aranyaprathet, had come under Vietnamese
fire.

The third, smaller guerrilla group, one loyal to Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the
former Cambodian head of state, has not been attacked in recent days.

The United Nations says there are 20 camps inside Cambodia along the border that
receive humanitarian food aid. Of them, 10 are controlled by the Khmer Rouge,
eight by the Khmer People's National Liberation Front and two by the Sihanouk
group.



U.N. Chief Expresses Concern


UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 27 (Reuters) - Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar
expressed concern today at the outbreak of fighting along the Thailand-Cambodian
border and appealed to all concerned to avoid endangering thousands of
civilians.

A United Nations statement said: ''The Secretary General has noted with growing
concern the escalation of fighting along the Thai-Cambodian border, which has
caused further hardship and suffering to the displaced Cambodian population. He
appeals to all concerned to avoid endangering thousands of civilian lives and
adding to the misery and deprivation which already afflicts those most
unfortunate people.''

Although it has not yet been officially announced, Mr. Perez de Cuellar is
planning to visit both Thailand and Vietnam in late January in the course of an
extensive tour of the Far East and the Pacific.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of rebels

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              410 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Enid Nemy

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1170 words


IT would be nice to begin the New Year with

tidings of a new, wonderful, larger-than-life

musical, the kind that provides a feast for the

eyes and a message of no import. Nice, but not yet possible. So if the year must
start on a more serious vein, let it be with a play that celebrates the spirit
of survival.

This one is ''Tracers,'' a production of the New York Shakespeare Festival/
Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company, which, after meeting with critical
acclaim in Los Angeles and Chicago, begins a four-week run at the Public Theater
on Jan. 9. ''Tracers'' grew out of an improvisation by a group of actors, all
veterans of the Vietnam War, and it traces the real and imagined experiences of
eight men who served in that war. The production is directed by John DiFusco,
and the sound track is rock music from the 1960's and 70's, including the Doors
and Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young.



Harvey Fierstein said he was ''totally unemployed,'' and although it was better
to be unemployed and rich than unemployed and poor, it got pretty boring feeding
the dogs. Which is why the actor-playwright, who may soon be crowded out of his
home by awards, is returning to ''Torch Song Trilogy'' Jan. 7 to resume his
Tony-Award winning role of Arnold Beckoff. Mr. Fierstein, who also garnered a
Tony for a musical, with his ''Cage aux Folles,'' made a similar repeat
performance last January. This time, he'll remain in ''Torch Song'' which he
also wrote, for seven weeks. Court Miller is also returning, to play the role of
Ed, the lover.

''It's like going home,'' Mr. Fierstein said. ''I love that company.''



It's not fair to choke to death on moo shu pork in a Chinese restaurant. That's
what Shirley thinks, and that's why she refuses to stay buried. Her stunning
reappearance sends her husband and son reeling. Whether the audience reels, we
won't know until Donald Margulies's ''What's Wrong With This Picture'' opens
Jan. 29 at the Manhattan Theater Club, 321 East 73d Street. Madeline Kahn will
play Shirley, and Bob Dishy, her husband, Mort.



Eight times a week, for a total of something like 16 hours, Stuart Zagnit throws
his body into ''a position it doesn't want to go and shouldn't.'' He transforms
himself into a Hasid with a squint, a stammer, a lump and a limp, which, for a
nice- looking, perfectly healthy young man in his early 30's, is no mean feat.
''I've taken to doing warm-up exercises before and after performances,'' said
Mr. Zagnit, who plays the title role in ''Kuni- Leml.'' ''It's a demanding
chore.''

It's particularly demanding because, as the actor explained, when the role was
originally performed in the late 19th century, ''Yiddish comics would add their
own shtick to it, but nowadays our society doesn't accept using physical aspects
as comedy.'' The result is that although the physical characteristics are an
integral part of the play, they are handled in a straightforward manner and the
humor, he says, emanates from ''a point of view.''

Another result is that Mr. Zagnit has developed a reverse kind of ego. He's not
too pleased when he's recognized offstage. ''It's a left-handed compliment,'' he
said. ''It may mean that I'm doing something wrong.''

Mr. Zagnit, who thinks he may be the only actor in New York who hasn't worked as
a waiter (he did sell magazine ads and deliver singing telegrams), has also lost
a number of jobs in commercials because of the beard he's grown for
''Kuni-Leml.'' Before he was chosen for the role, he appeared as a junior
executive, a waiter and a Ping-Pong ball, the latter a highly choreographed job
that he enjoyed because it wasn't exactly run-of-the-mill.

Still, Mr. Zagnit said, he has never lost sight of the fact that while
commercials are lucrative, they're only ''the icing on the cake.''

''You can lose a commercial because you're not the right height or you don't
have the right look,'' said Mr. Zagnit, who was brought up in Spotswood, N.J.,
and decided to become a performer after watching Jerry Lewis movies. ''In the
theater,'' he said, ''you can cross all those barriers.''



We've had one-man shows of Mark Twain, Harry S. Truman, Rudyard Kipling, Emily
Dickinson and Edgar Allan Poe, but only Poe is going to be with us again
starting tonight. Conrad Pomerleau wrote the script and also stars in ''Poe in
Person,'' which will play an uneven schedule at the Apple Corps Theater Company
(336 West 20th Street) through Feb. 11. The piece, which made its debut at the
Wonder Horse Theater in 1976, hasn't been performed professionally in New York
since 1979.



The new year will mark the 100th anniversary in America of the publication of
''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn,'' which naturally stimulated a lot of
theatrically-attuned brain cells. ''Downriv er,'' a new musical based on the
Mark Twain classic, opens at the Musical Theater Works Jan. 9, and ''Big
River,'' already a veteran of Cambridge, Mass., and La Jolla, Calif., is
scheduled to go into a New Haven preview in late March and open on Broadway in
April. The more immediate production features John Scherer as Huck Finn, Todd
Heughens as Tom Sawyer and Joe Lynn as Jim. Musical Theater Works is at 133
Second Avenue, at Eighth Street.



With what is billed as a mixture of poetry, rock 'n' roll and the ''passion,
confusion and comedy'' of youth, there seems to be something for everyone in
''Surrender/A Flirtation,'' a dramatic musical set for a three-week run starting
next Thursday at the Theater for the New City at 162 Second Avenue at 10th
Street. Written by Dana Foley and William Mernit, the plot wraps around Joey, a
city girl, and Dennis, a boy from the Middle West, who discover each other in a
dingy New York rock club. Roma Maffia and Matthew Ashford will play the young
couple who naturally end up nicer and more understanding than they were at the
beginning.



It should be interesting to watch the upstaging in this one. Peggy Cass, Nancy
Marchand, Anne Pitoniak, Bette Henritze, Roberta Maxwell, Elizabeth Huddle, Lois
deBanzie and Elizabeth Franz have been signed to play the eight sisters in ''The
Octette Bridge Club,'' scheduled for Broadway in March.



Miriam Colon, the founder of the Puerto Rican Traveling Theater, will make her
debut on the stage of the theater's new permanent home at 304 West 47th Street
on Jan. 9. That's when the company's 18th season gets under way with the
American premiere of ''Orinoco'' by the Mexican playwright Emilio Carballido.
There will be performances in English and Spanish.



Signing up for composers' and lyricists' workshops at the 92d Street Y shouldn't
require a resolution, but if it does, go ahead and resolve. Charles Strouse will
conduct the four-session composers workshop starting Jan. 3. The lyricist Lee
Adams will teach four classes beginning Feb. 7. The men created ''Applause'' and
''Bye Bye Birdie,'' so $80 for four sessions doesn't sound like too much. The
number for more information is 427-600, extension 129.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              411 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Curtis Karnow Weds Marilyn J. Englander

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 151 words


Marilyn Jean Englander, a candidate for a Ph.D. degree in anthropology at the
University of California at Santa Barbara, was married yesterday to Curtis
Edward Karnow, a lawyer with Landels, Ripley & Diamond in San Francisco. Federal
Judge Louis H. Pollack of the Eastern District of Pennsylvania performed the
ceremony in his chambers in Philadelphia.

The bride, who will retain her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Clinton
Englander of Oakland, Md., where Mr. Englander is a pharmacist. She graduated
from Harvard with the class of '83. Her previous marriage ended in divorce.

Mr. Karnow, a son of Mr. and Mrs. Stanley Karnow of Potomac, Md., graduated from
St. Paul's School in Concord, N.H., was a member of the class of '74 at Harvard
and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania. His father is an
author and journalist, whose most recent book was ''Vietnam: A History.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              412 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Dissolves Its Subjects

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 507 words


Vietnam has earned its reputation as the Prussia of Southeast Asia. After
humbling French and American armies, it conquered Laos and Cambodia, then turned
ferociously on its subject peoples. This Christmas week, Vietnam mounted a fresh
offensive against Cambodian rebels, driving 63,000 more civilians across the
border into Thailand.

This dumping of unwanted people was heretically anticipated by Bertolt Brecht,
the Communist writer who lived in the real Prussia. When East Berlin's workers
rose in vain revolt against their Communist masters in 1953, leaflets were
circulated asserting that the people had ''lost the Government's confidence.''
Would it not be simpler, Brecht wondered, ''if the Government dissolved the
People and elected another?''

Vietnam has embraced this simpler solution. Wedded to a doctrine that pretends
to be scientific, Hanoi applies radical surgery to nonconformists. Among the
luckier are the 600,000 Vietnamese who have fled by boat since 1975. Less lucky
are the 10,000 rotting in jail because they once worked for Americans.
Unluckiest of all are the Cambodians, first beset by Vietnamese guerrillas, then
by American bombing, next by the genocidal Communism of Pol Pot, then by famine
and finally by a Vietnamese invasion in 1978.

Three million Cambodians have perished in these disasters, roughly a third of
the nation. Most of the deaths occurred under successive Communist regimes. An
additional 600,000 Cambodians have fled into exile. Yet even after this
bloodletting, the client regime installed by Vietnam needs 180,000 troops to
protect it from three rebel forces.

To its shame, Vietnam has rejected every proposal for restoring
self-determination to an ill-used people. After visiting Hanoi this week,
Representatives Steven Solarz and Robert Torricelli detected no willingness even
to engage in serious talks about ending the war in Cambodia.

The unavoidable conclusion is that Vietnam wants to elect a new people, in ways
described by the Czech historian Milan Hubl: ''The first step to liquidating a
people is to erase its memory. Destroy its books, its culture, its history. Then
have somebody write new books, manufacture a new culture, invent a new history.
Before long the nation will begin to forget what it is and what it was.''

Given that Vietnamese objective, it is surely right to continue helping the
non-Communist Cambodian resistance and to help shelter those who flee. But the
United States has a further obligation: to work for the release of the 10,000
Vietnamese now in ''re-education camps'' because they once worked for Americans.

Vietnam's Prime Minister, Pham Van Dong, said last May that those outcasts could
leave ''tomorrow'' for the United States. Secretary of State Shultz agreed to
receive them, but the processing problems drag on. Now Hanoi says that unless
Washington curbs anti-Vietnamese activities among exiles it may not release
anyone. A regime that would rather change its people than itself seems incapable
even of this modest humanity.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              413 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ SAID TO DROP RECOMMENDATION ON NEXT ENVOY TO HONDURAS



BYLINE:
By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 28


Secretary of State George P. Shultz has dropped efforts to have a senior State
Department aide named as the next Ambassador to Honduras, department officials
said today.

Some White House conservatives, as well as some members of Congress, had
expressed concern at Mr. Shultz's plans to replace a dozen ambassadors in Latin
America as well as some senior State Department officials.

Much of the criticism had centered on Mr. Shultz's recommendation that President
Reagan nominate L. Craig Johnstone, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for
Inter-American Affairs, to replace John D. Negroponte as the next Ambassador to
Honduras.

State Department officials said today that after weeks of debate in the
Administration on the various Shultz personnel proposals, Mr. Shultz had agreed
to withdraw his recommendation that Mr. Johnstone be named to the Honduran post.
The officials said Mr. Johnstone would be named ambassador to a country not in
Latin America.

The significance of the shift was not clear.

A staff aide to a member of Congress called the withdrawal of the Johnstone
recommendation ''a victory'' forconservatives like Representative Jack F. Kemp,
Republican of New York.

Mr. Kemp had publicly said, ''I view what's going on with serious concern and
alarm, and if these changes take place, I think it'll jeopardize the
Administration's aid program.''

But aides to Mr. Shultz said that the conservatives had misunderstood what was
happening and that the withdrawal of the Johnstone recommendation could not be
regarded as a defeat for Mr. Shultz.

They said that Mr. Shultz had a good conversation with President Reagan last
Friday on the personnel shifts and that, except for Mr. Johnstone, Mr. Shultz
was getting his way on all the other recommendations.

Even on Mr. Johnstone, they said, the situation is more complicated. They said
Mr. Johnstone, who has previously served in Vietnam, Canada, Jamaica and France,
had originally asked to be reassigned after three years in the Inter-American
bureau to some other part of the world.

But Langhorne A. Motley, the Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American
Affairs, keenly wanted Mr. Johnstone to be Ambassador to Honduras.

Ronald I. Spiers, the Under Secretary of State for Management, favored going
along with Mr. Johnstone's recommendation that he receive a post outside of
Latin America on the ground that it was better for officials to have broader
geographic experience. But Mr. Shultz agreed with Mr. Motley and put forth Mr.
Johnstone for Honduras.

An aide to Mr. Shultz said that the secretary was aware of Mr. Johnstone's
preferences and that it was ''an easy compromise'' with the conservatives not to
insist on the Honduran post for him.

The criticism of Mr. Johnstone came from conservatives who said they felt he was
not tough enough toward the Nicaraguan Government and was too ready to seek a
negotiated outcome.

Among the major changes soon to be announced are the posting of Thomas R.
Pickering, the Ambassador in El Salvador, who is a career Foreign Service
officer, as the next envoy to Israel. He would replace Samuel W. Lewis, who is
retiring. Mr. Pickering is being replaced in San Salvador by another career
officer.

Mr. Negroponte, a career officer, who is returning to Washington next year from
Honduras, will become the next Assistant Secretary for Oceans and International
Environmental and Scientific Affairs, replacing James L. Malone, a political
appointee.

Under Mr. Spiers's management of the State Department, an effort is being made
to limit ambassadors to three years in a post, and two years in a ''hardship''
post, unless special waivers are secured. A senior official said two envoys who
had served longer than that had already been asked to remain - Arthur A.
Hartman, the Ambassador to the Soviet Union, and Arthur W. Hummel Jr., the
Ambassador to China.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              414 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 864 words


SATURDAY, DECEMBER 29, 1984 International

A sweeping victory for Rajiv Gandhi and his Congress Party was indicated in
returns from parliamentary elections in India. It appeared that Mr. Gandhi, who
succeeded his slain mother Indira as Prime Minister two months ago, had achieved
a popular victory unparalleled since the Nehru era of the 1950's and 1960's.
(Page 1, Column 6.)

$20 billion in aid for Argentina was approved by the International Monetary Fund
in Washington, ending more than a year of uncertainty over the financial status
of the developing world's third-largest debtor. The fund took similar action
last year to help Brazil and Mexico, the two most indebted countries. (1:2.)

The murder of a pro-Solidarity priest was described by one of the confessed
kidnappers of the Rev. Jerzy Popieluszko on the second day of his trial in
Poland. He recalled how on the night of his death, the priest broke out of the
car trunk in which he was being transported and pleaded for his life. The
testimony also brought out the possibility that similar attacks on two other
pro-Solidarity priests had been planned. (1:5.)

Modernization of Chinese factories and other projects that were built with
Soviet help in the 1950's will be aided by the Soviet Union under an agreement
it has signed with Peking. The two countries also announced a 22 percent
increase in the figure for their 1985 trade that was signed only four weeks ago.
(3:1.)

Vietnam's attack on rebels in Cambodia continued for the fourth day with the
shelling of the perimeter of the main headquarters of the guerrilla opposition
in Ampil, the military authorities in Thailand reported. Ampil withstood a
Vietnamese campaign in April. (3:1.)

State authorities in India suspended several officials and accepted the
resignation of its labor minister in connection with failures to act on safety
problems at the Union Carbide factory in Bhopal, where a poison gas leak killed
at least 2,000 people on Dec. 3. The actions appeared to be formal
acknowledgement by officials of Madhya Preadesh that they shared some blame in
the episode. (4:3.)

Suspension of antidrug measures in Peru's coca-growing Upper Huallaga Valley has
restored prosperity to the area, where dollars are now in such abundance that
they fetch less the official exchange rate. The change was brought about by end
of a United States-financed antinarcotics program. (4:1.) National

A key U.S. economic index rose a strong 1.3 percent in November, the sharpest
rise since February, the Commerce Department reported. Analysts said the index
of leading economic indicators, which the Government uses to try to foresee
turns in the economy, confirmed last month that the economy had rebounded from a
spell of anemic growth during the summer and early fall and was poised for
continued expansion throughout 1985. (1:1.)

Made in the U.S. labels must appear on all clothing and other textile products
manufactured in the United States under a new Federal law that went to effect
Monday. The law is meant to promote the sale of American-made garments and
textiles produced for home use and to protect the industry from extremely strong
foreign competition. (1:1.)

Miami is the new Casablanca, some people say. The resort city has become a
center of intrigue where ideological and criminal elements coexist in a way not
seen elsewhere on this continent. Miami is the base for smugglers who oversee a
multibillion drug trade, and for political exiles who spend their days plotting
against foreign governments. Often the two groups overlap. (1:5.)

A Ramada Inn was accused of bias against blacks in a suit filed by the Justice
Department in Federal District Court in Baltimore. The suit charged the
Baltimore hotel of discriminating against blacks seeking to patronize the
hotel's bar. The defendants are the two operating companies of the hotel and bar
and an official of the companies. (22:1.)

The movie director Sam Peckinpah died in a hospital in Inglewood, Calif., after
''a cardiac arrest,'' his brother said. He was 59 years old. (26:5.)
Metropolitan

There will be no official city holiday in honor of the birthday of the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., Mayor Koch said. In rejecting a unanimous City Council
resolution calling for a paid holiday, which he said would be too costly, Mr.
Koch said city employees who wanted to observe Dr. King's birthday could do so
without losing pay by drawing on accumulated leave time or taking time in
advance. (1:3.)

Area code 718 will become official on Tuesday for telephone users in Brooklyn,
Queens and Staten Island, despite resentment over losing the 212 code, which is
being retained for Manhattan and the Bronx. (1:2.)

Required retirement of state judges at age 70 was unanimously upheld by the five
judges of the Appellate Division of New York State Supreme Court. The panel
overturned a Dec. 18 decision by Justice Bruce Wright of State Supreme Court in
Manhattan ruling that the State Constitution's retirement provision violated the
Federal Constitution. (25:6.) Page 27

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              415 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              December 29, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Dissolves Its Subjects

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 507 words


Vietnam has earned its reputation as the Prussia of Southeast Asia. After
humbling French and American armies, it conquered Laos and Cambodia, then turned
ferociously on its subject peoples. This Christmas week, Vietnam mounted a fresh
offensive against Cambodian rebels, driving 63,000 more civilians across the
border into Thailand.

This dumping of unwanted people was heretically anticipated by Bertolt Brecht,
the Communist writer who lived in the real Prussia. When East Berlin's workers
rose in vain revolt against their Communist masters in 1953, leaflets were
circulated asserting that the people had ''lost the Government's confidence.''
Would it not be simpler, Brecht wondered, ''if the Government dissolved the
People and elected another?''

Vietnam has embraced this simpler solution. Wedded to a doctrine that pretends
to be scientific, Hanoi applies radical surgery to nonconformists. Among the
luckier are the 600,000 Vietnamese who have fled by boat since 1975. Less lucky
are the 10,000 rotting in jail because they once worked for Americans.
Unluckiest of all are the Cambodians, first beset by Vietnamese guerrillas, then
by American bombing, next by the genocidal Communism of Pol Pot, then by famine
and finally by a Vietnamese invasion in 1978.

Three million Cambodians have perished in these disasters, roughly a third of
the nation. Most of the deaths occurred under successive Communist regimes. An
additional 600,000 Cambodians have fled into exile. Yet even after this
bloodletting, the client regime installed by Vietnam needs 180,000 troops to
protect it from three rebel forces.

To its shame, Vietnam has rejected every proposal for restoring
self-determination to an ill-used people. After visiting Hanoi this week,
Representatives Steven Solarz and Robert Torricelli detected no willingness even
to engage in serious talks about ending the war in Cambodia.

The unavoidable conclusion is that Vietnam wants to elect a new people, in ways
described by the Czech historian Milan Hubl: ''The first step to liquidating a
people is to erase its memory. Destroy its books, its culture, its history. Then
have somebody write new books, manufacture a new culture, invent a new history.
Before long the nation will begin to forget what it is and what it was.''

Given that Vietnamese objective, it is surely right to continue helping the
non-Communist Cambodian resistance and to help shelter those who flee. But the
United States has a further obligation: to work for the release of the 10,000
Vietnamese now in ''re-education camps'' because they once worked for Americans.

Vietnam's Prime Minister, Pham Van Dong, said last May that those outcasts could
leave ''tomorrow'' for the United States. Secretary of State Shultz agreed to
receive them, but the processing problems drag on. Now Hanoi says that unless
Washington curbs anti-Vietnamese activities among exiles it may not release
anyone. A regime that would rather change its people than itself seems incapable
even of this modest humanity.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              416 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE GAIN AT CAMBODIA CAMP

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 448 words

DATELINE: NONG SAMET, Thailand, Dec. 29


Cambodian non-Communist guerrillas suffered further setbacks in a fifth day of
fighting at their Rithisen camp today. But two allied groups helped to ease
pressure against them with small-unit strikes against Vietnamese lines,
guerrilla and Thai military officers said.

Chau Eng, a guerrilla commander, told reporters in this Thai village near the
battlefield that the Vietnamese had been reinforced with fresh troops and two
Soviet-made T-54 tanks. He said the guerrillas had given up ground they had won
back in the camp, which was overrun by Hanoi's forces on Tuesday.

Interviews with the wounded carried into Thailand confirmed Mr. Chau Eng's
assessment.

The International Committee of the Red Cross said about 30 guerrillas were
wounded in Rithisen today. The number of dead was unknown. The report brought to
nearly 100 the number of Cambodians wounded in Rithisen who have been taken to a
Red Cross hospital near the frontier.

Guerrilla sources say hundreds of guerrillas and Vietnamese have been killed or
wounded since the offensive began, but there has been no independent
confirmation of that report.

Helping Larger Group


Mr. Chau Eng said he was helping fight the Vietnamese on the eastern approaches
to Rithisen, which was controlled by the Khmer People's National Liberation
Front. Mr. Chau Eng belongs to a smaller anti-Communist group loyal to the
former head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

The Thai military authorities said about 200 soldiers of the Communist Khmer
Rouge were operating northeast of Rithisen. The Khmer Rouge and the two
anti-Communist groups are united in a coalition against the Vietnamese, who
invaded Cambodia in 1978. The Khmer Rouge has more than 30,000 guerrillas, the
Liberation Front 12,000, and the Sihanouk group 5,000.

A spokesman for the Khmer Rouge in Bangkok said he had no information about its
activity around Rithisen.

Hanoi's news outlets and those of the pro-Hanoi Government in Cambodia, as
monitored in Bangkok, have not mentioned the offensive. Virtually all the
information that journalists have obtained comes from guerrillas, civilians
loyal to them, the Thai military and international aid officials in Thailand.

Only scattered shelling was reported today at Ampil camp, the headquarters of
the National Liberation Front. But Lieut. Gen. Pichitr Kullavanijaya, commander
of Thailand's First Army, predicted that the Vietnamese would attack that key
base soon.

About 5,000 Liberation Front guerrillasare based at Ampil, which is protected by
a lake and thick forests - unlike the Rithisen camp, which is on exposed
terrain. Ampil's 23,000 civilians have already evacuated their homes.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a Cambodian doctor aiding a wounded rebel near border

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              417 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN CAMP SERVED ALL SIDES' INTERESTS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 506 words

DATELINE: NERN DIN DAENG, Thailand, Dec. 29


Rithisen was known as the biggest and maybe the best camp along the
Thai-Cambodian border. Its residents wore neat clothes, went to school and ate
well. Most important of all, Rithisen had a vast black market.

It sold goods smuggled from Thailand and the Cambodian interior. There were
bicycles, rice, fish, soap, tools, candles and much more. Everyone benefited -
the Thais, Rithisen's residents, the Cambodian guerrillas, even their Vietnamese
enemies.

People from the camp said many black market items reached Vietnamese troops in
western Cambodia and the interior.

It was an eminently convenient arrangement along a violence-prone border.

Many believe this was why the camp, controlled by anti-Communist guerrillas, had
never been attacked and why, when the attack came Christmas Day, there was such
shock and chaos. Sok Ni, 23 years old, said she awoke at 4 A.M. when the first
shells hit Rithisen from long-range Vietnamese guns. She grabbed her 7-year-old
son, ran from their hut and, eight months' pregnant, jogged with the mass of
panic-stricken people.

''My legs just ordered me to run,'' she said. ''My mouth was screaming.''

She saw her home explode in flames behind her. She ran past dead neighbors and
saw their two children helpless beside the bodies. A sea of 62,000 people was
struggling toward Thailand and she flowed with them.

Mrs. Sok Ni, now reunited with her husband and another child who fled that
night, was interviewed Friday at this evacuation site two and a half miles
inside Thailand. The din of battle could be heard from Rithisen, where
guerrillas of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front were counterattacking
Hanoi's troops. Smoke rose from the devastated encampment, one of about 20 set
up by anti-Vietnamese Cambodian guerrillas along the frontier.

Like most of the refugees, Mrs. Sok Ni's family brought almost nothing with
them. Her husband toted a jute mattress and a mosquito net. Her two children
were half-naked. Mrs. Sok Ni wore a shabby blouse, a mud-splattered sarong and
no shoes.

Around them was an instant town of temporary shelters, mostly crude tents made
of bamboo poles and light blue plastic sheets. The camp here in Thailand had
been prepared by United Nations and voluntary aid agencies for just such an
emergency.



Few Options for Refugees

The refugees here have few options.  They cannot apply for resettlement abroad.
They are allowed to stay in Thailand as long as the fighting continues and then
must return to Cambodia - either to the resistance side or deeper into the
interior, which is controlled by the pro-Hanoi Heng Samrin regime that many of
the refugees fled earlier.

For the refugees, this town is now their life. Already stalls selling
cigarettes, fish and vegetables have sprung up.

A day after the attack on Rithisen, the United Nations Border Relief
Organization trucked in 500 to 600 tons of supplies for the 62,000 refugees.
Water trucks keep rumbling in, carrying about three gallons of drinking water
per person per day.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of a Cambodian doctor aiding a wounded rebel near border

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              418 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'IT'S HOW WE GOT WHERE WE ARE'

BYLINE: By ENID NEMY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1348 words


When James Duff was attending junior college in Hurst, Tex., he and 94
classmates took part in a sociology poll. There were four questions to answer -
who would you most like to work with on a project, who would you least like to
work with, who would you most like to see out of class and who would you least
like to see. The result stunned both teacher and students. Mr. Duff had placed
first in all four categories.

Now a 29-year-old playwright whose first major work, ''Home Front,'' is about to
open on Broadway, Mr. Duff looks like a poster version of American youth -
clear-eyed, clean-cut, uncomplicated. He is clear-eyed, at least when he's being
interviewed. He is also clean-cut, although he noted that he doesn't usually
dress up (formal shirt, Ivy League sweater), and that only the flannel pants he
was wearing belonged to him. But he is, too, by his own definition, stubborn,
impulsive, intensely ambitious, and as complicated as the poll results
indicated. At the moment, he is awash in a kaleidoscope of emotions as
Wednesday's opening approaches, comforted only by a clutch of uniformly
enthusiastic British reviews. The drama, under the name ''The War at Home,'' was
produced in London last June, after three years of problems and postponements,
and was inspired by ''Amadeus,'' Mr. Duff's first encounter with a Broadway
play.

''I went back to that show three times because it was a stunning experience; it
had an enormous effect on me,'' Mr. Duff recalled. ''I thought 'this is
excellent but I think I could write something as interesting,' and after that,
it became a challenge.''

The challenge led to the fleshing out of an idea that had been simmering in the
back of his mind ever since he had seen a newsreel interview with a Vietnam
veteran. The veteran, commenting on the reception accorded American hostages
returning from Iran, had noted somewhat bitterly that America had not similarly
honored Vietnam returnees.

''I thought to myself 'oh shut up, all you veterans go on about that at the drop
of a hat,''' said Mr. Duff, who was a high school junior when the Vietnam war
ended. ''Then I began to wonder why I felt that way. The more I thought about
it, the more uncomfortable I felt about Vietnam. I realized there was something
I didn't quite like in myself that I didn't want to hear about it. I wanted to
explore that attitude.''

The result is a story that deals not with Vietnam but rather, in the words of
the playwright, ''with the loss of innocence in this country and the way we deal
with it, how people accept the failure of their preconceptions, and how we got
where we are.''



In some ways, the family Mr. Duff fabricated as his protagonists mirrors his
own. The setting is also familiar ground, his home state of Texas.

The principal character is a Vietnam veteran, who returns home in a
psychological coma. Withdrawn from family and society, he says he isn't
interested in socializing or getting a job and refuses to admit, even to
himself, that he is unable to do either. The father, who is in retailing (as is
Mr. Duff's) says he understands but doesn't. The mother, a housewife, is
puzzled. The young man won't, and can't, tell them what's wrong and they, in
turn, don't really want to hear.

There is, as well, a larger context, defined by the writer as ''the story of
America, a today country that doesn't seem to learn from mistakes, a victim of
the thing that made it great.'' Yet, despite his definition, Mr. Duff says that
he wrote ''Home Front'' as a human comedy.

''I've tried to turn something that used to be called a 'living room' play into
something that is happening in living rooms across the country,'' he said.

Mr. Duff first saw his words come to life in 1982 as a ''work in progress'' at
the Hotel Carter on West 43d Street. The budget was $42,000, scraped together by
friends, and there were only four performances but at one of them, Richard Barr,
the producer, was in the audience. (Before this, Mr. Duff, who is nothing if not
tenacious, had followed another well-known producer on the street, trying to
interest him in his play. The producer, who had been quoted on his interest in
new playwrights, threatened to have him arrested.)

Mr. Duff had plotted Mr. Barr's attendance with care. He had originally met the
producer when he was tending bar and once he had extracted Mr. Barr's promise to
attend a performance, he ensured his presence by bribing a mutual friend to take
him to dinner before the theater.

The ploy worked. Mr. Barr showed up and a scene that might have come from an old
movie followed the final curtain. Mr. Barr didn't shout ''Eureka'' but he did
say ''you've written a very good play and I'm going to put it on Broadway.''

'' I laughed because I thought things didn't happen that way,'' Mr. Duff said.
''It took almost three years but he kept his word.''



The project had been postponed four times as financing fell through when the
late Alan Schneider, the American director, said he would show the play to a
friend in London. Two days later, he called and informed the incredulous
playwright that a British production had been arranged. Mr. Schneider was killed
by a motorcycle in London a short time after, but the ''The War at Home'' was
put on by the Hampstead Theater Club last June and received strongly affirmative
notices. It also sent different signals to different people. Some viewed it as
an anti-American play, an interpretation that still surprises the author.

''I come from Texas and they breed patriotism into us there,'' he said. ''I'm so
American I couldn't live anywhere else.''

Born in New Orleans and adopted as an infant, Mr. Duff's childhood was spent
moving about Texas as his father, a Sears, Roebuck executive, was promoted and
transferred from one area to another. He attended, in all, five elementary
schools, three junior high and three high schools before a final move to
Arlington, Tex., precipitated a decision that he still regrets. He left home and
returned to Lubbock, where the family had lived previously because, he said, ''I
think I had reached the stage where I resented being jerked around.''

''I was probably the only person in the world to run away from somewhere to
Lubbock,'' he said. ''It caused a good deal of suffering in the family but I was
determined to have my way and when my mind gets set, I do it. We're very close
now but it caused a lot of polarization in the family.''



Later, he spent one and a half at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, a period
just long enough to make him realize that he wasn't cut out for the academic
life.

''I made an F in everything,'' he said. ''I majored in parties and social
affairs. I was in 15 plays while I was there but my father was against my
majoring in theater because he thought I'd never make a living at it and, in
retrospect, I can't say he was far from the truth. I've never made a living from
the theater and the most I've ever made from all my jobs in a single year has
been $9,000.''

Still, he did try academia again, at a junior college in Hurst. There, an
English teacher named Cuyler Ethridge convinced him to try creative writing and
although it had a long-range effect, its short range impact was negligible. He
was soon off to Dallas, ''hell bent to party,'' he said.

''My father is a most wonderful man but he was very strict,'' Mr. Duff said.
''When I found out what went on in the world and that I wasn't struck by
lightning for doing it, I decided to do everything.''

The attraction of ''everything'' lasted a year. When it began to pall, Mr. Duff
returned to acting, which he now says helped him understand the composition of a
good play. He also began writing, starting with a farce and going on to an
adaptation, in metered rhyme, of a Grimm fairy tale.

Since 1980, the acting (Off Broadway) and the writing have been done in New
York, a life he has found lean but satisfying. ''This is the city where you come
to put yourself in a crucible,'' he said. There is no doubt in his mind that he
can stand the heat.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              419 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'I HAD THESE DIALOGUES WITH MYSELF'

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON

SECTION: Section 2; Page 5, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1359 words


Bill C. Davis was a student at Marist College in his hometown of Poughkeepsie,
N.Y., when a Vietnam veteran enrolled on campus and began a campaign against
football as a model of war. ''He said the essence of war was contained in that
game, and we had to get rid of it,'' Mr. Davis recalled. ''Everybody thought he
was nuts.''

But Mr. Davis sought out the mysterious, taciturn stranger with his
''off-center'' looks and ideas, and talked with him often. Now, 11 years later,
football as war is a pivotal theme of ''Dancing in the End Zone,'' the
33-year-old Mr. Davis's second play on Broadway. It opens at the Ritz next
Thursday.

Like ''Mass Appeal,'' written by Mr. Davis and, several years ago, a hit off and
on Broadway, ''End Zone'' is about moral choices. (''Mass Appeal,'' with a
script by Mr. Davis, has been adapted and expanded into a currently running
movie starring Jack Lemmon.)

In both works, two comfortable worlds - the one of a popular priest, the other
of a football hero - are turned upside down by a character who challenges their
central beliefs, brings them close to scandal and changes them forever.

''That's why audiences cry in the theater,'' Mr. Davis said the other day,
''when people make a hard choice - for life. A good drama should give you every
reason to say no, and yet, you say yes.''

In ''Dancing in the End Zone,'' the catalyst is a young woman, played by Dorothy
Lyman, hired to tutor a Midwestern university's winning quarterback, with Matt
Salinger in the role. The four-character play also pits Pat Carroll, as the
quarterback's mother, against his coach, portrayed by Laurence Luckinbill.
Melvin Bernhardt directs the Morton Gottlieb production.



Inner conflict and quest have been part of the author's life from his earliest
years. Yet his outer aspect is boyish: he has an eager, impetuous air, a
tough-kid way of talking and a gap- toothed grin that make him seem younger than
his 33 years. He wrote his first play at the age of 16 and now has seven
full-length plays, 15 one-acters and two screenplays behind him, produced at
college and various small theaters around the country. His urge to write arose
out of frustration.

''In my family's house, talking was very difficult,'' he recalled the other day.
''For someone like myself, who really wanted to communicate, it was harrowing.
So I would have these dialogues inside myself that I could put down on paper and
then I could see it and it somehow helped to resolve things. There's something
very peaceful about the process when it's working right.''

Mr. Davis is a product of a middle- class Catholic family and a formal Catholic
education from elementary school through college. ''I was trained to believe
certain things, and to be acutely aware of what would happen when you didn't do
those things,'' he said. ''I had a concept of mortal sin very early.'' When he
was a little boy, he used to cry every night, worrying that ''my great-
grandmother and my great-uncle were going to go to hell because they had left
the church.''

But he grew ever closer to his great-grandmother, ''a Bohemian and a free
spirit.'' He announced one Sunday, when he was 14, that he would not go to mass.
''It was my age, I guess. I felt I wanted to reject everything,'' he said. ''It
wasn't so much what was happening on the altar. It was the congregation. It was
not a happy act - the families trudging off to church because they had to,
dressed up real nice. But it was scary. I didn't know whether I was headed for
eternal damnation or whether it was a leap of faith not to go. It all seems so
archaic now.'' That was a temporary decision. He is still a practicing Catholic,
but attends mass ''only when I feel the need to go.''



At Lourdes High School in Poughkeepsie in the mid-1960's, Mr. Davis saw the
Catholic church itself changing amid turmoil. A Catholic teaching brother left
the church, married a student and fled to Canada to escape the draft. Another
brother married a nun. A lay teacher divorced his wife and married a senior. Mr.
Davis attended encounter groups, shockingly frank at the time, that included
priests and nuns.

''I was actually glad to see some kind of humanity surfacing,'' the playwright
said. He wrote a play to be produced at the high school with a ''sexual nature
to the story.'' The board at Lourdes turned it down. Mr. Davis's chemistry
teacher, Brother Mike Marotti, fought for it in vain, but in doing so, he became
a person for Mr. Davis, ''not just another threatening robe.''

In 1970, Mr. Davis briefly attended a non-denominational school - Emerson
college in Boston - because ''everything was theater there and I wanted training
on how to write plays.'' He quickly decided that ''What does it matter if you
learn how to write if you don't have anything to say? I wanted to know how to
think.'' He returned to Marist College and took as many philosophy and
psychology courses as he could, ''to see how great minds dealt with the world.
Marist College didn't have a theater department, so I had to create it. The
teachers encouraged me and produced everything as fast as I could write it,'' he
said.

Working at a village for emotionally disturbed and retarded adults in Rhinebeck,
N.Y., Mr. Davis ''began to understand human nature.'' They were, he said, ''so
raw. They had no guile. If somebody said something to hurt them, they'd punch
themselves. They'd hurt themselves because of what somebody else did to them. I
learned about self-destruction and the life force there - battling it out, all
the time.''

A friend of Mr. Davis, a priest, sent ''Mass Appeal'' to Geraldine Fitzgerald,
the actress and singer who made her directorial debut with the play in 1980 at
the Manhattan Theater Club. It needed much revision, but from the first reading,
Miss Fitzgerald saw that it had ''life in it.'' Popular with critics and
audiences there, ''Mass Appeal'' also was a success on Broadway, with Milo
O'Shea in both productions as the priest grappling with a fiery young
seminarian.



That was Mr. Davis's only ''religious'' play, but he still feels that it is more
about ''friendship, courage and all kinds of love'' and less an inside story of
battles inside the Catholic church. His screenplay went through two drafts, but,
he said, ''I didn't experience the kind of horror story you hear about writers
in Hollywood. The only terrifying thing about a film is - what's written is
there forever. In the theater, you can change the lines from performance to
performance.''

He has attended most rehearsals of ''Dancing in the End Zone'' since they began
in November, ''making tiny revisions all the time as the actors shed light on a
part, or discover awkwardness.'' The play was first put on last spring at the
Coconut Grove Playhouse in Miami, with Jose Ferrer directing; in the months
since, Mr. Davis changed the order of scenes and developed characters.

He says it was ''an easy decision'' to fall in with producer Morton Gottlieb's
extraordinary plan to reduce the number of seats, ticket prices and production
costs of ''End Zone'' - including a cut in the author's share of the weekly
gross from the usual 6 percent to 4 percent until the show recoups its
investment. ''It was clear what was happening on Broadway, with all those empty
houses,'' Mr. Davis said. ''This idea may fill them with life.''

He acknowledges that he feels the pressure to produce another hit after the
success of his first play on Broadway, but, he says, ''I'd rather concentrate on
the healthy pressure of work. You can make yourself nuts with the need for
approval.'' Besides, he has other irons in the fire. He has finished an original
screenplay called ''Internal Combustion'' for 20th Century- Fox and there are
two plays in progress: one called ''Wrestlers,'' produced a year ago at the
Singers' Forum in Manhattan and another titled ''Family Planning'' at the Burt
Reynolds Jupiter Theater near West Palm Beach.

''My play 'Mass Appeal' had two characters, and 'Wrestlers' has three.'' Mr.
Davis said. '' 'Dancing in the End Zone' has four. 'Family Planning' has seven -
it's an epic!''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              420 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FILMING A JAPANESE WRITER'S DRAMATIC LIFE-AND DEATH

BYLINE: By ALJEAN HARMETZ

SECTION: Section 2; Page 14, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2109 words


SAN RAFAEL,Calif.

On Nov. 25, 1970, the Japanese novelist, Yukio Mishima, pulled a knife across
his belly in the act of ritual suicide for which he had been yearning most of
his life. That suicide and the life that preceded it are now being turned into a
movie in one of the strangest Hollywood ventures of the last 50 years.

''Mishima'' is an American movie with a non-English-speaking Japanese cast
directed by a man who does not speak Japanese. When it reaches American movie
screens, the movie will have English subtitles. Movie theaters in Japan may
refuse to play the movie at all because Mishima's public suicide was an
embarrassment to his country.

''If Mishima did not exist, I would have had to invent him,'' says Paul
Schrader, in explanation of why he has spent five years trying to make a film
''that will bring me no financial remuneration now or forever.''

The 38-year-old screenwriter of ''Taxi Driver'' and ''Raging Bull'' and director
of ''American Gigolo'' and ''Cat People'' stubs another cigarette butt into an
ashtray jammed with butts. He grew up in a repressive Calvinist family where it
was a sin to go to the movies or to smoke a cigarette.

The overflowing ashtray is in a cement building at George Lucas's Lucasfilm. Mr.
Schrader is here in northern California overseeing the editing that will get
''Mishima'' ready for next spring's Cannes Film Festival. He sees the most
famous Japanese writer of the postwar years, a man who narrowly missed getting
the Nobel Prize in literature, as a ''bookend'' to Travis Bickle, the homicidal
taxi driver he created for Martin Scorsese's movie. They are both, he says,
people trapped in Plexiglas cages in a world where they cannot be free, people
who feel they do not exist. But where ''Taxi Driver'' with its fantasy of
apocalyptic violence was ''a young man's picture,'' ''Mishima'' with its
questions of the relationship between life and art is, he says, ''my first
middle-aged picture.''

''I've always worked around the subject of acting out - particularly as it
involves the notions of guilt, sin and redemption. How does one act out those
internal pressures? My characters act out in their everyday life. I act out in
my scripts. Mishima acted out in both. Mishima violated what I believe is the
fundamental purpose of art. I believe you can mitigate personal problems, can
rid yourself of dangerous ideas by expressing them in artistic metaphor. Writing
about a suicidal character just kicked Mishima's suicidal fantasies to a higher
level.''



Not very long ago, Paul Schrader also acted out in life as well as art. ''I got
in a little over my head,'' he says cautiously, his pugnacious, nondescript face
overwhelmed by huge horn-rimmed glasses. ''Then I made the radical decision to
pull back from the fast lane.''

If, as his friends say, his particular fast lane included drugs, he does not
mention them. ''There was someone I planned to marry,'' he says tonelessly. ''I
thought I could get away with an affair with Nastassja Kinski. I couldn't. As a
director and writer you think you can touch up the script. It comes as a bit of
a shock when you realize you can't do a rewrite on your life.''

Part of his fascination with Mishima comes from Mishima's ability to perfect his
life as art. He was a novelist who wrote 40 novels, a playwright, an actor, a
married man with children, and a homosexual. He took up bodybuilding when he was
30 and transformed his frail body. Although less political than in the grip of
private fantasies, he organized a private army of nearly 100 fanatical followers
to restore the glory of the Emperor. He wore Levis and lived in a ''Victorian
Colonial'' house and wanted urgently to die as a samurai. He became a media
personality and shocked the Japanese by posing for a series of photographs in
which he died in every conceivable way, including a hatchet buried in his brain,
but he wrote almost every night of his adult life from midnight to 6 A.M. At the
age of 45, he produced, directed, and starred in a suicide that had been planned
two years before it took place.

With somewhat less dramatic gestures, Paul Schrader moved to New York in August
1982, married for the second time in August 1983, and fathered a child. Sharing
with Mishima a need for symbolic flamboyance, he abandoned the house he owned in
Hollywood. ''Somebody sold it,'' he says. ''Somebody else put the furniture in
storage. I haven't been back.''



The saga that led to ''Mishima'' - a movie with Frances Coppola and George Lucas
as executive producers; a score by Philip Glass, America's leading avant-garde
composer; stylized sets by Eiko Ishioka, Japan's leading avant-garde graphic
designer, and starring one of Japan's most famous actors, Ken Ogata - actually
began in 1968 when Leonard Schrader, Paul's older brother, avoided the Vietnam
War by becoming a Calvinist teacher-missionary. By the flip of a coin with
another young Calvinist, he ended in Kyoto rather than Teheran. It was Leonard
Schrader - a screenwriter who has co-authored ''The Yakuza,'' ''Blue Collar,''
and ''Mishima'' with his brother - who found Mishima's death ''dumbfounding''
and ''impossible to make sense of'' and who first pursued the movie rights to
his life.

The novelist's widow jealously guarded Mishima's image and refused to admit he
was a homosexual. There was also a literary executor, Jun Shiragi, who wanted no
exploitation of Mishima's life. Fairly fluent in Japanese and married to a
Japanese wife, Leonard Schrader came to terms with both the literary estate and
the widow after years of negotiation but didn't have the $50,000 necessary to
execute the agreement.

''Paul called me on March 30, 1980,'' says Tom Luddy, co-director of the
Telluride Film Festival and director of special projects for Francis Coppola's
Zoetrope Studios. Mr. Schrader wanted money but even more important, says Mr.
Luddy, ''Paul thought if Francis produced the film the project would have
maximum credibility in Japan. Francis is revered by the Japanese as the
quintessential American - a big, hairy, ethnic guy who is a great film artist.
The Japanese feel 'The Godfather' could be the story of a powerful Japanese
family.''



Mr. Luddy flew to Japan in April 1980. Two years of arduous negotiations later,
there was a Japanese partner to provide initial financing and an agreement with
Mrs. Mishima that the picture would not be about homosexuality and violence.
Mrs. Mishima would eventually denounce the script as being about homosexuality
and violence. The Japanese distribution company would try to back out. People
close to the film are convinced there was government pressure to keep the film
from being made because the perception of Mishima as a right-wing martyr - he
died with the ''Tenno heika banzai'' of a Kamikaze pilot on his lips - would
embarrass the current government.

''A lot of Mishima's antics were performed in public and everybody was
conspiring to erase the memory,'' says John Peters, the chief operating officer
of Zoetrope. Adds Paul Schrader, ''The problem wasn't the homosexuality but the
self-promotion. Japan is a consensus culture. The fact Mishima made the whole
nation deal with his death disquiets the Japanese.''

Because of the failure of ''One From the Heart,'' by 1983 Francis Coppola's
empire had collapsed. He had lost his nine-acre studio, and, to pay off bank
debts, he had frantically hired himself out to the producers of ''The Cotton
Club.'' In June 1983, a $150,000 rights payment on ''Mishima'' was due, and
there was no money. ''We kept the deal alive,'' says Mr. Luddy, ''by sending
$800 and a note that said, 'We're a little bit short on our first payment.' ''

The Schraders arrived in Japan in November 1983 with a $5.5 million movie to
make and only the tantalizing promise of money from the Japanese distributor.

''Frances told us to go ahead anyway,'' says Mr. Luddy, the American co-producer
of ''Mishima.'' ''On General Patton's theory that you advance even though you
have no support because the supply troops will catch up with you before you
perish.''

Meanwhile, the Japanese co-producer, Mataichiro Yamamoto, was deliberately
borrowing money he would not be able to repay. ''His theory,'' says Mr. Luddy,
''was that if he borrowed enough money, he would put himself in a position where
he would be ruined and the distributors could not lose face by allowing such an
embarrassing thing to happen.'' Toho-Towa did, indeed, come through with the
money it had promised - but not until March 1984.



At Christmas 1983, says Mr. Luddy, ''Things looked really grim. We had an
obligation to come up with several hundred thousand dollars. I went to Francis
and asked if I could go to George Lucas and tell him we needed help.''

Mr. Lucas had started out as Mr. Coppola's protege. Then the relationship
between the cautious, fastidious Lucas and the reckless Coppola had turned
bitter. But, in 1983, the collapse of Mr. Coppola's financial house of cards and
the collapse of Mr. Lucas's marriage had brought the two men closer. ''Francis
had lost everything financially. George had lost everything emotionally,'' says
a friend.

Mr. Lucas promised to raise $3.5 million by getting an American studio to put up
money to distribute the film. Although film studios are eager to build a
relationship with someone as successful as the creator of ''Star Wars,'' this
particular project seemed financially absurd to most of them. It was not until
April 1984, after the movie was already in production, that Warner Bros. agreed
to provide the money.

Mr. Schrader says that, despite the subtitles, ''Mishima'' is an American motion
picture. ''The rhythms are American. The movie sounds Japanese, but visually,
it's American.'' In another example, Philip Glass has said his score does not
imitate Japanese music. ''If I had orientalized the music it would have been a
cheap shot,'' says the composer of ''Einstein on the Beach.'' Mr. Glass's one
concession to Japanese music was the use of wind chimes.

Mr. Schrader laughs abruptly. ''Writers always complain you don't see their
words,'' he says. ''For the first time you'll actually see what I wrote.''

No one, however, will hear what he wrote, since the Japanese script - written by
Leonard Schrader's wife, Chieko - uses different metaphors to get over the same
ideas in ways more appropriate to that culture. The visual metaphors are also
often different. To show affection in the American version of ''Mishima,''
''Mishima's'' mother kisses her son. In the Japanese version, she stares at him.

Chieko Schrader and a Japanese- speaking American, Alan Poul, served as
translators between Mr. Schrader and his Japanese actors and crew. Each had the
additional job of making sure the other had not misinterpreted Mr. Schrader.



According to Mr. Schrader and Mr. Luddy, it would have cost nearly $20 million
to make ''Mishima'' in America. In addition to low salaries, says Mr. Luddy,
there are no union barriers in Japan. When it was necessary to spread lily
petals over one of the 41 sets, everyone from sound men to the principal actors
helped.

''Mishima'' will not be an easy movie to comprehend. It has a complicated
structure which Mr. Schrader describes as two grids set on top of each other.

''The stylistic grid has three parts,'' he says. ''There is the last day of
Mishima's life which is shot in color in pseudo-documentary style like a
Costa-Gavras film. Everything in his life prior to Nov. 25, 1970 was shot in
black-and-white and static in composition. Then there are excerpts from his
novels 'The Temple of the Golden Pavillion,' 'Kyoko's House,' and 'Runaway
Horses.' The stories from the novels use stylized, theatrical sets designed by
Eiko, who didn't design anything else in the picture. That's to make reality
seem synthetic.''

The thematic grid has four phases: the young Mishima's obsession with beauty,
the young man becoming an artist, his acting out through politics, and his
attempt to harmonize the pen and the sword. The last day of his life is
presented chronologically but is interrupted for black-and-white flashbacks and
for glimpses of Mishima's fantasy life through an excerpt from the appropriate
novel. ''At the moment of Mishima's death,'' says Mr. Schrader, ''you see how
each of the novels - his fantasies - ends.''

Mr. Schrader lights up another cigarette and smiles wryly. ''Since nobody
expects this film to make money, I can say, 'This movie will make you think
while it entertains you.' But I've certainly cut off the conventional excuse for
the critics - that I was only trying to make money.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              421 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
SO LONG TO 1984

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 13, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 738 words


WASHINGTON Dear George Orwell, wherever you are: l984 wasn't such a disaster
after all. The things you feared the most for this year didn't really happen, or
at least weren't as scary as you predicted in l949.

Things weren't very good either. Only about a third of the world's people are
living in decent freedom. At the end of this year, the Pope in Rome was still
pleading, as you did all your brief life, for the cold and hungry and abandoned
of the earth. But there were some consolations.

As I remember, there were only 20 years between the two world wars of your time.
And while you were right in predicting an age of perpetual local wars, political
scoundrels and religious fanatics, we have avoided your third world war now for
two generations - and considering the availability and popularity of sex these
days, maybe for three.

Your Big Brother is still around, revealing and twisting the truth with his
computers in ways even you didn't imagine, but he's not really as big as Hitler
or Stalin were in l934.

The present nuclear giants are terrified of their own power. They couldn't wipe
out the little folk of Afghanistan, Vietnam or Lebanon. They chained their own
wrists to keep their hands from trembling.

Stalin's dreams of a Communist empire that would last for a thousand years fell
apart like Hitler's. Washington now has better relations with Moscow and Peking
than they have with one another, which is not saying much, but says something.

Believe it or not, the big shots have even begun to doubt their own ideological
prejudices. The economic determinists in Moscow now survive by borrowing and
stealing modern technology from their adversaries in Europe and Japan.

The Chinese are flirting with capitalism, sitting on the fence, trying to make a
dollar out of 15 cents. Francois Mitterrand in Paris is trying to adjust his
socialist theories to the brutal facts of the first-world economy. And Ronald
Reagan, with his supply-siders and backsliders, is winding up with the biggest
budget and trade deficit in American history.

I wouldn't say, George, that you had it all wrong. You scared the pants off us,
but your fast ball was better than your control.

The enemies of the last war - the Germans and the Japanese - have become our
allies. The Germans and the French have composed their ancient enmities, and
Europe is beginning to think again, not only about an English Channel tunnel,
but about how to avoid becoming a little divided peninsula between the giants.

All this is good news, but we have a problem around here that you didn't write
about. We have so much freedom that we don't quite know how to handle it.

We have free speech, but almost everything that's said is written by somebody
else. ''If liberty means anything,'' you wrote, ''it means the right to tell
people what they do not like to hear.''

In l984 in America that was not a popular idea. Television replaced the print
press as the main transmitter of the news and the principal instrument of
election politics.

It is not working out now precisely as you predicted. The news has become a form
of television entertainment. The people are not being misled by wicked men
telling them lies, but by amiable men telling them what they want to hear and
avoiding dissent whenever they can, with the approval of the majority of the
people.

Yet in the wider world, modern communications are not necessarily instruments of
repression but may actually be going the way of freedom.

For the facts of a changing world are drifting on the airwaves across the Iron
Curtains that divide Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin America and telling the
isolated peoples that the hunger of their children is not inevitable but
intolerable.

And by l994 or at least by the end of the century, the chances are that we will
have worldwide television that cannot be jammed by dictators, and the notion of
freedom and cooperation will begin to be heard in all nations.

So farewell, George, to l984 and all your dark visions and grim fantasies.
Everything you loved and fought for has been threatened, but nothing has been
irretrievably lost. Except, of course, your voice, and nobody now writes as well
as you did in the dreary 40's.

By the way, is it better up there? Are the heavenly hosts as happy as we are
told? And if it's all so peaceful, what do you find to write and protest about?
And if you can't write, how can you be satisfied?B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              422 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Requiem for a Nation

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 613 words


Orwell's year ends with all his imagined horrors realized in Afghanistan. Five
years ago, the Soviet Union undertook a ''limited and temporary'' intervention
at the ''invitation'' of a beleaguered Marxist ruler. He was then murdered by
his supposed comrades, and a docile successor was implanted. The war thus
spawned in lies, and waged in stealth, has now run longer than Stalin's war with
Hitler.

Sadly, the Soviet method ''works.'' The Kremlin can rotate recruits to maintain
an occupation force of 115,000 without worrying about dissent at home or protest
abroad. A war that threatens a nation with extinction draws little more than
token censure by the United Nations. And since Afghanistan is officially closed,
much of the world finds it convenient to look the other way.

The indifference is too often excused by the claim that the most appalling
accounts of Soviet atrocities come from refugees and resistance fighters given
to overstatement. But that does not hold for the hundred-odd European physicians
working in medical centers in the insurgent regions of Afghanistan.

''When an Afghan woman tells you she left home because Russian soldiers killed
almost everyone in her village, including her children, you wonder,'' one doctor
told The Times's William Borders. ''But over the months, when two dozen more
Afghan women from various parts of the country come in with exactly the same
story, it begins to seem inescapably true.''

What Mr. Borders learned in just two weeks along the Afghan frontier in Pakistan
is amply corroborated by a Helsinki Watch team that also conducted scores of
interviews there: ''It soon became clear that just about every conceivable human
rights violation is occurring, and on an enormous scale.''

The team's report lists indiscriminate bombings, reprisals against villages and
villagers, summary executions, the mining of inhabited areas and homes, the
planting of grenades on corpses, destructing of agriculture, theft of civilian
property, desecration of mosques, killing prisoners of war, wreckage of
hospitals, assaults on journalists, training children as spies - all violations
of Geneva conventions to which the Soviet Union has solemnly subscribed.

Unable to win hearts and minds, the invaders now aim lower. The overwhelming
evidence is that in 1984 the Soviet occupiers widened the war to destroy food
production in rebel-held areas. Refugees fleeing these regions are being
forcibly interned to prevent their joining an exodus of more than four million
refugees, a fourth of Afghanistan's pre-invasion population.


Not since the Stalin era have massive crimes like these been credibly charged
against the Soviet Union. Yet there are no war crimes tribunals in Stockholm to
weigh the evidence, as happened when the United States was charged with
atrocities in Vietnam. When a Politburo member visited London, there were no
demonstrators chanting ''How many children did you kill today?'' The nonaligned
nations that protest so quickly for displaced Palestinians say little or nothing
about four million Afghan refugees.

The explanation for this double standard is that only democracies heed protest,
or that more is expected of them. That weak and callous argument is worthy of
''1984.''

There are military and political constraints on helping the Afghan resistance,
but none on speaking out for the victims of this appalling, pointless
aggression. No one ever challenged Afghanistan's neutrality. Soviet influence
there was assured forever without any invasion. ''A whole nation is dying,'' a
resistance leader said to the Helsinki Watch team. ''People should know.'' They
should indeed.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              423 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAJOR NEWS IN SUMMARY;
;
Vietnamese AttackCambodian Camps

ect Few $

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 337 words

Six years after invading Cambodia and establishing a friendly Government in Pnom
Penh, Vietnamese forces seemed intent last week on delivering a knockout blow
against rebel forces holding out in camps along the border with Thailand.

The large number of civilians killed and injured by artillery and tank guns led
Washington to describe the attacks as ''contemptible.'' Bangkok, which has to
deal with thousands of Cambodian refugees, called the Vietnamese onslaught
''cruel, savage and brutal.'' Whatever hopes there were for a settlement of the
civil war seemed more distant than ever.

Vietnam seemed anxious to wipe out the rebel bastions before the dry season ends
and the spring monsoon rains prevent large-scale movements of tanks and trucks.
Four camps where rebel forces are mixed with civilians were attacked. From the
largest camp at Rithisen more than 60,000 civilians fled into Thailand, while
Vietnamese tanks sought to beat back rebel counterattacks and Thai officers
nervously watched for signs of a spillover of the fighting. Thai military
sources reported that the rebels had recaptured part of the Rithisen camp.

Three rebel groups have coalesced in an effort to defeat some 180,000 Vietnamese
troops and the Government of Heng Samrin, whom they installed in Pnom Penh in
January 1979. Two groups are non-Communist and are supported by the West. The
third is the Chinese-backed Khmer Rouge, which governed with particular ferocity
until the Vietnamese invaded in December 1978.

The United States and neighboring Asian countries have been trying to promote
peace through the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces and self-determination by the
Cambodian people.

But last week, Representative Stephen J. Solarz, the Brooklyn Democrat who heads
a House subcommittee on Asia, said after a visit to Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia
that Vietnam still showed no willingness for talks to end the war. One reason
Vietnam might have to seek a settlement is its troubled economy, which needs
large doses of foreign aid.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              424 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING AND MOSCOW GET REACQUAINTED

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1032 words


PEKING IF it did not quite match the drama of Richard M. Nixon's visit in
February 1972, there was nonetheless unusual interest in the arrival here last
week of Soviet

deputy Prime Minister Ivan V. Arkhipov for the start of the most important
encounter between China and the Soviet Union in 15 years.

Mr. Arkhipov's visit began on an upbeat note when his Chinese counterpart, Vice
Premier Yao Yilin, first grasped the Russian's hand, then embraced him. Later,
four Politburo members greeted the Russian in similar fashion, telling him of
their pleasure in seeing him and of the gratitude China still feels for the
Soviet assistance immediately after the Communist takeover in 1949. The warmth
persisted as Mr. Arkhipov held four days of talks here, then flew south for a
tour of the Shenzhen special economic zone, the showcase of China's distinctly
un- Soviet attempt to modernize with the help of foreign investment, private
enterprise and competition.

At the end of the week, as Mr. Arkhipov wound up his visit, assessments of it
were mixed but the official upbeat note was maintained through the final banquet
Friday. From the frequency with which Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang and other
Chinese leaders referred to the 77-year- old economic specialist as ''an old
friend'' and as a man who had ''worked swimmingly together'' with the Chinese
during his years as chief of the Soviet aid program here in the 1950's, there
was no doubting that the atmosphere was good. Nor was there any disposition to
belittle the value of personal contact between high-ranking leaders for
dispelling some of the bad blood that has bedevilled relations between Moscow
and Peking.

All the same, there was plenty of evidence that it will take more than affection
toward an old comrade to solve the knotty problems blocking the normalization of
political relations that both sides have avowed as their goal. The talks ended
with the announcement of four new economic and technical agreements, including a
long-term trade pact, that were already in the works in May when the Arkhipov
trip was scrubbed in a fit of Soviet pique over President Reagan's successful
talks here in April and renewed border fighting between China and Vietnam. But
the Chinese leaders were careful to restate the conditions for a broader
political accommodation, which the Kremlin has already refused.

What emerged more strongly than before was China's decision to allow commercial
and economic ties to move ahead on an independent track. In this, there is less
sentiment than hard-headed calculation about the benefits China can reap by
allowing natural flows to resume. In the decade up to the border clashes in
1969, the heavy trade built up in the 1950's was reduced to barely $30 million a
year, and this crept back up to only $300 million by 1982. Once China's leader,
Deng Xiaoping, decided to emphasize economic growth, inhibiting the potential
that the two economies have for servicing each other became self-defeating.
Thus, it was agreed that for 1985, trade would be increased by 22 percent, to
$1.8 billion. The Russians also agreed to modernize several dozen factories
built in the 1950's with their help.  The commitment to a five-year trade pact
signalled a willingness on both sides to put matters onto a surer footing than
year-to-year arrangements have allowed. But even the most generous estimates by
Chinese and Soviet officials place a ceiling of about $6 billion on the barter
trade the two nations will be conducting by 1990, when the trade pact will
expire.  This is about as much trade as the United States and China will do in
1984. Peking's hunger for American technology suggests that the total will go
much higher in future years.  The trade figures reflect a wider truth. Although
the fashion among Chinese officials these days is to play down the strategic
relationship that developed with the United States after Mr. Nixon came, there
is much that attests to the strength of the American tie. The Arkhipov visit has
to be balanced in this year alone against the trips to Washington made by Prime
Minister Zhao and Defense Minister Zhang Aiping, and the visits here by Mr.
Reagan, Navy Secretary John Lehman and the American delegate to the United
Nations, Jeane Kirkpatrick.

A Threatening Presence

On the other hand, there is still much in the relationship with the Russians
that the Chinese consider threatening. The ''three obstacles'' to normalization
that were emphasized again last week - Soviet support for Vietnamese actions in
Cambodia, the Soviet presence in Afghanistan and Soviet troop deployment along
Chinese frontiers - are examples of Moscow's muscle-flexing on Peking's
doorstep. In 27 months of Foreign Ministry talks, the Soviet Union has shown no
readiness to compromise on any of the three, a stand that leaves 50 Soviet
divisions arrayed along the border and nuclear-armed aircraft at Mongolian bases
barely half an hour away from Peking. And far from preparing to move out of
Afghanistan, the Soviet Army marked the fifth anniversary of its entry into that
country with a continuing offensive in the countryside against stubborn
guerrilla resistance. (For President Reagan also, the Soviet occupation was ''a
serious impediment'' to improved relations.)

The part of the Arkhipov visit that seemed particularly interesting was the
Russian's visit to Shenzhen, the area bordering Hong Kong, where the Chinese
have granted tax and tariff concessions to foreign investors eager for low-cost
labor. Together with the unleashing of market forces and the decentralization of
economic authority sponsored by Mr. Deng, the experiment embodied at Shenzhen
makes for a stark contrast with the halting reforms the Kremlin has launched at
home. Soviet propagandists have predicted confidently that the Chinese policies
will fail, but the fact that Mr. Arkhipov went there - on his own initiative,
the Chinese say - suggests that Moscow was at least curious and wanted to look
things over all the same.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              425 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Requiem for a Nation

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 613 words


Orwell's year ends with all his imagined horrors realized in Afghanistan. Five
years ago, the Soviet Union undertook a ''limited and temporary'' intervention
at the ''invitation'' of a beleaguered Marxist ruler. He was then murdered by
his supposed comrades, and a docile successor was implanted. The war thus
spawned in lies, and waged in stealth, has now run longer than Stalin's war with
Hitler.

Sadly, the Soviet method ''works.'' The Kremlin can rotate recruits to maintain
an occupation force of 115,000 without worrying about dissent at home or protest
abroad. A war that threatens a nation with extinction draws little more than
token censure by the United Nations. And since Afghanistan is officially closed,
much of the world finds it convenient to look the other way.

The indifference is too often excused by the claim that the most appalling
accounts of Soviet atrocities come from refugees and resistance fighters given
to overstatement. But that does not hold for the hundred-odd European physicians
working in medical centers in the insurgent regions of Afghanistan.

''When an Afghan woman tells you she left home because Russian soldiers killed
almost everyone in her village, including her children, you wonder,'' one doctor
told The Times's William Borders. ''But over the months, when two dozen more
Afghan women from various parts of the country come in with exactly the same
story, it begins to seem inescapably true.''

What Mr. Borders learned in just two weeks along the Afghan frontier in Pakistan
is amply corroborated by a Helsinki Watch team that also conducted scores of
interviews there: ''It soon became clear that just about every conceivable human
rights violation is occurring, and on an enormous scale.''

The team's report lists indiscriminate bombings, reprisals against villages and
villagers, summary executions, the mining of inhabited areas and homes, the
planting of grenades on corpses, destructing of agriculture, theft of civilian
property, desecration of mosques, killing prisoners of war, wreckage of
hospitals, assaults on journalists, training children as spies - all violations
of Geneva conventions to which the Soviet Union has solemnly subscribed.

Unable to win hearts and minds, the invaders now aim lower. The overwhelming
evidence is that in 1984 the Soviet occupiers widened the war to destroy food
production in rebel-held areas. Refugees fleeing these regions are being
forcibly interned to prevent their joining an exodus of more than four million
refugees, a fourth of Afghanistan's pre-invasion population.


Not since the Stalin era have massive crimes like these been credibly charged
against the Soviet Union. Yet there are no war crimes tribunals in Stockholm to
weigh the evidence, as happened when the United States was charged with
atrocities in Vietnam. When a Politburo member visited London, there were no
demonstrators chanting ''How many children did you kill today?'' The nonaligned
nations that protest so quickly for displaced Palestinians say little or nothing
about four million Afghan refugees.

The explanation for this double standard is that only democracies heed protest,
or that more is expected of them. That weak and callous argument is worthy of
''1984.''

There are military and political constraints on helping the Afghan resistance,
but none on speaking out for the victims of this appalling, pointless
aggression. No one ever challenged Afghanistan's neutrality. Soviet influence
there was assured forever without any invasion. ''A whole nation is dying,'' a
resistance leader said to the Helsinki Watch team. ''People should know.'' They
should indeed.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              426 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE COUSINS

BYLINE: By Kathleen Teltsch

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6050 words


Kathleen Teltsch is a reporter on the metropolitan staff of The Times.

 THE SECLUDED ROCKEFELler estate in the Pocantico Hills of New York, overlooking
the Hudson River, offers an idyllic and very private setting for the homecomings
of the family's younger members. They met there two weeks ago, and also last
June, when the rhododendron and laurel were in bloom. The trees in full leaf
provided a shield, preventing outsiders from glimpsing the tennis matches, the
softball game or the children tumbling on the greensward. A vehicle constantly
patrolled the perimeter of the grounds.

The ''cousins'' - the collective name for the 22 fourth-generation heirs of John
D. Rockefeller, founder of the Standard Oil Company and one of the great
American family fortunes - arrived unobtrusively and were passed through the
guarded iron gates. They drove station wagons and sports cars, an occasional
Mercedes and a few Jeeps - visible symbols of diverse tastes and life styles.

As usual, the gathering combined the unplanned recreation of a family reunion
with business sessions held in the two-story gymnasium that John D. Rockefeller
Jr. built for his five sons, John, Nelson, Laurance, Winthrop and David. (A
diagram of the third- and fourth-generation Rockefellers is on page 30.) Huge
paintings of the brothers in military uniform hang on the walls of this
spacious, handsomely designed building the family calls the Playhouse.

The cousins have been meeting there for more than a decade, but the conclaves
this year seem especially important. Increasingly, the cousins are developing
their own priorities. And, as this process continues, David Rockefeller Jr.
appears to be emerging as one of the leaders of the younger Rockefellers.

Eileen Growald, David Jr.'s youngest sister and his successor as the president
of the cousins' association, recently acknowledged there is a sense within the
group that now is a time of transition. The shared awareness, she says
confidently, has welded them closer together.

''We talk about family matters and about issues of broad impact,'' she said,
citing as one example the considerable financial support the cousins give to
reducing the threat of nuclear war. Whatever the issue, she added: ''We talk as
close friends who have a deep caring for one another and respect for
differences. This increases as the baton is passed from one generation to
another.''

Preparation for the passing of the baton has been going on quietly. Certainly,
the cousins have been groomed most of their lives for this time. The agenda for
last June's meeting included a discussion of family ''leadership.'' The subject
of leadership is increasingly important, if only for the simple fact that, of
the third generation of Rockefellers, only Laurance and David survive. The
others, including Abby, the only sister, died during the 1970's.

The brothers (as the third generation is called) cast a formidable shadow. John
was a philanthropist, supporter of population control and patron of Asian
culture; Laurance, a venture capitalist and conservationist; David, the chairman
of one of the nation's largest banks and a civic force; Winthrop, Governor of
Arkansas, and Nelson, Vice Presi- dent under Gerald R. Ford and Governor of New
York. Their legacy includes the sponsoring of research to improve health and
education standards and reduce hunger abroad. Their fortune has been behind
Colonial Williamsburg, Va., and the Museum of Modern Art in New York.

The most visible cousin has been John D. (Jay) Rockefeller IV, the Governor of
West Virginia, who recently won a Senate seat. Other cousins are setting
independent courses, some far afield of traditional family pursuits. Dr. Lucy
Waletzky, a Washington psychiatrist and Laurance's daughter, and Eileen Growald,
president of the New York-based Institute for the Advancement of Health, are
involved separately in innovative studies in mental health. Although the
Rockefellers have had a long-standing commitment to education, Nelson's son
Steven Rockefeller is probably the first to achieve academic prominence, as the
dean of Middlebury College. His brother Rodman Rockefeller, the oldest male of
the cousins' generation, heads Ibec, an agribusiness company. Margaret Dulany,
David's daughter, is senior vice president of the New York City Partnership, a
coalition of business, educational and nonprofit interests put together by her
father to promote economic development. Her sister Neva Goodwin is on the board
of trustees of Rockefeller University; Abby O'Neill, Abby's daughter, is
involved in the Williamsburg restoration.

The fourth-generation Rockefellers are beginning to make their presence felt,
and as they do so they are emerging from an anonymity cultivated by vast wealth,
the family's obsessive privacy and individual lingering doubts about their
Rockefeller identity. Major steps have already been taken toward transferring
more philanthropic responsibilities to them. One has been the development of a
''strategy for the 1980's'' for the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, one of the
country's 50 wealthiest foundations. The plan, now in effect, is steering the
fund into expanded work on global security and resources - a direct reflection
of the cousins' interests. With this, a new Rockefeller chapter begins.



 THE FOURTH GENERATION'S INheritance has not as yet been quantified. It extends
through a network of more than 100 financial trusts - the 22- acre Rockefeller
Center being the largest single asset. But, compared with the brothers, the
cousins have much smaller individual resources at their disposal.

Yearly, however, not only third- but fourth-generation Rockefellers appear on
lists of the country's wealthiest families. Forbes magazine listed the fortune
of David Rockefeller in excess of $1 billion. Laurance's holdings are said to
exceed $700 million. Of the cousins, Winthrop Paul, 36, is said to have
inherited at least $550 million; Abby O'Neill, at least $300 million. The
families of Nelson and John are each reported to share an estimated $600
million. Yet, because Rockefeller lawyers and financial advisers zealously guard
their clients' privacy, such figures cannot be confirmed. However, according to
sources within and outside the family, popular estimates of the cousins' worth
are greatly overvalued.

The cousins range in age from 56-year-old Abby O'Neill to 17-year-old Mark, the
youngest son of Nelson and Margaretta (Happy) Rockefeller. Women among the
cousins outnumber men 3 to 1. There are also 50 fifth-generation Rockefellers,
who have their own group.

Spouses of the cousins have their own ''in-law'' grouping. One member blithely
allowed that their major discussions center on money and how to deal with the
family culture - a tacit admission that marrying a Rockefeller can raise
nettlesome issues. Nonfamily members remain in the family circle after the death
of a spouse, but divorce ends the association.  Many, if not most, of the
Rockefellers have divorced and remarried.

The young cousins spent weekends and holidays at Pocantico, a 2,700- acre
estate. There they grew up sheltered, depending mainly on one another for
companionship. Although virtually all have moved away from New York, making
their homes elsewhere on the East Coast and in California, they return at least
twice a year for the meetings.

Most of the cousins came of age during the turmoil of the 1960's, which drew
them into campus demonstrations against the Vietnam War and involved many in
groups vociferously advocating social change. Being a Rockefeller also made some
of them targets for activists denouncing the ''capitalist'' war. For Alida
Dayton, the youngest child of Blanchette Ferry Hooker and John Rockefeller,
involvement in the antiwar movement created painful doubts about her family's
great wealth. On visits home from Stanford University, she peppered her parents
with questions about how the fortune had been amassed. ''I still don't know if I
agree or not with the way our money was made,'' she said in a rare interview two
years ago, when her husband, Mark Dayton, unsuccessfully sought a Senate seat
from Minnesota. ''I certainly can't make up for that. All I can do is to be the
best person I can and try to use my money to help others,''

''I don't think I'd say it any differently now,'' she said this month. ''I
really was speaking from my heart, and what I felt and said are still true.''

For many cousins, the 1960's were years of alienation and confusion about their
identity, and a few dropped their family name or tried renouncing their
inheritance only to discover it had been placed in unbreakable trust for their
descendants. Some of them sought psychiatric help in their struggle to find
themselves.

Frustrations were also growing about the management of their financial and
personal affairs by a 200-member staff, headquartered in what is called ''Room
5600,'' two floors in an office tower at Rockefeller Center. To the cousins,
this arrangement ''infantilized'' them and insulated them from decisions. Some
were incensed, for example, about investments made in corporations doing
business with South Africa. At their 1972 meeting, they vented their objections
and demanded a report on the cost - reportedly $6 million yearly - and staffing
of Room 5600.

A detailed account of the cousins' rebellion and painful struggle to cope with
their identity was given in an engrossing book, ''The Rockefellers,'' by Peter
Collier and David Horowitz, based on hundreds of hours of interviews with
disaffected fourth-generation members. Its publication in 1976 not only deeply
disturbed the parents, but also made many cousins wary about sharing confidences
with outsiders. More than a dozen Rockefeller cousins declined repeated requests
to be interviewed for this article or simply did not respond. Others agreed, but
insisted their children neither be identified, photographed nor, in some cases,
even mentioned. In granting interviews, they spoke for the first time about
their public endeavors and about their concern for the future.



 BBY O'NEILL ONCE SAID OF her younger cousin, ''David would have had a great
career as a singer - if he had not been born a Rockefeller.'' If that is true,
David, the oldest child of Margaret McGrath and David Rockefeller, seems to have
come to terms pleasantly with his destiny. ''I think you either are born with a
great voice or not,'' he says, ''and my own objective judgment is that I
wouldn't have been a great talent. But I love the experience of singing publicly
and the challenge and thrill of it.'' Last April, in Lexington, Mass., David, a
baritone, sang in a production of Mozart's ''Cos i Fan Tutti.''

''The theme for my life has been the arts and music particularly,'' says David,
who, at 43, is a trustee of the Museum of Modern Art as well as an overseer of
the Boston Symphony Orchestra. The ''music line,'' as he calls it, is an
inheritance from his mother's side, along with her feeling for poetry and what
he calls the ''crafting of words, to find a verbal outlet for the emotions.''

David, who has a degree from the Harvard Law School, has taken on more and more
responsibility for the family's affairs. Last year, he headed the planning
committee to draft the new strategy for the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, the
foundation created in 1940. Because the family no longer has formal links with
the bigger, billion-dollar Rockefeller Foundation, started by John D.
Rockefeller in 1913, the Brothers Fund, with assets of $165 million, has become
the major vehicle for carrying out family philanthropy. The smaller Rockefeller
Family Fund, with assets of $20 million, has been a virtual training ground for
the cousins.

''There is no way that our generation would have been interested in working on
the Brothers Fund 20 years ago, because it really belonged to the brothers'
generation,'' David said last year. He acknowledged that drawing up a new
strategy, among family and nonfamily trustees, had involved reconciling diverse
views on many issues, including disarmament.

Their report recommended a ''one world'' perspective, focusing on issues of
resources and global ''security,'' including arms control, international
relations, economic development, trade and finance. Two- thirds of the Brothers
Fund's $6 million grant budget has been allocated to the ''one world'' theme.
The proposal was accepted unanimously by both generations.

''David is a healer,'' says William M. Dietel, the fund's president. ''He is a
superb listener, he writes well and he has the gift of being able to find
consensus.''

Along with his siblings and cousins, David is working to increase voter
registration among underrepresented groups - women, blacks, Hispanic people, the
poor and the elderly. Last June, in a speech at a meeting of the United States
Conference of Mayors, he announced the establishment of the Citizens
Participation Project, promising that the drive would continue beyond the 1984
election to reach the country's 80 million nonvoters. His speech, underscoring
the plight of the cities as well as touching on such international issues as
hunger and the arms race, was his first major political statement' Still, he
disclaims any ambition for elected office.

''I'm a back-office person, but I care deeply who sits in the front office in
terms of politics,'' he says.

After law school, David spent five years as assistant manager of the Boston
Symphony Orchestra. As chairman of Arts, Education and Americans, an advocacy
organization promoting the teaching of the arts in public schools, he has
testified before Congress.

Recently, he agreed to devote part of his time to managing the human-resources
department for Room 5600, becoming the only salaried family member. David's task
is to improve the functioning of the legal, investment, accounting and
philanthropic units.

Referring to the cousins' widely shared concern that they were being treated as
wards, David says: ''There are ways of flipping this fear.  If you begin to
control the entity which you sense controls you, then it no longer controls you.
I think there are a number of us who, over the last decade - the cousins and the
fifth-generation members - have taken a very active role in making certain that
the profile of the service organization in the future suits their needs and
their capacity to pay for it.''

Costs have been pared and there have been other changes at Room 5600, now headed
by William F. Pounds, former dean of the Sloan School of Management at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He was at M.I.T. when the Vietnam War and
the school's military-research contracts provoked campus protests that resulted
in his heading a student-faculty inquiry panel. He says mildly that many of the
cousins' voiced frustrations had a ''familiar rhetoric.''

David likes to work in shirtsleeves, sipping club soda, and refers to Pounds as
''my boss.'' Because he must spend more time at the office and away from his
family, David has taken an apartment within walking distance of Rockefeller
Center.

To think of the cousins as a collective voice, Pounds advises, is a mistake.
Certainly, it's wrong to ask, ''What do the cousins think?''

David agrees, but says that growing up during the 60's influenced most of the
cousins. In those years, some looked on their inherited wealth as an unwanted
burden. His sister Abby, a professed Marxist, gave her money freely to radical
causes.

''There certainly have been times in my life when it was more difficult than fun
to be wealthier than most of my peers,'' he says, ''but I think that was an
adolescent problem and, to some extent, a problem in my 20's. I call it the
'beautiful woman syndrome.'

''I've often had conversations with exceptionally beautiful women who share one
important thing in common: a mistrust that people like you for your exterior,
your external assets as opposed to your interior. That's the great challenge for
anyone with trappings that could overwhelm the essence of the individual.

''There's one thing about singing. There's no way anyone else can take credit or
blame for the voice !xcept yourself. I once had someone on an early television
interview say to me that it must be wonderful to do or be anything you want. I
said it was not true. I could never be a soprano.''



 CCOMPANYING HER FAther, David Rockefeller, on trips was an important element in
shaping the career interests of Eileen Growald, David's younger sister by 11
years and his successor as president of the cousins' group. In 1979, she went
with him to Williamsburg, acting as hostess for a dinner given in her
grandparents' home for a group of Russians attending one of the informal
Dartmouth Conferences on Soviet-American relations.  The previous evening, she
had met Norman Cousins, author of ''Anatomy of an Illness,'' an account of his
fight to overcome a crippling illness that doctors said he had a 1-in- 500
chance of surviving. Eileen and Cousins talked for almost a half hour, mainly
about his conviction that creativity was linked with longevity. Overnight, she
decided to include in her toast to the Russian guests a poem she had written,
titled ''The Promise of Spring.''

''I always have been interested in individuals and in relationships between
diverse individuals,'' says Eileen, a comely and animated woman of 32. ''There
was no interpretation into Russian, but those who understood loved the idea. It
was a human touch.''

Cousins, who was impressed by the poem, requesting a copy, kept in touch with
her, and their friendship solidified. She went with him as his assistant to a
writers' conference in the Soviet Union. The Russian participants surprised her
by translating and reading her poem. The Russians have a definitely schmaltzy,
emotional side that is very family-oriented and shows in reverence for the
elderly and affection for relatives,'' she says. ''I guess this was their way of
telling me they were glad to have me there.''

Her earnestness, sincere and unaffected, is that of someone unconcerned about
sounding sentimental. ''Eileen wears her innocence like a seamless armor, but
there are strengths, too,'' says Dietel of the Brothers Fund. ''And they emerge
more and more as she grows older.''

Her major interest is the Institute for the Advancement of Health, established
in 1982 to further the scientific understanding of how emotions and attitudes
affect physical well-being. The institute is the outgrowth of the loss she
suffered when two close friends who had been her mentors died within a year.

''I think the timing is right,'' she says. ''There is burgeoning interest out
there, waiting to find some way to affect a field we're all increasingly
concerned about - this puzzling and nebulous field of mind and body.''

The institute's quarterly journal already has attracted favorable comment in
medical circles, as has its first bibliography of scientific papers on
behavioral immunology, the study of how attitudes can affect the immune system.
M. Barry Flint, executive director of the institute and a psychologist, says,
''We're part foundation, part publishing house and part information
clearinghouse.''

Housed in a narrow, bland, mid-Manhattan office building, the institute is
functional and unostentatious. A prominently placed photograph of Albert
Schweitzer is a gift from Cousins. ''I've had the support of my husband and
Norman,'' whom she calls her best friend and a major influence in her work,
''and so I'm doubly lucky.'' Her husband, Paul, is a businessman.

She seems eager to underscore that her commitment is no girlish enthusiasm but a
soundly planned, serious undertaking that must attract financial support from
outside the Rockefeller family and approval from the medical profession to
thrive. So far, she has garnered, after making her own financial contributions,
a group of foundations to make modest grants; a prestigious board of directors,
and a scientific advisory board. The foundation, with its comparatively lean
$460,000 budget, will offer small grants for research in areas bypassed by
traditional medical support.

Succeeding without depending on Rockefeller money is important to Eileen: ''All
you have to do is have the family giving in the start-up stage, and you'll be
tied to them for life. No one else will contribute, figuring it's Rockefeller
supported.'' She anticipated some skepticism from the medical community: ''Why
do you think I got so many credible names behind me? I was not about to go out
and tell their world what to do. I got all these people everybody already
believed in to go out and do it.''

Credibility is all important, she says with a quizzical smile. ''Remember my
great-great-grandfather sold snake oil.''



 THREE YEARS AGO, DR. LUCY Waletzky, the daughter of Mary French and Laurance S.
Rockefeller, and her partner, Dr. Stephen P. Hersh, set out to treat emotional
problems associated with physical illness. Together, the two psychiatrists
established the Medical Illness Counseling Center in Chevy Chase, Md. They
started working with patients and their families, using a wide range of
treatments, including psychotherapy, biofeedback and hypnosis - a combination of
techniques that more conventional practitioners tend to regard skeptically.

''Traditional medicine regards health as being free of symptoms; we focus on all
the emotional factors involved, because mind and body are intertwined as the
threads of a tapestry,'' Lucy says, lacing her fingers together. She and Eileen
talk, but their involvement in overlapping fields is coincidental.

A slim woman of 43 whose movements are quick and graceful, Lucy speaks with
animation about the center, yet says little of her own contribution. Dr. Hersh
prods her, fills in, saying she works full time without salary, that her
contribution makes low fees for poor patients possible.

Many of their patients are children, and the center's waiting room is furnished
with small chairs and shelves of wind-up toys. ''Lucy loves buying them,'' Dr.
Hersh says.

The center is near her home, a large, gracious white house set back on a
tree-shaded corner frequently overrun with children. For years, she has coached
a co-ed soccer team.



 OTH LUCY AND HER CO-DIRECtor are confident they are furthering clinical
research on minimizing the toll emotional stress takes on the body. They tackle
problems ranging from helping patients cope with a major disease or accident to
helping families deal with infertility or terminal illness. Many cases are
referred to them after other physicians have failed. These are ''high- risk''
cases, Dr. Hersh says , but then Lucy's father is a venture capitalist. ''She is
being a venture capitalist in the medical field,'' he says.

Lucy's involvement grew out of her work at Georgetown University treating
postsurgical gynecology patients experiencing emotional trauma. Referring to her
undergraduate years, she says: ''I guess I was influenced by Albert Schweitzer,
his reverence for life and all. I was terribly young and silly. I was very taken
with all those television dramas like 'Dr. Kildare' and 'Ben Casey.' ''

Medical school was difficult, she says, in part because of her dyslexia, a
learning disability afflicting a number of Rockefellers, including her uncle
Nelson. She had to repeat her first year. At Columbia University's College of
Physicians and Surgeons, she met and married another student, Dr. Jeremy
Waletzky, who also is a pychiatrist.

Her first significant philanthropy began in 1969, stimulated by a meeting with
Dr. Helen Caldicott, the Australian pediatrician and antinuclear advocate.
Gradually, she combined her interests in women's issues with medicine. She has
long been involved with La Leche League, which promotes breastfeeding. She also
is a trustee of the American College of Nurse Midwives Foundation, a 17-year-
old organization working to eliminate legal and practical barriers impeding
qualified practitioners.

''We favor giving women options on whether to have their children in hospitals
or birthing clinics, which are increasing around the country, and not just for
poor women,'' says Kathryn Boyer, the foundation's president. ''Dr. Waletzky
supports this choice, and the emphasis we put on wellness - not illness - is
what she's all about. She's really ahead of her time.'' MIDDLEBURY COLlege,
tucked into a pleasantly agricultural Vermont community, has a tradition of
encouraging service to the needy and a strong commitment to the environment. Its
graduates have included numerous young people with inherited wealth who have set
a new philanthropic style by creating ''alternative foundations'' to develop
community leadership among minority groups. The 184-year-old school has been
instrumental in shaping the interests of many Rockefellers.

Eileen Growald went to Middlebury, as did two grandchildren of Nelson
Rockefeller. Yet the continuing Rockefeller presence is Nelson's son, Steven,
who came to the college in 1970 as assistant professor of religion. He now is
dean.

On a fall afternoon, after a long meeting with a student, Steven obligingly
skips lunch to show still another visitor through an art exhibition that he
assembled for the recent conference on Christianity and Buddhism. Three years of
preparation went into its planning. The Dalai Lama came. William F. Buckley Jr.
televised two hourlong programs there. Nearly 6,000 visitors saw the art show.

Steven was pleased. He had planned the event, hoping to extend the
Buddhist-Christian dialogue that, he says, has been developing in the last
decade. ''The great world traditions have something to gain from learning from
each other what they have learned - and sharing with each other what they have
discovered,'' he says, touching on a favorite theme.

In 1976, he began an intensive study of Zen Buddhism, making frequent weeklong
visits to the Zen Center in Rochester, where he is a trustee. His adoption of
Zen Buddhism ''opened him up,'' but it does not reject his being a Christian.

''People turn to Buddhism looking for a method of growth, and with psychological
insights this can take you far,'' he says. ''The Christian church tells
individuals to love and be forgiving, but most churches offer very little to
develop this capacity in human life. What I see happening - and this came out
clearly at our conference - is that Christian tradition is going to find a great
deal in Buddhism that will be helpful. It likely will take hundreds of years,
but it has started.''

Tall and lanky, balding yet youthful-looking, 48-year-old Steven strides across
campus, breezily returning the greetings of faculty and students. The impression
left is that he has found his niche. The search for it has been long and
sometimes painful, including years of questioning the ethics behind the
Rockefeller fortune as well as probing his own religious faith.

Sitting in his office, he remembers visiting, as a boy of 12, a huge cathedral
in Mexico City, ornamented with gold, and observing the elderly peasant women
dressed in black dropping coins into the collection box. ''They were so
obviously poor and worn looking,'' he says. ''The whole scene revealed such a
social injustice. There must be something wrong when the church that should help
the poor was asking them to contribute to a building.'' In 1960, after Princeton
and a short career in the Rockefeller Center rental office, he enrolled at Union
Theological Seminary.

''Looking back, during my 20's, I went through a period of considerable doubt
and uncertainty, which was intensified by the social turmoil of the 1960's,''
says Steven, who spent five years in psychoanalysis. ''I began radically to
question my own identity and became deeply concerned with questions about God
and the ultimate meaning of existence.''

Steven was also compelled to explore his thoughts about inherited wealth. ''The
conclusions I have arrived at, in brief, are these,'' he says, weighing his
words with care. ''There is something seriously wrong with a social system that
allows poverty and related disadvantages to exist alongside extremes of wealth
and privilege. Any sensitive, rational person can perceive the injustice in such
a situation. Nothing beneficial is accomplished if this awareness lapses into
guilt over the simple fact of having accumulated or inherited wealth.

''There is, however, an urgent challenge in this situation that confronts a
person, and it is simply this: How can I develop my own unique capacities and
interests, and use the wealth and power which has been entrusted to me by
society so as to benefit others and create a more just and compassionate
world?''

The answers he reached helped shape his philosophy about philanthropy. He
appears to see himself as a custodian of the fortune given to him. ''It is
important to remember that whatever resources we have acquired, they are
rightfully thought of not so much as possessions but as things that belong to
the larger community of being, entrusted to us for wise use.''

Steven's personal philanthropy focuses on education in the broadest sense, which
includes support for planned parenthood and contributions to human-rights and
environmental causes. He is directly involved with the Wendell Gilley Museum, a
small institution on Mount Desert Island in Maine that houses one of the world's
great collections of wooden carvings of American birds.

He and his wife, Dori, a part- time lecturer in the school's education
department, live a short distance from the campus in a contemporary house
designed with a Japanese influence. He has four children, three by his highly
publicized first marriage to a young Norwegian employed in the Rockefeller
household.

Steven, who enjoys hiking (''I could never live in the city''), still teaches
Western and Eastern religions. He is also president of a small nearby day-care
center he helped establish when college employees came to him for help.

Drawn to Middlebury because ''something happens here that affects the whole
individual,'' he speaks with the deep enthusiasm of an undergraduate about
values and social ethics, often quoting John Dewey (''my American hero'').

''He's earned a place in the community by impeccable integrity and hard work,''
says Olin Robison, Middlebury's president. ''He has a quality of serenity about
him, which he somehow combines with enthusiasm for life and a commitment to hard
work - a combination I have never encountered in another person before. People
get to appreciate him for what he is, not Nelson Rockefeller's son. They become
oblivious to all that.'' CLEARLY, THE COUSins do not think collectively. Even
within one branch of the family, the divergence can sometimes be striking, as it
is between Steven and his elder brother, Rodman. They share a family resemblance
to their mother, Mary Todhunter Clark, and both stand more than 6 feet tall.
But, as Rodman says, they are ''totally unlike.''

Rodman, 52, is one of the more politically conservative cousins, describing
himself as an Eisenhower Republican - financially conservative but socially
progressive. He also seems to have avoided the struggle of other cousins
searching for an identity apart from being a Rockefeller heir. Asked years ago
how it felt to be a Rockefeller, he replied: ''I really couldn't tell you, as
I've never been anything else.''

Business always has been his choice. After graduating from Dartmouth, he
attended Columbia University Graduate School of Business. Today, he directs two
separate ventures. Four years ago, he created the Pocantico Development
Associates, an investment-management company that has financed hydroelectric
projects and prepackaged co-generation units.

Ibec, the older venture of which he is chairman, was intended to promote
''self-development and better living standards'' in economically disadvantaged
areas, especially Latin America. In its heyday, it initiated moderate- cost
housing developments, supermarket chains and other enterprises; training, in the
process, thousands of workers and managers. But, after the oil crisis of the
early 1970's, he says, ''It was no longer economic to continue the kind of
activity in which we had been engaged, and the countries involved no longer
wanted that kind of service.''

In 1980, Ibec merged with a division of Booker McConnell Ltd., a British company
long engaged in agricultural development in third-world countries. Today, Ibec's
varied ventures include prospering poultry-breeding operations in Connecticut
and California, salmon farming in Scotland and a London-based sugar- management
company that operates in Sri Lanka and some African countries. ''This
Anglo-American partnership has been very successful,'' he says. ''Business is
flourishing.''

In the 1960's, Rodman played a key role in developing the Interracial Council
for Business Opportunity, formed to provide technical and financial assistance
to black commercial enterprises, one of the first groups to advise minority-
group businessmen.

Since the downturn of the 1970's, such outreach programs have been scaled back.
''I continue to support the concept of technology transfer,'' he says, ''but I
recognize it is much more difficult to support on a charitable basis than it
used to be.''

Rodman also has cautioned the cousins that future family generosity depends on
the availability of resources. ''My advice to the family is, you cannot give
money you don't have. You have got to assure yourself of regenerating funds to
ensure continuation of your philanthropy.''

When his father died in 1979, Rodman called the president of Dartmouth, which
Nelson had attended, to propose a suitable memorial. The outcome was the Nelson
A. Rockefeller Center for the Social Sciences, established by a $10 million
fund-raising campaign to which the surviving brothers, his mother, the cousins
and people outside the family contributed. ''This was a major family effort,''
he says. ''We are all very proud.'' EVEN AS THE fourth generation assumes more
of a leadership role in the Rockefeller family, members of the fifth Rockefeller
generation are beginning to stake out careers. Clare Buden, granddaughter of
Nelson Rockefeller, was elected last year as Democratic district co-leader in
mid-Manhattan. She also presides over the fifth-generation group.

An outgoing, attractive 28- year-old, she showed up, carrying her infant
daughter, at a gala birthday party of 750 at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel for
Gloria Steinem, the feminist. ''The babysitter didn't show up, and so it was
miss the party or bring the baby,'' she told an amiable-looking stranger, and
placed the sixth- generation Rockefeller in her arms so she could dance once
around the crowded ballroom.

The gesture was at once open and trusting. But, like many of the older cousins,
Clare, who with her husband, James Buden, has a real-estate and construction
company, also refused to be interviewed.

''She has worked so hard to win the confidence of the community people she
represents,'' explains a close relative. ''She's afraid of being identified with
Rockefeller money, and all that will create problems.''

The decision and the offered explanation suggest at least one member of the
fifth generation, like the fourth, is inheriting wealth but also a legacy of
doubts about the ''Rockefeller identity.'' As Dr. Pounds has said of the
fourth-generation members, the rhetoric sounded familiar.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: graph of Rockefeller lineage (page 30); photo of Jay Rockefeller (page
17); photo of Dr. Lucy Rockefeller Waletzky (page 16); photo of Steven Clark
Rockefeller (page 15); photo of Eileen Growald (page 13); photo of Rockefeller
family

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              427 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BETWEEN A POLITICAL ROCK AND A HARD PLACE

BYLINE: By Robert M. Solow; Robert M. Solow is a professor of economics at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1366 words


ECONOMICS IN THE REAL WORLD By Leonard Silk.  298 pp. New York: Simon &
Schuster. $16.95.

LEONARD SILK, the economics columnist for The New York Times, wants to describe
how economic policy is actually made and how it is seen by those who make it.
His book ''Economics in the Real World'' is very good on the interplay between
politics and economics, on the way rational policy gets worn down by rubbing up
against political rocks and hard places. He is lively, informed and sardonic.
Any observer of the economic policy scene who doesn't get a little sardonic must
be either naive or dim or both.

He is less successful with the more abstract question of the relation between
economic ideas and economic reality; theory always seems pale, abstract and
irrelevant next to the complexity and uncertainty of economic life. That sort of
issue cannot usually be handled in a casual paragraph. Even the simplified ideas
are subtle, and their relation to the real world they are supposed to represent
- how reasonable people should form judgments on them - is not at all
transparent.

Mr. Silk does not seem to be much interested in that sort of thing. So he
doesn't give his reader much of a feeling for the nature of economic thought and
economic controversy. Too often, instead of offering argument and evaluation, he
inserts quotations. Sometimes they are on one side of a question, sometimes the
other, and sometimes there is one of each, apparently on the principle that a
quote is a quote. This permits the author to slip away without committing
himself, or perhaps with a one-liner.

Thinking precisely and systematically about something as complex and irregular
as a modern economy is very difficult, maybe impossible. The same could be said
about any other very complicated object, like the earth's atmosphere or the
population of sea turtles off the Georgia coast. The only way to make progress
is to make simplifying assumptions, that is, to invent a simplified world. Here
are a few examples of the sorts of assumptions economists sometimes like to
make: there are only a few goods being produced, maybe only two or even one; the
firms producing them are so small and numerous they have no discretion over
price but can only meet the market; all consumers have the same tastes.

No one believes those assumptions to be true. The point is that it may be
possible to understand how such a simplified world works. The art of good
economics - and Mr. Silk is right that it's an art - is to sense when it is not
seriously misleading to extrapolate from the simplified world to the real world
and when it is dangerous. Most analytical economists spend their time puzzling
out the properties of one simplified world or another, but when they argue
fiercely with one another, it is usually over the utility of some particular
simplified world as a model of the real world.



This sort of method is not peculiar to economics, of course. Galileo discovered
that all bodies, no matter what their weight and density, fall at the same speed
when they fall freely under the influence of gravity. The legend is that he
tested his theory by dropping a feather and a cannonball from the top of the
Leaning Tower of Pisa. Maybe. Try dropping a page of The New York Times and a
tennis ball from a high window on a windy day. Of course, Galileo's proposition
applies only to a simplified world, to objects falling in a vacuum in which
gravity is the only significant force at work. No one would apply it in a real
gale. One of Mr. Silk's points, though he doesn't elaborate it, is that
economists go wrong when they put too much strain on their simplifying
assumptions. They sure do.

The second way economists lose touch with reality is more prosaic but probably
more important for good or evil. Even when economic analysis can successfully
see its way through a real problem and propose effective corrective policy, it
often runs afoul of the primacy of politics over economics. In the real world,
an idea that is useful and practical in narrowly economic terms may be a sure
loser politically. History is littered with clever economic ideas that didn't
fly, couldn't fly, ideas as dead as dodos and for the same reason.

When he comes to describe the way politics treats ideas and turns them into
policy, Mr. Silk is in his element. He calls the story of Lyndon Johnson's
decision to finance the escalation of the Vietnam War in an inflationary way,
against the advice of his own economic advisers, ''Highmindedness and
Duplicity.'' The 1968 tax increase was already too late. The supreme political
animal made a fateful choice. It laid the foundations of the great inflation of
the 1970's, whose effects - both economic and political - are with us still. Mr.
Silk's account is deft and vivid. ''Politicians and their advisers,'' he says,
''cannot find absolution for their duplicities and evasions of responsibility in
the abstractions of economics and the inevitabilities of history.''

He brings Richard Nixon's Administration back to life too, always an edifying
reminder. The Nixons of the world are usually bored by economic policy. Mr.
Silk's chapter title is ''There Ain't a Vote in It.'' That was Mr. Nixon's
response to an attempt by his aide H. R. Haldeman to get him to focus one
morning on the incipient breakdown of the pattern of exchange rates established
in the Smithsonian Agreement of 1971.

There was also some domestic excitement in the summer of the same year - more
votes there, no doubt. Mr. Silk gives a short but snappy account of the events
and infighting leading to the August freeze on wages and prices. But he doesn't
follow up with an analysis of Phases II, III and IV (remember?), the Nixon
Administration's ambivalent attempt to control wages and prices directly. He is
quite right about the circumstances and motives that led to the episode - an
election-bound Administration was frustrated by rising prices even with rising
unemployment and desperate for an opportunity to stimulate the economy. They
would hardly balk for ideological reasons at a little bit of price control. The
aftermath was full of interest. Economists still debate the effectiveness of the
policy and whether it lost much through halfhearted enforcement. I wish Mr. Silk
had chosen to pursue the story to its end, precisely as an example of politics
and economics interacting but this time with implications for our understanding
of the economy.


THE book is not all narrative. There is, for example, a nice chapter on the
''political-business cycle.'' Presidential and Congressional elections can be
studied as one might study hailstorms or the growth of animal populations. Much
statistical analysis by economists and political scientists has shown that the
single most favorable economic setting for the incumbent is a rising (not
necessarily a good) economy in the six to nine months before Election Day. It
should come as no surprise, then, that in the United States ''the growth of real
income after tax accelerated in 83 percent of election years, both Presidential
and midterm Congressional elections, compared to 40 percent of the years without
elections between 1961 and 1972.'' Almost certainly the pattern has continued,
1984 being a textbook example. Nor is the political-business cycle confined to
the United States. The Japanese - wouldn't you know? - do it even better. This
bit of reporting is Leonard Silk at his best.

The last hundred pages of the book cover the first Reagan Administration. Year
for year, that is a little out of proportion, but the flora and fauna were
particularly colorful, and one can forgive the naturalist for lingering. He
covers the ground fairly conventionally, maybe a little less cynically than I
would have expected, up to the middle of 1983. There is some attention paid to
the economic ideas that were then circulating in Washington, but once again the
author shies away from telling us straight out what he believes about them. When
he comes this way again in a few years, I hope Leonard Silk will tell us a
little more about his own ever so slightly simplified world. Everybody has one.
That is a fact about the real world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              428 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 30, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOOKING BACK ON 1984: WHAT THEY'LL REMEMBER MOST

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 1, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 5236 words


AS the year drew to a close, the Long Island Weekly section asked a random
selection of Long Islanders what they will most remember about 1984 on the
Island. Here are their replies:

Robin Horsley of Bellport, a teacher: ''When I look back, I am constantly amazed
at Long Island's resilience. Despite incessant battering by developers, county
and state 'improvements' and careless people, she manages to shine through her
parks, her beaches and her ambience. Long Island is a survivor.''

Harriet Lesser of Woodmere, a writer: ''In 1984, Long Island was called upon to
pay its environ mental dues. For the first time, garbage literally became a
burning issue. Legislators and medical authorities were inundated with
complaints about water pollution. In Nassau County, which has one of the highest
cancer rates in the nation, the public finally began to assert itself - as
evidenced by the protest over the Oceanside landfill. It had been going on for
at least a decade. But the voices of the people were not heard until this year.
In 1984, we saw the beginning of the people's revolt against pollution.''

Coleman Fineberg of East Northport, executive director of the Suffolk County
Medical Society: ''As John Q. Citizen, the thing I most respond to this year is
the Shoreham controversy. I wish the darned thing would be resolved. Once and
for all, if it's going to open, open. If not, get on with business elsewhere.''

Lee E. Koppelman, executive director of the Long Island Regional Planning Board:
''In 1984 Long Island led the entire country in family disposable income. That
means we are one of the strongest economic areas in the United States.''

Henry Clark, hat finisher at Old Bethpage Village Restoration, which recreated
the 1860 Long Island Fair last fall: ''What I remember most about 1984 was the
time I spent in 1860. Sometimes I'm grateful to have Old Bethpage to go to, to
get away from 1984. The seven hours I spend in the 19th century every day enable
me to handle the 20th century much better.''

Paul Bjorklund of Centerport, Congressional aide who received a kidney
transplant in April and was named campaign manager for Representative Robert J.
Mrazek's re- election effort in May: ''This year I learned to want to get out of
bed in the morning.''

Arthur Stanley Thompson of Huntington Bay, marine contractor specializing in
shoreline reinforcement: ''I will never forget how Long Island was battered by
that severe storm on March 29, the intensity of it and all the damage that it
did. People with waterfront property are still trying to recover from it. The
storm changes a lot of people's opinions about the kind of protection they need
in order to live on the water on Long Island.''

The Rev. Christine B. R. Grimbol, the new minister at the Old Whalers
Presbyterian Church in Sag Harbor: ''Having recently moved from Milwaukee, I had
absolutely no idea that the east end of Long Island was different from the west
end. I always thought that the whole of the island was apartment buildings from
Queens all the way out. I never had any idea that anything like Sag Harbor
existed.''

Marcie Bergman of Wainscott: ''The American dream seems to be shattered, because
we bought a piece of land this year and now we can't afford to build a house on
it.''

Samuel J. Francis, president and general manager of WLIW-TV in Plainview: ''I'm
impressed by the low unemployment rate. 'Help wanted' signs are something I
haven't seen in years.''

Peter F. Cohalan, Suffolk County Executive:''Two of the major legislative
initiatives which I set forth in my 1984 message became realities. The first is
a creation of the Pine Barrens Commission, which will deal with the problems of
protecting Suffolk's precious ground water, and second will be the resolution of
a difficult financial problem surrounding the Southwest Sewer District through
the implementation of the temporary five-year 1/4 of 1 percent increase in the
county sales tax coupled with a restructuring of the sewer district debt.''

Francis T. Purcell, Nassau County Executive: ''Two things stood out in 1984. The
first was the courage that was displayed at the Olympic handicapped games. It
was a great example of what people can do under adversity. The second was the
tremendous demand for land in Nassau County for both residential and business
building. The number of people looking for land has created a tremendously good
economy.''

Ira Kornbluth, a Southampton lawyer: ''People were buying little piles of
mesquite at Dean & DeLuca to barbecue their food on this year. I guess mesquite
was 1984's wood of the moment.''

Hazel Dukes of Roslyn, president of the New York State Chapter of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People: ''It was a year that revived
some of the civil rights activities of the 60's because of present social
conditions at home and abroad. There is an increased number of families in
poverty and of homeless persons. We on Long Island have not taken leadership in
seeing that middle-class families can continue living here; there is a dearth of
reasonable priced homes and rental housing because of the conversion to
cooperatives and condominiums.''

C. R. (Rick) Merolla, president of the Bank of Babylon and chairman of the board
of trustees of the Long Island Philharmonic: ''Our own Long Island Philharmonic
ends 1984, our fifth season, on a solid high note with the elimination this year
of the $250,000 start-up deficit. With the Philharmonic's continued successes we
have realized our constant dream - a nationally recognized, first-class
orchestra bringing magnificent music into the lives of Long Islanders.''




Larry Austin, president of Austin Travel and chairman of the Long Island
Association's Identity Committee: ''We witnessed the birth of a positive
identity for Long Island. The board of the L.I.A. has fully endorsed the
development of our marketing plan to increase Long Island's identity through the
use of our song, 'Long Island U.S.A.,' and encouraging businesses to use Long
Island on their letterheads. For too many years Long Island was seen as just the
neighbor to New York City, but in 1984 we saw a real groundswell of a feeling of
pride for Long Island by Long Islanders.''

The Rev. Keta C. Jones, pastor of the First Parish United Church of Christ in
Riverhead: ''What's most memorable for me is the fact that apparently Lilco is
going to be given the go-ahead to open the Shoreham plant. The Nuclear
Regulatory Commission has disregarded people's interests, concerns and sense of
safety.''

Roy L. Wilson, professional engineer, president of Wilson Management Associates
Inc. in Glen Head: ''The move toward sanity in the final testing and startup of
the Shoreham nuclear power plant.''

Margie H. Ankeles of Wantagh: ''What I remember most about 1984 was the feeling
of isolation living on Long Island with a newborn baby. There are a lot of women
in my position, but the problem was in meeting them. The neighborhood atmosphere
of 30 years ago no longer exists on Long Island.''

Sandra Chapin of Huntington Bay, head of Long Island Cares, an organization
established by her late husband, the singer Harry Chapin: ''For the first time
in many years, perhaps since the Vietnam era, peace groups on Long Island worked
together toward one goal instead of fighting independently for their own special
interests.''

William Kaiser, curator, Cradle of Aviation Museum, Mitchel Field: ''The
development of the Grumman X-29. This experimental, forward-swept-wing aircraft
is a total departure and its high performance capability has an important future
for both commercial and military purposes.''

Felix Grucci Jr.  of Bellport: ''The fight for survival, the searching for new
property to be the new home of Fireworks by Grucci, and the rebuilding of the
150-year-old company. Our company has survived the devastation of Nov. 26, 1983,
and it has gotten back on its feet again and we are doing extremely well on the
marketplace. But it hasn't been a good year from the standpoint of family unity
and the mental stress that our family has been living under.''

The Rev. Robert Smith, chaplain, Stony Brook University Hospital: ''This was the
year of Baby Jane Doe at the hospital. It confronted us with a powerful issue
and involvement with the larger world. We learned we have the resources to meet
a challenge with mutual respect, moral sensibility and technical ability.''

Rabbi Arthur Seltzer, Long Island regional director of the Anti-Defamation
League of B'nai B'rith: ''A Council of Academic Professionalism and a Community
Relations Council were established and the relationship of the community to the
State University of New York at Stony Brook and the definition of academic
freedom were explored. As a result of the heightened interest, it safeguards
academia and the Jewish community.

''The second is the election campaign. From our point of view, particularly on
the Democratic side, there were the kinds of anti-Semitic slogans we haven't
heard in many years, and it's troublesome. As a result, we have a functioning
black-Jewish coalition on the Island, and for the first time we are sitting down
regularly to discuss issues we haven't talked about for years. That's a very
positive thing to come out of it.''

Nancy Kelley, executive director, Group for the South Fork, Bridgehampton:
''After many years of hard work, the completion of updated comprehensive master
plans in both Southampton and East Hampton. Part of that is the enactment of new
zoning laws to protect natural resources. This represents the accumulation of
not only our efforts but the efforts of many dedicated people who deeply care
about how we protect our environment.''

Thomas Conoscenti, Long Island economist, who is director of management studies
at the Polytechnic Institute of New York: ''I'll remember 1984 as the year
30,000 jobs were added to the Long Island economy - or the fifth consecutive
year the economy has performed well.''

Evans Griffing, former Supervisor of Shelter Island: ''The thing that impressed
me the most over this year was the controversy over Lilco's nuclear power plant
at Shoreham. I'm not alarmed by its operation, particularly since on the East
End we have been living with one closer to us at Millstone, Conn. Europe has
dozens of them operating all over, and nobody pays any attention to them. But
there they found one plant that works, and they used the same design over and
over. Here we design one for each area. Each design is vastly different and more
expensive than the last.''

Patrick Henry, District Attorney of Suffolk County: ''The crime rate is down
significantly - about 30 percent. We've taken a hard- nosed attitude toward
house burglaries, insisting on incarceration in the state penitentiary for the
guilty.''

Edward Grilli, spokesman in the Nassau County District Attorney's office: ''A
little brighter news'' on crime, with burglary, ''the highest felony in terms of
volume, dramatically off.''

The Rev. David L. Parker, minister of the United Methodist Church in East
Meadow, who assisted the athletes participating in the International Games for
the Disabled as a spotter in the shotput and discus throw: ''What a rich
experience it was to see the determination, courage and sheer joy of the people.
There was no tinge of self-pity on the part of these athletes. They have a joie
de vivre that made you in a way feel 'disabled' was a wrong word to describe
them.''

Helen McCrosson, real estate broker, North Haven: ''Upzoning on the East End is
a good thing, but it's helped to further escalate prices. I'm concerned that
young people can no longer afford to live here. House prices are too high, rents
are becoming too high, young people work two and three jobs and still can't save
money or even keep pace with rising values. You don't want to have an area
without young families, but that is what's happening on the East End.''

Richard Wall, retired oil company executive, Sands Point: ''I'll remember 1984
for what seemed to me to be a real resurgence of patriotism here. One could see
it in parades and crowds, at sporting events, and on the school campuses.''

Diana Hawkes, supervisor, Nassau County Black History Museum, Hempstead: ''Jesse
Jackson's appearance at Hofstra University.''

Glenn Sitterley, curator, Baldwin Historical Society: ''The newly established
Town of Hempstead Landmarks Preservation Commission began the initial work to
protect historical town landmarks. This progress has made many citizens more
aware of historic preservation, particularly in unincorporated communities such
as Baldwin.''




Iris Wolfson, president of the Nassau/Suffolk School Boards Association: ''This
past year was especially notable to Long Island school districts because of the
enactment of the Regents Action Plan. We'll continue through 1985 to petition
Albany for sufficient funding so that the Island's school districts won't have
to cut back on other offerings to comply with the new regulations. In 1984 we
became increasingly concerned with shortages of math, science and foreign
language teachers as Long Island's senior staff in these areas came nearer to
retirement.''

Edmund Emrich, owner of Edmund's Showcase in Garden City: ''The Garden City
Hotel has made a tremendous difference in the area by attracting people from all
over the world, and it helps the businesses in the area.''

Cal Axinn, Dix Hills businessman: ''I see 1984 as a year when many Long Island
officials courageously resisted capricious upzoning pressures to four and five
acres that would prevent affordable housing. Long Island is already beyond the
reach of most young people. I want to know that my children and grandchildren
can continue to live here.''

John McKinney, publisher and editor of The Port Jefferson Record and The North
Shore Record: ''While riding my horse, I have discovered the beauty of Long
Island's pine barrens this year.''

Msgr. Daniel S. Hamilton, director of the Bureau of Public Information for the
Roman Catholic Diocese of Rockville Centre: ''It's memorable for the whole
crisis concerning the future of the Lilco Shoreham plant, and for the disputes
over the continuance of the Brentwood prison facility and over a moment of
silence in the Hicksville schools.

''Nineteen eighty-four marked the dedication of a 150-unit housing complex for
senior citizens and handicapped people in Inwood, and groundbreaking for Bishop
Kellenberg Gardens in Oceanside. It also marked the closing of two of our
diocesan high schools and of our seminary high school.''

Katherine Heaviside, president of Epoch 5, a marketing and public relations
concern in Huntington: ''New recognition for Long Island. We have seen the
strength of the Long Island Philharmonic, the International Games for the
Disabled, the Elaine de Kooning exhibit at Adelphi, and a technology investment
showcase, to name just a few.''

Alex Hargrave, owner of the Hargrave Vineyard, Cutchogue: ''So many other
vineyards are here now that the gregarious birds in our vineyard are few in
number. We're sharing the wealth of birds. This year, for the first time, we've
spotted a pair of nesting hawks in our vineyard. One of the great pleasures of
working in the vineyard is to witness the events of nature come and go.''

Horace Kramer of Woodmere, senior associate counsel to the Speaker of the New
York State Assembly: ''The Nassau County Republican Party leadership's repeal of
bipartisan endorsements for sitting judges. As a result of this action, all
sitting judges in Nassau County and Suffolk County's Supreme Court judges -
regardless of political party - must now look over their shoulder to insure that
their decisions do not offend party leadership. It would be my hope that, on
second thought, the Republican Party will reconsider their decision for 1985.''

Gene Hughes, Coast Guard officer in charge of the Montauk Lighthouse: ''Not a
lot happens here. The most major thing was that a new cedar shingle roof was put
onto the lighthouse in 1984. We're kind of a throwback to the last century.
We're the dinosaur of the Coast Guard.''

Debra Scott, a writer who recently returned to Long Island after living in
England for a several years: ''The East End farm stands discovered fresh
coriander.''

Jerry Asher of South Huntington, lawyer, sports agent and a winner of the 1984
Congressional Achievement Award for voluntary service: ''All the work, the
energy and the family involvement that was necessary to send my daughter off to
her first year of college.''

Don Scott, Long Island producer for Channel 2 news, WCBS-TV: ''This is the first
year that Channel 2 decided to place an experienced television news crew here on
a full- time basis and have the Island be our sole focus of attention. When I
worked out of the city, we tried to pay attention to Long Island stories, but
never to this extent - it seems to be working.''

Mary Shanahan of Garden City: ''The international Olympics for the handicapped.
Long Island had an opportunity to focus attention on people with great
determination, fortitude and courage.''

Wallace Brown of Bellport: ''On the summer mornings that I sail my catboat
across Great South Bay to Fire Island, I often pass a lone bayman lifting his
eel pots. He just nods and goes on working, but I remember the dozens of baymen
that used to work that stretch of the bay. They're almost all gone now.''

The Rev. Ronald A. Richardson, executive director of The Ministries in Coram:
''The beginning of the recognition of undocumented aliens in our community. It
was in 1984 that Bishop McGann, among others, took note of the presence of so
many refugees from Central America and encouraged Long Islanders to welcome them
as neighbors and to offer their skills toward alleviating their suffering.''

Bobby Nystrom of Westbury, veteran defenseman for the New York Islanders hockey
team: ''I guess 1984 was the end of an era, the year the Islanders lost after
four straight championships; but from a personal standpoint, it was a good year
in many respects. I have a beautiful family, we're all healthy and we spent the
year together and enjoyed it together.''

Tom Doheny, director of conservation, Town of Hempstead: ''Ground water
pollution and solid waste have been the main concerns this year. We realize now
that we were building and polluting along where we drink from. Now we have
technology enabling us to detect chemicals in parts per billion and parts per
trillion. It's hard to change 100 years of development habits: We've built our
roadways and developments along the middle of the Island where the ground water
comes from. Chemicals follow the same path as the rainwater: They hit the ground
and go down, down, down. It's important that we realize this right away and
change these habits, or we're not going to have any drinking water.''

Hugh L. Carey, the former Governor, who summers on Shelter Island: ''The day I
was inducted into the Long Island Hall of Fame.''

Kathie Bodily, co-director of the Inter- Media Art Center in Huntington: ''A
challenging year for IMAC, bringing live entertainment back to the old
Huntington Theater. It has been difficult but extremely rewarding because Long
Island audiences welcome the opportunity to see first-rate entertainment without
traveling to New York City.''

Sister Frances, director of the community center, St. Mary of the Isle Church in
Long Beach: ''The fire that burned out 100 familes was the most important thing
in Long Beach this year as far as a very negative thing happening. But it had a
positive effect with people reaching out to help others. This was a congregation
of poor people who have very little, giving to people who have nothing. It was
good to see people pulling together for the first time.''

Betty Friedan, author and feminist: ''This year I've discovered a beautiful new
trail through Mashomack, the nature preserve in Shelter Island. I've explored
about two-thirds of it now in different seasons and it's just beautiful.''

James T. Tempera, whose home on Bluebell Lane in North Babylon 40 was
contaminated by fumes from a 100,000 gallon underground gasoline spill: ''I'd
like to forget about it. I hope a year like this never happens to anyone else. I
lost my home and my family life because of the contamination. My life was
completely disrupted, and that's not a strong enough word. It's been a
nightmare. Every day you just can't wait for it to get over, so you are one day
closer to making this a bad memory.''

Janet Hanson, executive director of Suffolk Housing Services, a private,
not-for-profit fair-housing agency in Hauppauge that assisted two black air
traffic controllers who won a Federal housing discrimination suit last summer
against the operator of an apartment complex in Patchogue: ''The award of over
half a million dollars - the biggest in the history of the Fair Housing Act. We
hope it will offer a major deterrent to racial discrimination in housing.''

Kay McEnroe, mother of John McEnroe, who lives in Cove Neck: ''I'll remember
what my three sons did this year: one son started Stanford University, one
finished Stanford, and one son won back the U.S. Open.''




Walter Weiss, owner of the Walt Whitman Pharmacy in Huntington Station: ''We
were told the water would clear once they finished installing the sewers. Well,
the sewers are in, but the water tastes horrible. We're all becoming very
concerned about just what it is we're drinking, what kind of contamination there
might be.''

Peter Nolan, Mayor of Northport, referring to the drug-related murder of a
teen-ager: ''Unfortunately, the only thing memorable was unkind. The incident
that happened in the village on July 4 brought the community closer together and
we're focusing on drugs. No matter what happens, you can't get away from it. It
brought to the forefront a problem that existed and will always exist in the
United States We think we live in a pure and safe community; we don't.''

Charlene Zorskis of Commack: ''What really stands out is Shoreham. The nuclear
power plant is such a volatile issue here on Long Island, and I believe many
Long Islanders are wary of having the Shoreham plant so close to their homes.
I'm not too sure what's going on out there, and I'd like more information before
they start it up.''

Ben Motley, gas attendant at Wisser Mobil, Huntington Station: ''Nineteen
eighty-four wasn't too good a year. The family cars aren't running, my taxes are
too high and I had too many bills to pay.''

Canio Pavone, owner of Canio's Books, Sag Harbor: ''I've been encouraged by the
growth of poetry groups on Long Island and the attention being paid to poetry by
everyday citizens. Libraries, poetry collectives, bookshops and colleges all
over Long Island are having readings at a time when many people are resigned to
moving into a coldly technological age. I believe poetry will help save humans
from an increasing nonhuman future.''

Patricia and Peter Lenz of Lenz Vineyards in Peconic: ''We finally bottled and
released our wine. After growing grapes for five years, we were very happy to
reach this stage and to see the wine sell out so quickly.''

Scott Wickham of Anderson's Deli, Huntington Station: ''All the renovations in
the town of Huntington are creating a better quality of life, but there are too
many homes going up and congestion becoming an overwhelming problem. Too much of
the old Island is disappearing.''

Frank Bear, community activist, Southold Town: ''An increased awareness of and
concern for our natural resources - related in many ways to the contamination of
our drinking water. Efforts to improve and protect Long Island's sole source
aquifer often met resistance. That was especially true in relation to the pine
barrens, under which lies the Island's purest water, uncontaminated because
until recent years the so-called barrens were not attractive for either farming
or development. But untouched space is running out on Long Island, so where do
we go next? The pine barrens.''

Dr. John H. Marburger 3d, president of the State University of New York at Stony
Brook: ''This year I will remember that Paul Lauterbur, professor of chemistry,
won the Lasker Award for his work with nuclear magnetic resonance; that the
computer science department was given $4.5 million from the National Science
Foundation to study relational data bases. We opened our burn center and began
to see the light at the end of the tunnel for the completion of our hospital. We
won all our home football games.''

Gregory J. Blass, Suffolk County Legislator: ''This year has been Long Island's
'year of prosperity.' We've taken a turn for the better, especially with the
industries that have been a part of our heritage. Government had a lot to do
with the growth of tourism, vineyards, horse farming and development of L.I.'s
fishing industry. Now it's time for private industry to continue the momentum of
the past year. We must reach people the prosperity has yet to touch.''

Ronald J. P. Lesko, professor of political science at Suffolk County Community
College: ''This is part of an ongoing experience - the return of women over 30
to school. It has happened in many colleges, but we get them first. Many of them
are unsure of themselves at the start. They are not entirely sold on the
extremes of the woman's movement. They are not looking for some emotional
fufillment but a rational, intellectual foundation for their lives.''

Peter King, Nassau County Comptroller: ''Joe Mondello established conclusively
that he is running the Nassau Republican Party and that he is his own man.''

Charlie Backfish, social studies instructor, Smithtown High School East: ''The
most I will remember about 1984 is the progressive buildup of traffic. The
awareness that 25A, which was once a rural road heading east into Riverhead, is
now laden with traffic jams. I am stunned at the process of development. What
was once beautiful wilderness is now overly crowded condominium complexes.''

Michael D'Andre of St. James, Suffolk County Legislator: ''We had landmark
legislation with the smoking bill. It was also the first year in which the
county appropriated funds for landscaping of county roads at my request.''

Steve Pratt of Custom Metal Fabrication, Huntington Station: ''This year has
been marked by a steady growth in the amount of work available to small
contractors, and I think that's linked to stability of large industries on the
Island.''

Paul Stoutenburgh, naturalist and Southold Town Councilman: ''Nineteen
eighty-four was the year we all realized that disasters such as Mexico's
devastating refinery explosion and India's horrifying poison could happen
anywhere. This reinforces the fact that environmentalists have had the public's
concern at heart all along. The sooner that we accept the fact that every major
action must take into consideration its effect on the public, the better off our
world will be.''




William Daley, chief of the Coastal Erosion Program for the New York State
Department of Environmental Conservation: ''A series of early spring
northeasters in 1984, and the implementation of New York State's Coastal Erosion
Hazard Area Law, made Long Island's shoreline property owners painfully aware of
the risks they face on the subtle and tenuous coastal plain.''

William C. Richards, retired Suffolk County Deputy Labor Commissioner and former
Presiding Officer of Suffolk County Legislature: ''It meant the end of
government life for me and a relief from a commitment to activities that meant I
was unable to do other things. I don't need to be so aware of the political
implications of the things I want to do to help the community.''

Marcia Schwen, coordinator of the Long Island Coalition Against the Death
Penalty: ''This year meant a grim challenge to overcome the tendency to live in
isolation on our beautiful Island. We have to connect with the fact that
executions are being carried out in Florida, Louisiana, Georgia and other
states, of poor people and minorities, of innocent people and guilty people.''

Eliot Goshman of Dix Hills, president of TV Weddings Company, Melville: ''Long
Island has been very good to me this year. Video exploded here this year, and my
business couldn't survive anywhere else but on Long Island. So many people here
have video machines and they are aware of video.''

Eddie Simon, co-owner with his brother Paul of WWHB radio on the East End:
''Buying the radio station this year. We wanted to do something special
musically and we are finding that the community is eagerly receiving us. We are
making a difference in keeping music alive and progressive on the Island. In
1984, it wasn't politics. It wasn't the environment. It was music.''

William T. Picchioni of Rockville Centre: ''The mist hung frozen above the lake.
Each limb along the shore encased in crystalline hairs. Trailing away from me a
set of prints in the snow, one foot falling behind the other. Fox in Hempstead
Lake State Park.''

Pietro di Donato, author of ''Christ in Concrete'' and resident of Strongs Neck:
''The ardent fan of my book and the next President, hopefully - Governor Mario
Cuomo's visits to the Suffolk Community College Citizens Forums to fight the
customer rip-off and nuclear threat of Shoreham.''

Philip Nolan of Brentwood, Suffolk County Legislator: ''We finally dealt with
the Southwest Sewer District tax problem. There was a real possibility that the
sewer tax would double, and instead there is a slight increase in the sales tax,
which in my opinion will not hurt anybody.''

Edith Gaines of Great Neck: ''The excavation of our Great Neck street, which
uncovered an old waterway that had fed a stream in earlier times.''

John Nickles, president of the Eastern Long Island Board of Realtors: ''What
encourages me most about 1984 is the resiliency of the real estate market. Once
again it's been able to survive the onslaught of elections, zoning changes,
upzoning, taxes on private rights.''

Albert Renz Jr., assistant manager, Shearson Lehman American Express,
Huntington: ''A very lackluster year for the stock market in general.
Fortunately, people on Long Island did considerably better economically than
people in other parts of the country. So brokers here likewise did better.''

Rob Bartlett, comedian, who performs regularly in Huntington: ''I'll remember it
as a disappointing year, in that Long Island still was not named the 51st
state.''



This article was compiled by Phyllis Bernstein, Phyllis Braff, Thomas Clavin,
Susan Carey Dempsey, Shelly Feuer Domash, Joe Dysart, Florence Fabricant,
Alastair Gordon, Judy Glass, Diane Greenberg, Tom Lederer, Frank Lynn, Therese
Madonia, Doris Meadows, Jerry Mikorenda, Ellen Mitchell, Sharon Monahan, Evelyn
Philips, John Rather, Carol Steinberg, Jamie Talan, Ronnie Wacker and Richard
Weissmann.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              429 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 31, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CBS-WESTMORELAND TRIAL PROVIDES INSIGHTS INTO THE VIETNAM WAR ERA

BYLINE: By M.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 2604 words


A. FARBER

The way Ira Klein tells the story, it was when he encountered Samuel A. Adams in
an editing room at CBS studios soon after the broadcast of the network's now
disputed 1982 documentary on the Vietnam War that Mr. Adams said: ''We have to
come clean, we have to make a statement that the premise of the show is
inaccurate.''

Mr. Adams, a former Central Intelligence Agency analyst, was a paid consultant
for the CBS Reports program, which charged that Gen. William C. Westmoreland's
command in Saigon had conspired for ''political'' reasons to deceive President
Johnson, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Congress and the American public about the
size of North Vietnamese and Vietcong forces in 1967.

Mr. Adams, who will testify as the lead witness for CBS, denies making the
statements attributed to him by Mr. Klein, the film editor for much of the
90-minute broadcast.

'L.B.J. Had to Know'


But as Mr. Klein recalled the exchange on that day in February 1982, shortly
after General Westmoreland had assailed the program, Mr. Adams went on to say,
''L.B.J. had to know.''

''Sam,'' Mr. Klein said he replied, ''isn't it a little late? Why weren't you
telling George about this all along.''

Mr. Adams, according to Mr. Klein, said he had repeatedly informed George Crile,
producer of ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

On Thursday General Westmoreland's libel trial against CBS over the documentary
will resume in Federal District Court in Manhattan, with the general's lawyers
winding up their three-month effort to show not only that the broadcast was
false but also that CBS and three other defendants, including Mr. Adams and Mr.
Crile, knew that or acted with reckless disregard as to whether the program was
true. To prevail, the plaintiff must prove malice as well as falsity.

Mr. Klein is expected to be examined about his exchange with Mr. Adams and much
else that he recounted during a recent deposition when he testifies as the
general's 19th and final witness. Mr. Adams - who, as a C.I.A. Vietnamese
specialist in 1967, unsuccessfully opposed the military's position on enemy
strength and called it a ''monument of deceit'' - is scheduled to follow him
early next month as the first of a dozen witnesses for the network.

Questions of Intent


So far, the trial has produced 6,013 pages of densely detailed testimony about
the calculation of enemy strength and the making of a documentary: why some
statistics were used by the military in 1967 and others were not, why some
interviews by CBS were used in 1982 and others were not.

Behind the accounts of casualties from claymore mines and pungi sticks, behind
the reams of newly declassified military reports and cables that were as much
concerned with how the press was interpreting the war as with how it was going
in the field, behind the rolls of unused CBS film that flicker from a half-dozen
television sets in the courtroom - behind all of what has emerged at this trial
are questions of intent and credibility.

In nine days on the stand, General Westmoreland offered an impassioned rationale
for his actions as commander of American forces in Vietnam between January 1964
and June 1968. And Mr. Crile, called as a ''hostile witness'' by the plaintiff,
defended with equal fervor his editorial decisions regarding the documentary for
which he was chiefly responsible. But which side, if either, is winning the
hearts and minds of the jury is no clearer now than it was in early October,
when the trial began.

Although they differ on most other points, lawyers for CBS and General
Westmoreland agree that if Mr. Klein proves to be a persuasive witness, he could
''damage'' the network's case.

Touched on Subject in Letter


While Mr. Adams denies having said ''we have to come clean,'' or anything like
it, in his conversation with Mr. Klein, the former C.I.A. employee had touched
on the same subject in a letter to Col. Gains Hawkins on Jan. 20, 1982, three
days before the broadcast.

Overall, Mr. Adams wrote to Colonel Hawkins, a retired intelligence officer who
had given a key interview for the documentary, the forthcoming program was
''reasonably good.''

''But as I mentioned before,'' he wrote, ''there's a major problem: the
documentary seems to pin the rap on General Westmoreland, when it probably
belongs higher than that.''

Dan M. Burt, General Westmoreland's principal attorney, plans to use both this
letter and the editing room exchange to argue that CBS harbored doubts about the
general's role in the handling of enemy strength estimates.

But Mr. Adams is expected to testify that, while he suspected the White House of
having originated the ''deception'' and he ''talked endlessly'' about that to
Mr. Crile, he always believed the general's command had participated in
''massive falsification'' of data. ''And Westy,'' he said in an interview last
week, ''certainly knew about aspects of it.''

Mr. Klein, a 34-year-old freelance film editor who was brought into the Vietnam
project by Mr. Crile, will be the only person who worked on the documentary to
voluntarily testify for General Westmoreland. David Boies, the chief lawyer for
CBS, is expected to portray him as a man who developed a vendetta against Mr.
Crile and who was ignorant of much of the off-camera material gathered for the
program.

In his $120 million suit, General Westmoreland accuses CBS of saying he had
imposed an ''arbitrary ceiling'' of 300,000 on reports of enemy strength in
South Vietnam, suppressed reports from his officers of a higher enemy presence
and a higher infiltration rate than was made known, and engineered a cover-up of
the truth after the Tet offensive of January 1968.

The CBS documentary, which cost about $250,000 to produce and has cost at least
10 times that to defend in court, sought to ''offer an explanation for one of
the great mysteries of the war - why for so long our Government apparently
believed, and wanted us all to believe, that we were winning the war.''

The broadcast said that the ''conspiracy'' by General Westmoreland's command to
minimize enemy strength had left the President, American troops and the public
''totally unprepared'' for the scope of the Tet offensive.

''The President,'' said Mike Wallace, the narrator of the program and a
defendant at this trial, ''had been alerted to the enemy's intentions, but no
one had been able or willing to inform him of the enemy's capability.''

Eight Supported Thesis


Of the nine people other than Mr. Adams and General Westmoreland who appeared on
the program - some of whom will now testify for CBS - eight basically supported
its thesis.

Some of the eight, including Colonel Hawkins and other intelligence officers,
said that, while they had no direct orders from General Westmoreland, they had
reduced figures or had witnessed others doing it because they believed, from
briefings with the general or contacts with his aides, that he would not accept
higher numbers.

From the testimony and other evidence to date, it appears that the size of the
enemy in South Vietnam - except perhaps for the regular, uniformed troops known
as ''main and local forces'' - was uncertain long before 1967, if not thereafter
as well.

The official American military listing of enemy strength, normally published
each month by General Westmoreland's command, was known as the order of battle.

Some Figures Remained Static


But for months, even years, its figures for such categories as political cadre
and ''irregulars'' - which included both full-time guerrillas and part-time,
hamlet-based self-defense forces - remained static. These statistics seem to
have been obtained in the early 1960's from South Vietnamese officials, who, in
turn, had inherited them from the French in 1954. And, however widely these
figures were circulated and publicized by President Johnson and others after his
Administration made a major military commitment in Vietnam in 1965, they appear
to have been given little credence by American intelligence analysts.

In late 1966, Mr. Adams and some of his C.I.A. colleagues concluded - largely on
the basis of newly captured enemy documents and other material provided by
General Westmoreland's command - that the size of the irregular forces had been
seriously underestimated and was now more than twice the 112,000 carried in the
order of battle. The C.I.A. officials also said in internal memorandums that the
total enemy strength figure of 280,000 was ''far too low and should be raised,
perhaps doubled.''

Meanwhile, the Pentagon, confused by ''apparent discrepancies'' in the estimates
but under pressure to satisfy what Gen. Earle G. Wheeler, chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff, called ''an insatiable thirst for hard numbers here in
Washington,'' ordered a review of methodology that would allow the military, the
C.I.A. and other agencies to ''play off the same sheet of music.''

The result was a conference in Honolulu in February 1967, attended by Maj. Gen.
Joseph A. McChristian, who had been General Westmoreland's chief of intelligence
since 1965, and by Colonel Hawkins, who was head of General McChristian's order
of battle section. While the conferees noted the difficulty of measuring the
irregulars with precision, they agreed to continue including that category in
the order of battle.

That spring, Colonel Hawkins's unit completed a 70-page analysis of the
irregulars, one-third of whom had previously been considered to be guerrillas
and two-thirds, self-defense forces. The new study found 61,000 guerrillas and
124,000 self-defense militia. Although the total of 185,000 was less than the
250,000 estimated by Mr. Adams, it was substantially higher than the 112,000 in
the order of battle.

A similar analysis of the political cadre by Colonel Hawkins's staff concluded
that the figure of 39,000 long carried in the order of battle should be
increased to at least 90,000.

In the middle of May, two weeks before his scheduled transfer to Fort Hood,
Tex., General McChristian presented General Westmoreland with a one-page cable
for Washington containing Colonel Hawkins's higher figures for irregulars and
political cadre. What happened then, and in the weeks and months thereafter when
General Westmoreland ordered the self-defense forces removed from the order of
battle altogether and the political cadre diverted to a separate listing, has
been much in dispute at the trial.

On ''The Uncounted Enemy,'' General McChristian said that General Westmoreland
was ''disturbed'' when he first saw the increased figures for the irregulars.
''And by the time I left his office,'' the former intelligence chief recalled,
''I had the definite impression that he felt that if he sent those figures back
to Washington at that time, it would create a political bombshell.''

'He Chose Not to Inform Congress'


When General Westmoreland said on the program that he rejected General
McChristian's estimates for the self- defense forces because he felt they were
''specious'' and because ''the people in Washington were not sophisticated
enough to understand and evaluate this thing, and neither was the media,'' Mr.
Wallace said:

''We underscore what General Westmoreland just said about his decision. He chose
not to inform the Congress, the President, not even the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
of the evidence collected by his intelligence chief, evidence which indicated a
far larger army.''

General Westmoreland also said, during the broadcast, that ''political
considerations'' played no role in his deletion of the self-defense forces.

In court, the general stressed that, until he was shown the higher estimates, he
had little interest in what he considered outdated data on civilian units of
''old men, women and boys'' who were of ''no military consequence.'' He then
concluded it was time to ''separate the fighters from the non-fighters,'' partly
because the press would interpret an increased number for the self-defense
forces as a sign that his command faced a much larger armed enemy than he
believed it did.

''Sure we were sensitive to press reaction,'' the general said. ''We would have
been dummoxes if we weren't.''

Nonetheless, the general said that, during and after a full briefing on the
numbers in late May 1967, he informed his superiors of the new estimates and
ordered that they be reviewed by a committee of field operations officers and
embassy representatives.

Mr. Burt has introduced several documents from that period, including one
written by General McChristian, that appear to support the general's statements
and to demonstrate that the Joint Chiefs of Staff concurred in the removal of
the self-defense forces.

After a protracted debate in mid-1967 between General Westmoreland's command and
the C.I.A. - which had warned Robert S. McNamara, the Secretary of Defense, in
May that the total ''insurgent apparatus'' in South Vietnam may be ''in the
half-million range'' - an agreement was reached in September on a special
intelligence estimate for President Johnson.

The special estimate placed the enemy's ''military force'' at 223,000 to
248,000, plus political cadre of 75,000 to 85,000. The C.I.A., some of whose
officials had their own reservations about the capabilities of the self-defense
forces, dropped its opposition to their exclusion from the order of battle,
accepting a ''verbal description'' of them instead. The estimate noted that,
while these forces may have numbered 150,000 in 1966 and were ''still large and
constitute a part of the overall Communist effort, they are not offensive
military forces.'' No current figure for them was provided.

To Mr. Burt, this was all part of an ''open'' process in which General
Westmoreland exercised his prerogative to take a ''command position.'' It was
''simply not the stuff of a conspiracy to suppress,'' he told the jury.

'Honest Debate' Cited as Issue


To Mr. Boies - who has underscored a series of cables in which General
Westmoreland and his staff, supported by ranking American diplomats, were
adamant about the need to preserve their ''image of success'' and to avoid
issuing an enemy strength figure higher than that already ''carried by the
press'' - the ''noise'' over the figures in 1967 is not the issue today. The
issue, he said, ''is whether it was an honest debate or not.''

To Mr. Crile, who has testified for seven days, the answer is plain.

''The only question that was raised by the documentary,'' he said in court,
''was whether it was known by the President, by the Congress, by all the
consumers of this intelligence that it was a dishonest debate'' and that the
military ''had evidence that supported the C.I.A.'s position.''

''That,'' Mr. Crile said, ''was at the heart of it. Did anyone know that there
had been arbitrary reductions that went into the military's position in several
categories, did people know that intelligence decisions were being made for
purely political reasons, for reasons of press concerns? These were the
issues.''

To Judge Pierre N. Leval, the case does not pivot on whether General
Westmoreland's superiors were deceived but whether the general ''sought to
deceive'' them.

The judge ruled before the trial that ''although a reporter may have sufficient
evidence of his charge to foreclose any material issue of constitutional malice,
he may nonetheless make himself liable if he knowingly or recklessly misstates
that evidence to make it seem more convincing or condemnatory than it is.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              430 of 430 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 31, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIANS SAY HANOI SUFFERED 100 CASUALTIES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 600 words

DATELINE: NONG SAMET, Thailand, Dec. 30


Cambodian non-Communist guerrillas, fighting Vietnamese troops in the heart of
an overrun rebel camp, said today that they had killed or wounded about 100 of
Hanoi's soldiers but had sustained serious losses of their own.

Some 4,500 guerrillas have been trying to retake the Rithisen camp, the largest
guerrilla camp along the Thai- Cambodian border. The non-Communist rebel group,
the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, and two other anti-Vietnamese
groups have their strongholds along the border.

The other groups are the Communist Khmer Rouge and a force loyal to the onetime
Cambodian head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk.

The guerrilla groups have been united in their goal of expelling the Vietnamese
from Cambodia. Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978 and installed the Heng Samrin
Government.

100 Cambodians Are Treated


An official of the International Committee of the Red Cross said today that more
than 100 Cambodian fighters had been treated inside Thai territory by Red Cross
medical teams. The official said it was the highest number treated in a single
day since fighting began at the Rithisen camp on Christmas Day.

Commanders of the Khmer Liberation Front, which controlled Rithisen until the
Vietnamese overran the camp, said that 30 of their soldiers were killed today
and that about 100 of Hanoi's soldiers were killed or wounded. The figures could
not be independently verified.

A guerrilla leader, Lia Ne, told reporters at the Thai border village of Nong
Samet that Vietnamese gunners fired more than 1,000 artillery and mortar rounds
at guerrillas in Rithisen in a 12-hour period beginning at 4 A.M. today, when
the Cambodians began their first assault.

Lia Ne said his forces battled Vietnamese near the center of the camp, which
once held 60,000 civilians, and at the site of a destroyed Buddhist temple to
the south. The Vietnamese infantry, he said, was supported by four T-54 tanks
and by artillery strikes from nearby bases.

Long-Range Guns Are Used


Another guerrilla commander, Pan Tai, said he led an attack near the temple,
where, 30 yards apart, each side raked the other with AK-47 rifle fire. He said
that Vietnamese infantry troops radioed for big-gun support but that some shells
fell on their own troops, causing casualties. The Vietnamese are using their
longest range howitzers, Soviet-supplied 130-millimeter guns with a range of up
to 18 miles.

Thai military officers said Vietnamese troops with tanks and artillery were near
Ampil, another Khmer People's National Liberation Front camp.

Ampil's 23,000 civilians fled last week and are clustered on the eastern edge of
a Thai-constructed anti-tank ditch. Reporters saw some of these refugees
crossing the ditch today to a evacuation area prepared by a United Nations
agency deeper inside Thailand, about six miles from Ampil.

The area is known along the border as Site Two. The 62,000 refugees from
Rithisen are farther south along the frontier at an evacuation site called Nern
Din Daeng.

Thailand's top security official, Prasong Soonsiri, said the Vietnamese were
using heavier and better weaponry than in the previous five years of fighting.

The official press agency of the pro- Hanoi Government in Cambodia said the
camps attacked were not civilian refugee camps but ''camouflaged bandit hideouts
where civilians are kept as hostages.''

It accused China, the United States and the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations, which includes Thailand, of feeding, arming and training the guerrillas
and providing them with sanctuary on Thai soil.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cambodian rebels

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
