
                               1 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LEGISLATORS PASS NEW STATE BUDGET

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1435 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, March 31


The State Legislature passed a new budget today that increases spending by more
than $2 billion in a broad range of areas, including education, prisons and
housing for the homeless.

Buoyed by an improving economy, the Legislature approved the largest increase in
education aid ever and a record appropriation for projects requested by
legislators for their districts.

The Assembly completed passage this afternoon of the series of bills making up
the $35.6 billion budget. The Senate finished its work on the budget shortly
after midnight Friday.

The Assembly session was punctuated by debates on tax cuts and financing for the
Westway highway project. Scores of amendments were proposed and defeated one
after another,

It was the second year in a row that the lawmakers adopted a budget by the
deadline of April 1, when the new fiscal year begins.

''They said we weren't going to get it done on time,'' Assembly Speaker Stanley
Fink, Democrat of Brooklyn, said as the last bill was passed at 4:06 P.M. ''And
we have eight hours to spare.''

The Governor has 10 days to veto any changes by the Legislature in his original
budget proposals. If he does not act, the budget package automatically takes
effect.

Spending from state tax revenues rose by about 11 percent, the largest such
increase in a decade, officials said.

These are some of the key provisions of the new budget:


- An increase of $460 million in education in the next school year, including
new programs to purchase computers, improve attendance and train teachers.


- A freeze on tuition increases at the public universities, a $48 million
increase in aid to full-time students at public and private colleges, a new $11
million program to aid part-time students and a new $3.2 million program to
provide free tuition for Vietnam War veterans.


- The restoration of more than 1,600 jobs cut last year at the City University,
the State University and state mental institutions. For the first time, the
Legislature included language fixing specific staff levels at the agencies.


- Increases of $3.3 million for the arts, $20 million for housing the homeless,
$15 million for nutrition, more than $200 million for prison expansion, and
$12.6 million for the prosecution of major criminals.

Upgrading Credit Rating


The state's Director of the Budget, Michael Finnerty, said the budget reduced
the state's reliance on one-time revenues and other fiscal devices.

He said he was ''absolutely hopeful'' that credit-rating agencies would upgrade
the state's financial obligations, saving up to $30 million in interest costs.

In contrast with last year, the legislative leaders reached agreement on the
outline of the budget and many of its details on their own, giving Governor
Cuomo a less visible role in the process.

Mr. Cuomo, who rushed to the Assembly podium last year to thank the Legislature
for improving the budget, remained in his official residence today.

Last year, Mr. Cuomo said, ''Say, hallelujah, it's the miracle of New York - it
really works.'' This year, his press office put out a four-paragraph statement
saying the budget was ''another vindication of the effectiveness of our
political system.''

''I congratulate the members of the Senate and Assembly and their leadership,''
he said, ''for demonstrating to the people of our state, and the financial
community, that responsible government thrives in New York.''

Curb on Westway Spending


After a lengthy debate in the Assembly, the Legislature approved a restriction
on the use of state funds for the Westway project, and cut $100 million from the
appropriations for the project in the budget.

The restriction would bar the state from spending money for the highway on the
West Side of Manhattan unless the Federal Government guranteed that it would pay
its share of the costs.

''Thank God for the striped bass,'' said Assemblyman William F. Passannante,
Democrat of Manhattan, an opponent of the highway. A lawsuit over the fate of
the fish has blocked construction.

But Governor Cuomo is a supporter of the project and Michael J. DelGiudice, Mr.
Cuomo's secretary, said the Governor would veto the restriction. Mr. DelGiudice
said the cut in appropriations would not have any effect on the project.

New York City will get an increase of at least $160 million in education aid
over the next school year. Nevertheless, city officials complained that they
were getting shortchanged.

''We've said that we felt we are about $60 million short,'' Alair A. Townsend,
the city's budget chief, said, ''and we don't have any other information to
suggest that isn't so.''

In revising Mr. Cuomo's budget, the Legislature eliminated $22 million in higher
fees for state services, a $100 million sports betting game, a reorganizaion of
several state agencies and tuition increases.

Helped by Expanding Economy


Of the $2 billion in spending increases, $1.8 billion of them were proposed by
the Governor and the rest added by the Legislature. The spending increases were
balanced by increased estimates of tax revenues attributed to an expanded
economy.

Budget officials said that, since Mr. Cuomo's budget was released in January,
economic improvements had led them to increase their estimates for the
collection of personal income tax, revenues from the state lottery, and receipts
from a tax on gains from large real estate transactions.

This is in sharp contrast with the last two years. In 1982, the state borrowed
$500 million in order to have enough to cash to pay its bills. Last year, the
state raised more than $1 billin in taxes and fees, and cut thousands of jobs
from the payroll to balance the budget.

The Legislature added far more than $200 million in new programs, but much of
these were offset by cuts, lower estimates of inflation, and increased Federal
reimbursements.

In many agencies, funds to pay for state operations were cut so additions could
be made in aid to local governments. Many of the additions were ''member
items,'' hundreds of programs added at the request of individual legislators for
their districts.

A Rise in Travel Expenses


State fiscal aides said $40 million in these programs were included in the
budget, an increase of $10 million over the level last year. The budget also
includes an increase in the reimbursment rate for travel expenses for
legislators.

Mr. Fink defended the spending for ''member items,'' saying legislators were as
qualified as state commissioners or the Governor's aides in recommending
programs.

''In my opinion,'' he said, ''individual members are as capable of determining
which programs they believe are important to the quality of life in this state
as anyone else.''

When Mr. Cuomo's budget was first submitted in January, the Senate majority
leader, Warren M. Anderson of Binghamton, said he was ''flabbergasted'' by the
size of the increase, and proposed $285 million in tax cuts instead.

But the idea of tax cuts was dropped from negotiations after the Assembly agreed
to consider them later in the year, if enough money were available. Mr. Anderson
said he did not want to delay the budget for the issue.

Anderson Is 'Flabbergasted'


Asked today about the budget he approved, Mr. Anderson said he was still
''flabbergasted'' that tax cuts were not included.

The Senate went ahead and passed $285 million in tax cuts on Friday, amid
charges from Democrats that the move was a political ploy. Republicans in the
Assembly proposed them in the form of amendments, but they were not put to a
vote.

The Assembly Speaker, Stanley Fink, Democrat of Brooklyn, ruled that they were
not relevant to the bills being amended. He was upheld in a party-line vote.

In the Assembly, proceedings were slowed today by 58 amendments unsuccessfully
proposed by Republican legislators. The amendments called for a variety of
expanded programs beyond those included in the budget.

Most were defeated in party-line votes, and legislators said they were efforts
to build a record for the November elections.

'I'm Consistent'


Assemblywoman Pinny Cooke, Republican of Rochester, proposed - for the third
time in three years - a $25 million state program to pay for day care. It was
defeated overwhelminly

''I'm consistent,'' she said.

Despite a rare lobbying effort by the state's judges, the budget does not
include any new funds for salary increases, or money to repair the state's
courthouses.

In all, $75.8 million was cut from a request for a $125.1 million increase in
the court system budget.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOP U.S. RIGHTS AIDE ACCUSES PRESS OF DISTORTION

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 603 words


The Reagan Administration's chief human rights spokesman has asserted that the
public gets a distorted view of rights violations around the world because news
organizations report abuses in nations that the United States supports and
ignore those in countries it opposes.

The accusation was made Friday in a debate in New York between Elliott Abrams,
Assistant Secretary of State for Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs, and
Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut.

Mr. Dodd replied that the chief source of distortion was the Reagan
Administration's ''indifference'' to human rights infractions of allies and
opponents alike. Senator Dodd said, however, that the press should expand its
reporting of such abuses even if the Administration was not calling attention to
the problem.

The two-hour debate, before an audience of 150 at Cooper Union, was sponsored by
that school and by the Center for Communication, a New York-based organization
that arranges seminars and symposiums on communications issues and policies.

'Systemic' Factors Cited

Mr. Abrams said coverage was inevitably affected by ''systemic'' factors.
Reporters cannot get much information about abuses in the countries with the
worst records, such as Cuba, North Vietnam or the Soviet Union, he said. But
they can find dissidents and protesters in ''partially open'' nations like South
Korea or El Salvador, he noted.

''The media are business,'' Mr. Abrams said, and editors ''tilt toward the
visually interesting and exciting stories.''

''They will choose the Philippine protest over the Rumanian practice,'' he said.

But the reporting is also tainted by ideological bias, he asserted. He cited a
1983 survey for Public Opinion that indicated that Washington reporters for
leading news organizations were substantially more liberal politically than the
general public in the rest of the country.

He said many reporters had a preconceived belief that the Administration was
indifferent to abuses generally and that it preferred corrupt dictatorships to
genuinely nationalistic revolutionary movements. He said such bias was evident
in the cant of many articles; the Philippines are said to have ''a dictator,''
the Soviet Union ''a leader,'' he said.

'Quiet Diplomacy' Stressed

Critics of the Administration's human rights policies, both in Congress and in
the press, ignore the ''quiet diplomacy'' it uses effectively with allies, Mr.
Abrams said. He declared that reporters took the Administration's public silence
about some human rights violations as evidence of indifference. Instead, he
said, they should ''look for a more sophisticated policy.''

Senator Dodd said press coverage was strongly affected by the Administration's
not criticizing allies publicly. ''If the issue is treated in the White House as
little more than an annoyance,'' he said, ''editors will turn to other issues.''
News organizations will report what the President says about human rights
abuses, he said, ''and we need a background chorus from the media to show that
America genuinely cares.''

He said reporters were justified in paying special attention to abuses in
countries that receive aid from the United States because the public needs to
know how its money is being spent. ''It raises questions about the consistency
of our human rights policies,'' he said.

The Senator maintained, however, that the press should increase its attention to
human rights violations ''not as a matter of altruism but as a matter of
survival.''

''A free press cannot survive in a world without freedom,'' he declared.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A VIETNAM WAR BOARD GAME CREATED BY PRINCETON SENIOR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 48, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 569 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON, March 31


Late last spring, when Nicholas Karp had to submit a topic for his senior thesis
at Princeton, he told the classics department he would like to design a board
game simulating the Roman war of 49 B.C. between Julius Caesar and Pompey the
Great.

The department rejected his proposal, and Mr. Karp had to choose a more
traditional topic. A professional game manufacturer, however, knew of Mr. Karp's
imagination at inventing games and commissioned him to design one dealing with
the Vietnam War.

The game, ''Vietnam: 1965-1975,'' appeared in game and hobby stores last month.
Produced by Victory Games of New York City, it is designed to simulate the most
important aspects of the war, and domestic opposition plays an important role.

Game Sells for $20


A spokesman, Gerald Glickenhouse, said Victory Games had issued a first printing
of 15,000, priced at $20. Mr. Karp receives a royalty on each game sold.

The game is for two players. One takes the role of the United States and South
Vietnam, and the other represents North Vietnam and the Vietcong. They re-enact
the war and its military, political and economic aspects. The United States
player must also contend with opposition to the war back home.

''If morale is low,'' said Mr. Karp, a 21-year-old senior, ''the game doesn't
allow more troops to be sent, and will eventually require withdrawal of what is
there.''

The game is played on a large, L-shaped map of South Vietnam, with 780 small
cardboard squares representing military units, political leaders and positions
for air power. Dice are occasionally used to determine the outcome of bombings
or military confrontations.

Actions and Morale


''The emphasis of the game is on politics,'' said the 21-year-old Mr. Karp, who
is now a senior. ''Every action in the game has a corresponding morale effect in
the U.S. and in South Vietnam: bombing the North, sending new troops, high
casualty levels. The U.S. has to balance military needs with the ability of the
U.S. to cater to them.''

The game manual includes 48 pages of instructions, one of which reads: ''The
U.S. player may wish to invade Cambodia and/or Laos at some point during the
game. He may do so, although the penalties to U.S. morale are stiff. No
U.S.-controlled units may ever enter North Vietnam under any condition.''

Mr. Karp, who has been inventing games since he was 18, said he spent 18 months
researching and designing the game. He read the Pentagon Papers and accounts of
individual battles and campaigns and interviewed veterans.

He said he hoped the game would lead people to ''experiment with new ideas, new
approaches'' to the war. ''If you read a book's account of the war,'' he said,
''you don't understand in as vivid a way how contrasting factors interacted with
each other. A simulation game puts all these factors and their relationships
together.''

The instruction booklet offer 11 scenarios. Nine involve individual phases of
the war and take about a half hour to play, Mr. Karp said. The other two are
longer, with one covering 1965 to 1975 and the other lasting from the Tet
offensive on, or from 1968 to 1975.

In the two longer campaigns, the American goal is to maintain the Saigon
Government. The game ends in 1975, when that government fell. ''If it hasn't
fallen by then,'' Mr. Karp said, ''it is judged a U.S. victory - only by game
circumstances.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHURCHES BECOMING HOME TO CENTRAL AMERICAN EXILES

BYLINE: By ARI L. GOLDMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 9, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1063 words


From California to Vermont, hundreds of normally law-abiding Americans are
knowingly breaking the law. In churches, monasteries and synagogues, they are
harboring illegal aliens who have fled the violence in Central America.

Americans who advocate the use of religious institutions as sanctuaries say they
are following a tradition that dates back to biblical times and that was honored
here for blacks fleeing slavery and draft evaders during the Vietnam era.

The Reagan Administration says a church-as- sanctuary tradition has no standing
in American law. Nevertheless, Federal authorities have resisted going into
churches and hauling out illegal aliens, but at the same time they have been
warning church leaders that they may be held responsible for their actions. The
illegal aliens could be deported and church officials are liable to fines of up
to $2,000 and five years in prison.

Despite the risks, the idea of providing sanctuary to Central Americans is
spreading beyond the West and Middle West, where it began two years ago. Last
month, a Benedictine monastary in Weston, Vt. welcomed its first refugees -
Guatemalans. Riverside Church in Manhattan is deciding whether it should provide
sanctuary.

There are 110 sanctuary churches in 60 cities around the nation, according to
the Chicago Interreligious Task Force on Central America, which has emerged as
the coordinating body for sanctuaries. The number has been growing. ''We are
receiving one or two declarations a week,'' said Robin Semer, a task force
official.  Religious institutions declare themselves sanctuaries for a
combination of humanitarian and political reasons. For the most part, it is a
way of demonstrating opposition to United States activities in Central America
and to the denial of political asylum to people who flee the area.

Not Welcomed Home

Beverly Keene, director of New York's Interreligious Task Force on Central
America, argued, as many sanctuary proponents do, that ''the United States does
not want to recognize them as refugees because that would call into question
United States policy, which has created war, death and destruction throughout
Latin America.'' She contended that the Federal Government is deporting people
to countries where they face imprisonment or death.

Immigration authorities estimate that more than half a million displaced Central
Americans - the majority from El Salvador - are in the United States illegally.
They include peasants, laborers, students, scholars and former government
officials. According to the Immigration and Naturalization Service in
Washington, the United States has deported 29,479 illegal aliens from El
Salvador alone since 1980. The Administration argues that the majority came to
the United States not for political asylum but for employment opportunities, and
that few are able to show the ''well-founded fear of persecution'' needed to
qualify for asylum and refugee status. State department officials have
acknowledged that some number sent home by the immigration service have been
killed, but as victims of random violence rather than as specific targets of
political factions.  Duke Austin, a spokesman for the immigration service, said
that given the agency's limited enforcement abilities, it decided not to go
after the 300 to 350 illegal aliens who are under the protection of church
organizations. ''When you put it into perspective, the sanctuary movement is
really not that big and is receiving an unjustified amount of attention,'' Mr.
Austin said. The priorities of the service are to apprehend aliens at the
border, to stop the people who smuggle them into the country and to remove
illegal aliens from the work place, he said.  Avoiding ConfrontationSanctuary
organizers say, and some Federal officials admit, that the immigration service
has been restrained largely because it wants to avoid the spectacle of
immigration officers dragging refugees out of churches, which could turn public
opinion against Government policies and increase support for sanctuaries.  But
since, as Mr. Austin acknowledged, the sanctuary phenomenon is growing, such
confrontations may be unavoidable. If churches become major harbors for illegal
aliens, he said, ''We will have to put them on notice that this is civil
disobedience and that sometime in the future they will be held accountable.''
Miss Semer of the Chicago interreligious group said the numbers helped by the
sanctuary movement far exceed the 300 to 350 who formally claimed sanctuary.
Thousands, she said, are receiving food, medical and legal assistance, education
and job training through churches such as the Southside Presbyterian Church in
Tucson, Ariz., the first church to declare sanctuary. There is a sign in Spanish
on the small building that says, ''This is a sanctuary for the oppressed of
Central America.'' One congregant, Philip Conger, said it has been home to a
Salvadoran family since March 1982, but in the meantime has assisted hundreds of
other illegal aliens.

Most of those who take sanctuary begin by living in quarters in the church or on
church grounds. In many cases, nearby housing is eventually found for the
refugees, but they remain under the church's protection.

Many who have accepted sanctuary have gone on to tell American audiences about
politics, military activities and living conditions in their homelands. Miss
Semer said sanctuary coordinating groups often make the arrangements for such
lectures.

The immigration service has yet to arrest any of them, either on or off church
grounds. Two recent incidents, however, have many church leaders and members
worried. In both cases, one in Texas and one in Arizona, church workers and the
Salvadoran refugees they were transporting were arrested by immigration
officials. In both cases, the aliens seemed to be heading for, but had not
reached, the protection of a sanctuary.

Immigration officials in Washington would not say whether these incidents were
part of a stepped-up campaign against the sanctuaries or part of routine
enforcement. Mr. Austin would only reiterate that, in granting sanctuary,
churches were operating outside the law. ''A church,'' he said, ''cannot harbor
illegal aliens any more than it can hide criminals.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Brother John holding Guatemalan refugee

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POISED FOR THE PERSIAN GULF

BYLINE: By Richard Halloran

SECTION: Section 6; Page 38, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4056 words


Richard Halloran, a member of The Times's Washington bureau, covers military
affairs.  PROMPTLY AT 8:30 EVERY weekday morning, Lieut. Gen. Robert C.
Kingston, commander in chief of the United States Central Command, strides into
a briefing room at his headquarters at MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Fla.,
and asks his staff to be seated. An intelligence officer, standing at a lectern
beside a large wall screen, flicks a switch to display a map of the region
around the Persian Gulf. He runs quickly through the action of the previous 24
hours in the war between Iran and Iraq. Another flick brings up a satellite
photograph of a new Iranian troop deployment. A chart provides fresh detail on
the 115,000 Soviet troops in Afghanistan, or the 25 Soviet ships in the Indian
Ocean, or Soviet advisers in Ethiopia. The context in each case: threats to the
industrial world's largest source of oil.

General Kingston, known in military parlance as ''the CINC'' (pronounced
''Sink''), asks a short question; the briefing officer gives an equally short
reply. An operations officer takes the podium, brings up a list of American
forces available to the Central Command, and highlights several points on their
training. A map of the Arabian Sea shows where an American aircraft carrier and
other warships have moved within the last 24 hours. A second map shows the
disposition of American warships in the Persian Gulf. General Kingston asks
another quick question in his Boston twang, and gets another quick answer.

A third briefing officer gives a succinct forecast of weather that could affect
military operations in the 19 countries within the Central Command's area of
responsibility. A public-affairs officer takes three minutes to report on news
that may affect the command. General Kingston says, ''Thank you,'' rises and
walks out to resume his duties as commander of the American military force that
will fight to protect the oil lifeline from the Persian Gulf, if President
Reagan so orders.

In its four years of existence, first as the Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force,
and then, since Jan. 1, 1983, as the Central Command, the force has become, in
General Kingston's words, ''a credible deterrent.'' Its assets, he points out,
include the organization of his headquarters; the combat units on call from the
Army, Navy, Marine Corps and Air Force; the positioning of arms and equipment
close to the operating area; widening access to bases in the region, and the
experience of 16 exercises in the United States and overseas and two overseas
operations.

In February 1983, a month after the command was formed, President Reagan
responded to warnings from Egypt and Sudan that the mercurial leader of Libya,
Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, planned an air assault on the Sudan and a coup to
overthrow the Sudanese Government. The President turned to the Central Command;
37 hours later, four Awacs radar and control planes arrived in Egypt to monitor
Libyan air movements for the Egyptian Air Force.

The President also deployed the aircraft carrier Nimitz off the Libyan coast to
make F-14 fighters available for air cover. Administration officials said at the
time that Mr. Reagan had let Colonel Qaddafi know he was prepared to order the
destruction of the Libyan Air Force should the Libyan leader persist. Neither
the assault nor the coup was attempted.

Similarly, the Central Command dispatched Awacs and supporting aircraft to Egypt
two weeks ago, after a Libyan bomber attacked a city in the Sudan. The mission
was the same: to dissuade Colonel Qaddafi from trying to overthrow the Sudanese
Government.

Even so, the command still has immense obstacles to overcome. General Kingston,
a veteran of 16 campaigns in the Korean and Vietnam Wars and among the nation's
most experienced combat leaders, says bluntly: ''If we had to send a combat
force into the Central Command area, we would start from almost zero in terms of
combat power and support structure.''

The Central Command is 7,000 miles from its area of responsibility. It has few
forces under its operational control - and these only when deploying. Special
forces to operate behind enemy lines are inadequate. The command lacks
sufficient air and sea transport, and acquiring it is proving to be slow. Access
to other nations' military bases is dependent on the political winds of the
moment; there is little long-term logistical support. The command has neither a
communications apparatus nor an intelligence network in place. And the United
States has no military alliances with nations in the region the command has been
assigned to defend.

All this raises serious questions of combat capability. Whether the Central
Command could accomplish any particular mission would depend on the strength of
the adversary, the amount of warning time, and the speed with which deployment
took place. The command's basic tactic would be a pre-emptive move - getting
into position first in hope of deterring an adversary's strike.

Clearly, the Central Command could handle the small Iranian units of poorly
trained and badly led Revolutionary Guards that have been thrown at the Iraqi
Army. Just as clearly, the command would be in deep trouble if the Soviet
Union's 30 divisions north of the Iranian border and in Afghanistan were to
drive south. What is less certain is how well the command would perform in some
crisis in between - whether it could assemble and deploy enough troops to stop,
say, a full-scale Iranian invasion of Saudi Arabia.



 THE CENTRAL COMMAND, ONE OF SIX UNIFIED, MULTIservice United States commands,
is responsible for military operations, security assistance and training of
foreign forces in Southwest Asia, the Arabian Peninsula and the Horn of Africa.
Its area of responsibility covers an expanse larger than the continental United
States, stretching from Egypt in the west to Pakistan in the east, from Jordan
in the north to Kenya in the south. Its primary mission was laid down in 1982 in
Defense Guidance, the Defense Department's secret marching orders: ''Our
principal objectives are to assure continued access to Persian Gulf oil, and to
prevent the Soviets from acquiring political-military control of the oil
directly or through proxies.''

In the late 1970's, plans for a force that could be dispatched to trouble spots
had kicked around the Pentagon for several years. The fall of the Shah of Iran
and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, both during President Carter's
Administration, brought the force into being.

Today, the Central Command's immediate concern is to be ready to deploy forces
should the war between Iran and Iraq jeopardize the oil fields around the
Persian Gulf. Iran has threatened to retaliate for Iraqi attacks on its oil
installations by closing the Strait of Hormuz, through which nearly nine million
barrels of oil from Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Qatar, Kuwait and
Iran are shipped each day, providing 20 percent of the non-Communist world's
oil. American naval officers doubt that Iran has the mines to shut a channel 30
miles wide, very deep, and filled with swirling currents. But an air attack, or
a batch of free-floating mines, or an artillery assault on a passing tanker
could send maritime insurance rates prohibitively high, scaring off ship
captains and owners.

''It's not so much Khomeini that's the problem,'' says one officer, ''it's
Lloyd's of London.'' To prevent those insurance rates from reducing the flow of
oil, Administration contingency plans provide for sweeping mines, escorting
tankers with frigates, flying air cover, or launching air strikes from an
aircraft carrier in the Arabian Sea. ''We have contingency plans to handle
everything from an energy shortage to the military situation,'' says an official
in Washington. ''We began the planning in November and December, but we've
gotten more serious about it in the last three or four weeks.''

At Central Command headquarters, an intelligence section scrutinizes indicators
and warnings from the Central Intelligence Agency, Defense Intelligence Agency
and National Security Agency. A Combat Capabilities Assessment Group performs as
a ''fire brigade,'' running a constant check on crises, not only around the
Persian Gulf but in the Sudan; in Somalia and Ethiopia, with their continual
skirmishes; and in Oman and Yemen, where Soviet-backed Yemenis have been probing
the Omani border. Operations and logistic sections rework contingency plans.
''There is nothing so perishable,'' says one officer, ''as a contingency plan.''

In the field, prudent commanders take up slack to be ready if the bugle sounds.
But before soldiers climb aboard air transports, at least one nation in the
command's area of operations would have to invite the United States to send
forces. President Reagan has said the United States will not intervene on land
without such an invitation, because of the fierce political opposition that
would arise otherwise. Moreover, says an officer in the Tampa headquarters, ''an
invitation is a military necessity.'' The Central Command has paratoopers or
marines who could undertake a ''forced entry,'' but that would be hard to
execute - and even harder to sustain with reinforcements and supplies.  A
Presidential decision would be only the first step. Congress would undoubtedly
have a say under the much-disputed War Powers Act. Allies would have to be
consulted: The Europeans are wary of any American move that might divert forces
from Europe, even though they, and the Japanese, are far more dependent on oil
from the Persian Gulf than is the United States. Friendly nations would be asked
for access to bases and for permission to fly over their territory. The Soviet
Union would be advised that the United States seeks only to stabilize a
turbulent situation. The Soviet news agency, Tass, has already warned that
American actions in the Persian Gulf ''are creating a grave threat to peace and
international security.''

Once the order had been given, the Central Command's problems would begin. The
command has enormous political and military handicaps that make it different
from the Atlantic, Pacific and European commands, the Southern Command for Latin
America and the Readiness Command that controls forces in the United States.

Politically, the Central Command has no umbrella of pacts like the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization in Europe or the mutual security treaty with Japan.
In its area of responsibility, differences in political outlook are profound.
Most nations in the region regard Israel as their main enemy, while the United
States sees the Soviet Union as the threat. Islamic nations do not want to
embrace the United States, at least not in public, because of American support
for Israel. The recent criticism of the Reagan Administration's Middle East
policy by King Hussein of Jordan has jeopardized hopes for military cooperation
with that nation.

Unlike the European Command in Stuttgart, West Germany, or the Pacific Command
in Hawaii, the Central Command's Tampa headquarters is far from its area of
operations. Unlike those and other commands, the Central Command has no forces
under its operational control except those temporarily in its area of
responsibility, no bases in its operating area, and no established
communications and intelligence structures.

The Defense Guidance of 1983 acknowledged these shortcomings. It said: ''We must
acquire a reasonable assurance of achieving United States war-fighting
objectives in Southwest Asia by the end of the decade.'' That would include
reacting to everything from insurgency to Soviet invasion.

In any contingency, an early alert would be critical. With a five-day warning,
an Air Force fighter squadron and a battalion of 800 Army paratroopers could be
in the region within 48 hours of the order to go; B-52 bombers could be in
action in the same time. By the end of a week, two more battalions of
paratroopers and a brigade headquarters would bring the total to 3,000 soldiers.
How quickly an aircraft carrier, with its 70 to 90 planes, and a Marine
Amphibious Unit of 1,800 marines could get to the scene would depend on where
they were when the signal was given. A carrier is almost always in the Indian
Ocean, but Marine units come and go.

After that, things would slow down because of insufficient airlift and sealift.
It would take two or three weeks to bring in two more brigades of paratroopers
and support units from Fort Bragg, N.C., to fill out the 82d Airborne Division.
The first of the 12,000 marines in the Seventh Marine Amphibious Brigade, which
includes infantry, artillery, tanks, fighter aircraft and combat support units,
would begin to arrive in a week from Twentynine Palms, Calif. So would ships
from the island of Diego Garcia, 2,000 miles to the south, with weapons,
ammunition, food and supplies for the marines. But it would take several weeks
for the entire brigade to arrive, depending on air transport. More than a month
would be needed for the Army's 24th Infantry Division, with its armored
personnel carriers and tanks, to arrive by ship from Fort Stewart, Ga.

General Kingston, who won the Distinguished Service Cross, the nation's
second-highest decoration, in Vietnam, would soon move his headquarters from its
nondescript box to a forward base. To lessen the handicap of distance, the
Central Command in December placed a forward headquarters aboard the command
ship LaSalle in the Persian Gulf.

But General Kingston does not hide his dissatisfaction with that arrangement. He
told Congress last year that ''a forward element afloat sends the wrong message
to our friends and foes alike.'' What was needed, he said, was a forward
headquarters ashore. That, he said, would ''send a clear signal of United States
resolve,'' providing ''the right kind of presence at a minimum cost to the
taxpayer and maximum benefit to the nation.''

Instead of permanently assigned troops, the Central Command has a force list of
300,000 soldiers, sailors, marines and airmen from which it can draw.

A ground force would come from three Army divisions and from a brigade of
helicopter gunships. The Army's new, mobile light division will be available
later.

The Marine Corps would furnish a ground division and an air wing plus an
infantry regiment and an air group.

The Air Force has designated nine tactical fighter wings, a Strategic Projection
Force of B-52 bombers, an airborne warning and control wing of Awacs radar and
supporting planes, and reconnaissance and electronic-warfare units.

The Navy would provide three aircraft carriers, a surface group probably
centered on a battleship, five maritime aerial patrol squadrons, and ships from
the Middle East Force.

General Kingston, who once commanded the Special Forces, or Green Berets, would
use some of those soldiers, plus Army Rangers, Air Force special-operations
units and Navy Seals to infiltrate behind enemy lines.

Sustaining a formidable force near the Persian Gulf with a steady flow of
reinforcements, fuel, ammunition and supplies would be even more difficult than
getting it there. Maj. Gen. William E. Klein, a staff officer with the Joint
Chiefs, told Congress recently that ''the size of the force we could send to
Southwest Asia is limited by our capability to support it.''

''Probably the most pressing need we have is for more lift - airlift and
sealift,'' General Kingston says. ''Seven thousand miles one way is a long
commute.''

It takes a C-5 Galaxy 14 hours to fly from the East Coast to Oman at the mouth
of the Persian Gulf. Cargo ships carrying the bulk of the heavy equipment would
take 31 days, if the Suez Canal were closed and they had to sail the 12,000
miles around the Cape of Good Hope.

Once troops and supplies arrived, mobility would be hard to achieve. The entire
region, General Kingston points out, ''has just two-thirds of the paved-road
mileage found in the state of Florida.''


As a substitute for bases under United States control, American diplomats have
pioneered a new concept for the Central Command, persuading several nations in
the region to give American forces access to their military installations. In
most cases, the United States pays for expanding and improving those bases.

After long negotiations, the United States has gained access to the Sidi Sliman
Air Base in Morocco as a way station. The Administration has obtained a
Congressional appropriation of $2 million for this fiscal year to improve that
base, and has asked for $3 million for the fiscal year that begins on Oct. 1.

American forces have several times used the Egyptian military airport at Cairo
West for maneuvers. But getting an agreement to build a large base at Ras Banas,
on the shore of the Red Sea, has run into snags. American and Egyptian
negotiators have agreed that Egypt will put up $49 million for construction and
the United States another $49 million, but for a project less ambitious than
originally planned.

In Oman, Sultan Qabus bin Said has opened airfields at Seeb and Thumrait to
American forces, and has agreed to allow the United States to stockpile war
materiel there. He has also permitted the United States to use the island of
Masira as a transfer point for supplies flown in by large planes, then taken by
boat or smaller planes to ships at sea. The Administration got $60.4 million in
1983 for construction in Oman and another $28.6 million for this year, and has
asked for $42 million for next year. Included would be hardened shelters for
fighter planes at Seeb and temporary accommodations for American personnel at
Thumrait.

Programs for improving bases in Kenya and Somalia have been completed, at least
for now. The United States spent $57.9 million between 1981 and 1983 in Kenya,
largely on port facilities. Another $54.4 million was spent in Somalia during
the same period, largely to refurbish the air and naval base at Berbera built by
the Soviet Union before Somalia broke off military relations with Moscow in
1977.

The British island of Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean is vital to the Central
Command's logistic, naval and air support. Of the 18 cargo ships that would
immediately supply American forces deployed to the Persian Gulf, 15 are based at
Diego Garcia. To escape observation by Soviet spy satellites, each vessel
occasionally slips into the shipping lanes of the Indian Ocean, where it becomes
indistinguishable from the 5,000 ships plying those routes. Another ship is
based at Subic Bay in the Philippines, yet another is stationed at Guam, and a
third cruises around the Mediterranean, loaded with Air Force ammunition.

Over the last four years, the United States has enlarged the airfield at Diego
Garcia to accommodate B-52 bombers. Warehouses, repair shops and communications
facilities have been built. Submarine tenders call to service undersea boats.
The United States spent $57.9 million to improve the naval and air bases in
1983, and it is spending another $90 million this year. The request for fiscal
1985 is down to $22.9 million, as the program nears completion.

Saudi Arabia has so far held the Central Command at arm's length, offering no
access to bases and witholding permission for American forces to maneuver there.
But the Saudi Government has been building a complex of bases far beyond its
needs or its ability to operate. American planners believe those bases would be
be made available in an emergency.

To compensate for the lack of treaties, General Kingston has begun to build a
relationship with each nation in his command's operating region. Critical to
that effort have been deployments of American forces for training with local
troops.

The most visible Central Command exercises have been three Bright Star
maneuvers, most recently last summer, when 26,500 American soldiers, sailors,
airmen and marines were deployed to Egypt, Sudan, Somalia and Oman and nearby
waters. B-52 bombers flew from bases in the United States to make bombing runs,
paratroopers jumped with Egyptian paratroopers, and Marine tanks churned ashore
through heavy surf into Somalia. For the first time, the deployment included a
combined Egyptian-Sudanese-American maneuver.

A less-publicized exercise has been Shadow Hawk, in which American air-defense
soldiers train with Jordanians in Jordan. Marines have made amphibious landings
in Kenya and Oman, communications teams have drilled in Oman, and Special Forces
units have trained in the Sudan. The big exercise this year, called Gallant
Eagle, has been scheduled for the deserts of California this summer, while
another Bright Star deployment to Egypt and other nations is planned for 1985.

General Kingston emphasizes personal relations. Last year, he spent five days in
Jordan, where he met with King Hussein, and another five days touring military
bases in Saudi Arabia. He also visited Egypt, Sudan, Somalia, Kenya, Yemen, Oman
and Bahrain.

The relationship between the Central Command and the countries of the region is
furthered, General Kingston believes, by the command's role as the agency for
administering American security assistance in the area. In 1983, the United
States provided $7.7 billion worth of assistance in military sales,
government-financed arms shipments, military construction, training, grants,
economic support for military programs, and commercial arms exports to 14 of the
19 nations in the Central Command's operating area, plus Morocco. That nation is
outside the command's area but is crucial to its line of communications. The sum
will go up to an estimated $9.1 billion this year and to a projected $11 billion
in 1985.

Right now, most of the command's contingency plans focus on American troops. In
the future, planners would like to work with their counterparts in the region.


Four years ago, officers in the Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force had to start
almost from scratch to acquire data on the ethnic mixtures, religious
complexities and geography of a region of snow-capped mountains and deserts with
130-degree temperatures. Good maps have been hard to come by. Weather
information, vital to military operations despite technical advances, was
lacking. When American helicopters flew into Iran on their aborted mission to
rescue the American Embassy hostages, pilots ran into huge dust storms, about
which they had not been warned.

For intelligence, the Central Command has no network of listening posts to
intercept radio and telephone transmissions. It lacks places to put sensors that
can find, through radar or infrared detection, movements of tanks, missiles and
aircraft. The command lacks agents to gather information that satellite photos
are unable to pick up - for instance, how many aircraft inside a hangar are fit
to fly.

Similarly, the Central Command does not have the communications by radio, telex
and telephone that are common to other commands. The entire apparatus for
communicating with units in the field and with Washington must be carried when
the command deploys.

When the Central Command's forerunner, the Rapid Deployment Force, was formed in
1980, critics scoffed that it was not rapid, had little to deploy, and was not
much of a force. The critics have been less vocal recently, as the Central
Command has started to make progress. General Kingston touched on that in a
recent address in London, saying: ''Four years ago, if the President had
directed us to send a military force to this area of the world to protect the
vital interests of the United States, its friends and its allies, no one could
have told you what forces would go, in what order, how long it would take them
to get there, how they would be sustained or who their commander would be.''

''Today,'' he concluded, ''I can answer all of those questions.''





LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lieut. Gen. Robert Kingston

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT MEN;
STANDING HIS GROUND

BYLINE: By Michael Norman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 55, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words


I HAVE BRUISED A KNUCKLE AND bloodied another man's nose, but I am not, by most
measures, a fighter. The last time I broke the peace was more than a decade ago
in a small restaurant on the west slope of the Rocky Mountains in Colorado. My
stepfather had encountered an old nemesis. Words were exchanged and the distance
between the two narrowed. I stepped in to play the peacemaker and ended up
throwing the first punch. For the record, my target, a towering 230-pound
horseman, easily absorbed the blow and then dispatched the gnat in front of him.

The years since have been filled with discretion - I preach it, embrace it and
hide behind it. I am now the careful watchman who keeps his eye on the red line
and reroutes pressure before it has a chance to blow. Sometimes, I backslide and
turn a domestic misdemeanor into a capital case or toss the cat out of the house
without bothering to see where he lands. But I do not punch holes in the plaster
or call my antagonists to the woodshed. The Furies may gather, but the storm
always stays safely out to sea. And yet, lately, I have been struggling with
this forced equanimity. The messenger of reason, the advocate of accord, once
again has the urge to throw the first punch - in spirit at least.

All of this began rather quietly, a deep stirring that would come and go and
never take form, an old instinct, perhaps, trying to reassert itself. I was
angry, restless, combative, but I could not say why. It was a mystery of sorts.
I was what I was expected to be, the very model of a modern man, a partner
instead of a husband, a proponent of peace over action, thin-skinned rather than
thick, a willow instead of a stone. And yet there was something about this
posture that did not fit my frame.  Then, an acquaintance, a gentle man who
spent his Peace Corps days among the villagers of Nepal, suddenly acted out of
character. He got into an argument with a local brute in a neighborhood tavern
and instead of walking away from trouble, stood his ground. It was, he said, a
senseless confrontation, but he had no regrets, and it made me think of Joey.

Joey, the bully of the sixth grade, used to roam the hallways picking victims at
random and slugging them on the arm. When he rounded a corner, we scattered or
practiced a crude form of mysticism and tried to think ourselves invisible in
the face of the beast. Since I was slow and an inept mystic, my mother kept on
hand an adequate supply of Ben Gay to ease the bruises and swelling.

One day, a boy named Tony told the marauder that he had had enough and an epic
duel was scheduled in the playground after school. Tony had been taking boxing
lessons on the sly. He had developed a stinging left jab and when the appointed
hour arrived, he delivered it in the name of every bruised shoulder in the
school.

The meek pack of which Tony was once a part took courage from his example and
several weeks later when a boy at my bus stop sent me sprawling, I returned the
favor.

There were only a few challenges after that. On the way up, a Joey would
occasionally round the corner. But in the circles I traveled, he was the
exception rather than the rule. In the Marine Corps in Vietnam, we were consumed
by a much larger kind of warfare. In college, faculty infighting and bullying
aside, violence was considered anti-intellectual. And in the newsrooms where I
have practiced my trade, reporters generally have been satisfied with pounding a
keyboard instead of their editors.

And then came Colorado and the battle of the west slope. For years, I was
embarrassed by the affair. I could have walked away and dragged my stepfather
with me. As it was, we almost ended up in jail. I had provoked a common brawl, a
pointless, self-destructive exercise. The rationalist had committed the most
irrational of acts. It was not a matter of family or honor, hollow excuses. I
had simply succumbed to instinct, and I deeply regretted it. But not any longer.
Now I see virtue in that vulgar display of macho. It disqualifies me from the
most popular male club - the brotherhood of nurturers, fraternity sensitivus.

From analyst's couch to tavern booth, their message is the same: The male animus
is out of fashion. The man of the hour is supposed to be gentle, thoughtful,
endearing and compassionate, a wife to his woman, a mother to his son, an
androgynous figure with the self-knowledge of a hermaphrodite. He takes his
lumps on the psyche, not the chin, and bleeds with emotion. Yes, in the morning,
he still puts on a three-piece suit, but his foulard, the finishing touch, is a
crying towel.

He is so ridden with guilt, so pained about the sexist sins of his kind, he
bites at his own flanks. Not only does he say that he dislikes being a man, but
broadly proclaims that the whole idea of manhood in America is pitiful.

He wants to free himself from the social conditioning of the past, to cast off
the yoke of traditional male roles and rise above the banality of rituals
learned at boot camp or on the practice field. If science could provide it, he
would swallow an antidote of testosterone, something to stop all this
antediluvian thumping and bashing.









 ND HE HAS GONE TOO FAR.  Yes, the male code needs reform. Our rules and our
proscriptions have trapped us in a kind of perpetual adolescence.Why else would
a full-grown rationalist think he could get even with Joey by taking a poke at
another bully 25 years later in a bar in Colorado? No doubt there is something
pitiful about that.

But the fashion for reform, the drive to emasculate macho, has produced a kind
of numbing androgyny and has so blurred the lines of gender that I often find
myself wanting to emulate some of the women I know - bold, aggressive, vigorous
role models.

It sometimes seems that the only exclusively male trait left is the impulse to
throw a punch, the last male watermark, so to speak, that is clear and readable.
Perhaps that is why the former Peace Corps volunteer jumped into a brawl and why
I suspect that the new man - the model of sensitivity, the nurturer - goes
quietly through the day with a clenched fist behind his back.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Says Its Troops Did Not Enter Thailand

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 137 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, April 1


Vietnam denies that its troops crossed into Thailand from Cambodia and attacked
Thai civilians, the Vietnamese press agency said today.

The agency, monitored in Bangkok, also accused Thailand of allowing Cambodian
guerrilla followers of former Prime Minister Pol Pot to use Thai territory as a
sanctuary.

''Over the last few days,'' it said, ''the Thai authorities have repeatedly
spread the slander that Vietnamese Army volunteers in Cambodia had intruded into
Thai territory and attacked civilians. This is a trick of thief shouting
thief.''

The agency quoted the Vietnamese- controlled Cambodian press agency as saying
that in the week ended March 22, Thailand conducted 32 air sorties over
Cambodia, intruded into Cambodian waters with warships on 80 occasions and fired
big guns at Cambodian territory 52 times.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HOW MONDALE CAMPAIGN SHAPED ITS LOW-BUDGET TELEVISION ATTACK ON HART

BYLINE: By DUDLEY CLENDINEN

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1130 words


The cameras began to roll for Walter F. Mondale at 3 P.M. Saturday, March 24.
The New York primary was 10 days away and Gary Hart had already been on the air
for a week with almost $300,000 worth of commercial radio and television time,

The former Vice President had gone down to the Liberty Street Park at the foot
of Manhattan where his media consultant for the New York campaign, David Garth,
was waiting with a video camera and crew. For two hours, as

Both broadcasters and candidates have taken advantage of brief television news
interviews. Page C17.

the daylight waned and the air grew colder, they taped the footage that would be
cut and spliced to show the Mondale that New York television viewers would see
in paid commercials for the next week.

Mr. Garth and his staff knew the numbers defining the shape of the contest, and
they were conscious of the unknown. Their own polls and others' had shown that
Mr. Mondale had entered the New York campaign with a lead of 12 to 15 points
over Mr. Hart.

But they knew, Mr. Garth said, that the following Tuesday they would lose the
Connecticut primary badly and that would help Mr. Hart in New York. They knew
that the Hart campaign would outspend them on advertising by close to 3 to 1.

Dealing With Debate


They knew that the television debate the day after that would have an effect
they could not guess but would have to deal with.

And they knew, as their opponent, Raymond Strother, Mr. Hart's consultant puts
it, that in a media battle, ''You feel like you're at war full time. And you're
proud because you're doing what you shouldn't physically be able to do.''

What Mr. Garth set out to do, as the two commercials he shot that day show, was
to try to counter negative impressions of Mr. Mondale, to build on the Mondale
record in ways that matter in New York and to highlight faultlines in Mr. Hart's
performance.

Mr. Mondale is shown standing informally outdoors. In contrast to his reputation
for being dry, posed, formal, his posture is relaxed. His tone is quiet, warm,
authoritative. He talks about taxes and the middle class, linking a Hart
proposal with President Reagan's policies. ''It's time we stopped using
middle-income Americans to balance the national budget,'' he says.

Chrysler and New York


As a printed message informs the viewer that ''Gary Hart voted against the
Chrysler loan,'' Mr. Mondale speaks of his efforts to save Chrysler. It was a
chance, he says, ''but it was the same chance we took when we saved New York
City from bankruptcy.''

In the background is what seems to be proof of the city's saved economy: swarms
of construction workers raising a giant new building.  As the figures showing
Mr. Mondale's loss came in from Connecticut Tuesday night, those commercials and
one other went on the air around the evening news broadcasts.

The third commercial, one of 10 to be used in the campaign, is what Mr. Garth
calls ''our negative spot.'' The candidate does not make the negative charge; an
anonymous voice and printed message convey a contrast between solid leadership
and shift.

The leadership is Mr. Mondale's; the shift Mr. Hart's. ''Gary Hart has shifted
his position on the nuclear freeze issue six times in two years,'' the voice
says. ''On this issue, that's dangerous, and that's not leadership.''

Hart's Negative Commercial


But the Hart campaign's own negative commercial was already being broadcast.
Dubbed ''Central America'' but popularly known as ''The Fuse,'' it charges Mr.
Mondale with supporting a standing United States military force in Central
America and links that with Vietnam.

''Our sons as bargaining chips,'' an ominous voice intones as a fuse burns
across the screen toward some presumed bomb. ''Will we never learn?''

''I think you ought to pull those ads down tonight,'' Mr. Mondale said in an
angry exchange in the televised debate on CBS the next day. The Hart campaign,
happy with the damage ''The Fuse'' seems to be doing, declined.

It is still being broadcast, along with four to six other 30-second commercials
which play around entertainment broadcasts, the news and popular reruns.

Joseph Mercurio, the buyer for the Hart campaign, says the campaign will spend
$927,964 on air time by the vote Tuesday. Radio accounts for $120,800 of it, and
newspaper spending, primarily for full-page advertisements in The New York Times
at a cost of about $31,000, should bring the total to more than $1 million.

Mondale Budget $400,000


The Mondale budget is $400,000, Mr. Garth says, half what he would like. ''When
you have a much smaller budget,'' he says, ''you have to have a certain
strategy.'' Part of his emerged from tracking voter sentiment in the wake of
Connecticut and the debate.

The Connecticut results, he said, cut Mr. Mondale's lead from about 12 points
down to three or four. But the debate, he said, ''did break his descent and
start to raise him back up.'' It especially helped with women, a group Mr.
Mondale had been weak with.

Mr. Garth cannot explain that, but he immediately capitalized on it. He had
researched Mr. Mondale's record and constructed a commercial on Mr. Mondale's
stand on women's issues.

For the next two days, that commercial was broadcast in prime television time,
with Carol Bellamy, the New York City Council President, saying, ''That's why
Walter Mondale will make a great President.''

Governor Extolls Mondale


Gov. Cuomo is already on televison with a 30-second message extolling Mr.
Mondale that he wrote himself. Mayor Koch and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan
will do the same on radio, Mr. Garth says, there are interviews in which people
speak comfortably of Mr. Mondale as a proven leader, and also the red telephone
commercial used so effectively in Illinois to suggest the need for leadership to
avert nuclear war.  The one last-minute negative commercial now planned for Mr.
Hart will attack Mr. Mondale for his campaign's acceptance of political action
committee money in violation of his publicly stated policy.

But the main freight of the Hart commercial campaign is carried by thematic
advertisements depicting Mr. Mondale with Jimmy Carter as a joint mistake
(''Remember the past?'' a voice says), and Mr. Hart as the leader for the
future.

Mr. Strother, who made these advertisements, does not assume that Mr. Hart will
win the New York primary, or that televison commercials will be decisive as
against the widely watched debate. But he is satisfied with what he has done.

''People in New York think that David Garth is magic,'' he said. People keep
asking him if he is afraid to go against Mr. Garth. ''The answer is, not in the
slightest,'' he replies.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROMM TRANSCRIPT OF INTERVIEW WITH JACKSON, HART AND MONDALE

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1483 words


Following are excerpts from a transcript provided by television channel WNBC in
New York of the interview conducted yesterday by Gabe Pressman with Senator Gary
Hart, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Walter F. Mondale:

Mr. PRESSMAN: Let's get to what a lot of time has been spent on, in this
campaign, and that is, I guess, for want of a better phrase, the ethics of
political campaigning.

Mr. HART: Mr. Pressman, I have really tried very hard not to attack anyone, in
this race, including the four or five who have now departed. The issue in this
contest is the future versus the past, and which of us has the best policies for
our future, and what they ought to be, in great detail. Fritz and I have gone
back and forth on the question of the beef. I am - I know the beef is there in
books and articles and a lot of other things. That's what we ought to be
debating. I think there is a tendency, in traditional politics, to focus on
narrow issues of the past, to avoid the hard work and difficult work of debating
the issues of the future and policies of the future.

Mr. MONDALE: I disagree with Gary Hart's characterization of his campaign. He's
running an ad, now, with a fuse that's running, accusing me of being - want to
kill people in Central America.

Mr. PRESSMAN: I think what that ad says is something about American boys as
bargaining chips.

Mr. MONDALE: That's right. Which I never said. I, perhaps - he has said, in
several speeches, that my position is as bad as Reagan's. As a matter of fact,
I, perhaps, have been the most persistent critic of Reagan policies in Central
America. My whole idea is to demilitarize that region. And I think it's a sound
and a solid basis. When you - when you go beyond the facts, to say things of
that kind, I think, it is negative, it is personal, it is inaccurate, and it
raises concerns that are totally unjustified.

Mr. HART: Well, I don't think it's productive for us, in this debate, to go back
and say who said what to whom. The fact of the matter is - and Fritz knows it -
within hours, if not days, of the - our upset victory in New Hampshire, the
Mondale campaign did exactly what it hadn't done for a year, and did what
Senator Glenn did to Vice President Mondale, and went totally negative. In the
Maine caucuses, in the Vermont primary, and almost every state since then, up
until, I guess, the last day or two, almost all of the television advertising
was attack and negative; and the speeches got that same way. And they got to
character. They got to my commitment to civil rights - which Fritz knows is as
profound as his; my commitment to arms control; and things like that. Now, there
is an issue in this campaign. It has to do with what, if everything, we learned
from Vietnam. Experience is important. I grant that. But it's not how much
you've had; it's what you've learned from it. What I am saying is, if we have a
policy, which Fritz advocated, in Chicago, a week or so ago, of keeping American
combat forces in Central America and only removing them after negotiating with
another government - the Nicaraguan Government - that is an invitation to fall
prey to the error of Vietnam and Lebanon.

Mr. JACKSON: The issue, to me, is not the negatives; it's the attempt to neglect
my presence. At one point, Gary, in New Hampshire, says it's a two-man race.
There were still six running. And then, there were three, and Mondale says it's
a two-man race. Well, it's always been a three- man race since the other five
dropped out.

Mr. MONDALE: Reverend Jackson, I would never exclude you, in any sense. You are
here, and right - you're a superb candidate, and you've got a right to be heard.

What I am talking about are real issues that divide Gary Hart from myself. For a
year, I permitted Senator Hart to attack me, in every conceivable way -
negatively; distort my record - and I did not respond. In New Hampshire, it was
clear to me that people wanted those issues debated. The fact of it is that my
record, my commitment for the future on arms control is clear and coherent. You
have taken seven basic inconsistent positions on arms control, the key issue of
our side; and that is an issue I have made. The fact of it is, in Central
America, nobody has led a drive to change Reagan policies, to demilitarize that
area more than I have. Where I disagreed with you is in pulling the plug
entirely. No, my position is, and has been, one, that we should terminate the
covert action in Nicaragua; two, we should sharply condition any assistance on
El Salvador - land reform, political reform, and court reform, and the other
things that are necessary to stabilize the country; thirdly, we must work very
closely with the Contadora Group, which is the democracies in the region, to get
the area demilitarized; and finally, we should have no combat troops in
Honduras.

Mr. HART: The difference is, I would end military assistance to the El Salvador
Government immediately, and only resume it if and when the death squads were
ended. And they would be ended. That is not withdrawal. I would not bargain
however many levels of advisers there are. Advisers, by the way, are - is what
got us into Vietnam - in Honduras.

Mr. PRESSMAN: Reverend Jackson. Do you know that you caused a lot of pain to
Jewish New Yorkers with the Hymie, Hymietown remark from other stereotypes that
you quoted as having said about Jewish people - I'm sick and tired of hearing
about the Holocaust, and do you think that remarks like that square with a
doctrine of love and love thy neighbor and reconciliation?

Mr. JACKSON: That's not a doctrine, that's a mistake, and all of us have sinned
and come shout the glory of God. It was a very painful experience for me. My
position is, as a leader, you must be tough enough to fight; you must be tender
enough to hurt, to cry, to have compassion, human enough to make mistakes, admit
them and then move on, and keep live in context. For me it was that error, for
Jimmy Carter it was ethnic purity, for Kennedy it was Chappaquiddick. But when
it's all said and done, our batting average for social justice and peace is what
sustains us.

Mr. PRESSMAN: Do you both want to move the embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem?

Mr. MONDALE: On this issue, I think Gary is getting better as we move closer to
the Tuesday primary. For a year he took the ridiculous proposition - that
whether we transfer our embassy to the capital of Israel should be decided by
negotiations with her neighbors. For 20 years I've been for the transfer of that
embassy. He transferred that embassy to Jerusalem at the same time he
transferred his headquarters from Chicago to New York.

Mr. HART: I have never said that I would negotiate with anyone where we place
our embassy in Jerusalem or anywhere else. And I think Vice President Mondale
knows that. You know, this goes right back to the first question that you asked
us, and Fritz knows this full well, I have to believe that - I know - that the
voters of New York State are fed up with this. I know they are. They're fed up
with this penny ante, picky business, when they know that Walter Mondale and I
are equally committed to the survival of Israel, and the fundamental policy of
this nation.

Mr. JACKSON: Jerusalem . . . it's the city of three great religions, Christian,
Judaism, as well as Islam. There's a lot of tension around that, its role as an
international city. One cannot say so simplistically just to move the capital
there. No President has, because of the tension involved. While we posture about
it, people there can get hurt about it. And I would think that as you look at
the Jerusalem situation, the West Bank occupation and the settlement, we would
do well in the Middle East, to move toward a peace policy. Negotiations are
important. We need to spend more time getting Israel's enemies to stop waging
holy war agains Israel, and try to neutralize them, and engaging in what amounts
to real political pandering.

Mr. MONDALE: What counts in this campaign is to stay on the issues that
illuminate our differences. One of the issues in the Middle East is who's
steady, who sees it, who's consistent, who's worked in that area. I was involved
in Camp David, I was involved in the Egyptian-Israeli peace treaty. For 20 years
I've been for the transfer of the embassy. The reason I brought that up was is
that you changed your position on that fundamental question about five days ago.


Mr. HART: Can I ask Vice President Mondale a question. Why, during the four
years you were in the White House didn't the Carter-Mondale administration move
the embassy?

Mr. MONDALE: For the reason that you know. President Carter was never for it.
When he ran for President in 1976, he said it was opposed to it. That was clear.
I've always been for it.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

The Candidates on Key Issues

U.S. ROLE ABROAD

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1944 words


MONDALE

Says his lateness in opposing the Vietnam War was ''the worst mistake in my
life.'' Says Hart learned the ''wrong lesson'' from Vietnam. Insists ''there is
a proper role for American power in the world.'' Says Hart would ''pull the
plug'' by ending U.S. military assistance to Honduras. Says both Communism and
poverty are major problems in the third world.


HART

Says he has learned ''the lessons of Vietnam'' better than Mondale. Was an early
opponent of Vietnam War. Was quick to criticize Reagan Administration for
deploying troops in Lebanon, Grenada and Central America. Asserts real enemies
in third world are hunger, poverty and disease, not Communism. Calls on European
allies to assume more responsibility for land defense of Continent.

JACKSON

Says U.S. has treated third world with ''arrogance and contempt.'' Stresses need
for greater sensitivity to African, Arab, Asian and Latin American countries.
Says U.S. should not be policeman or ''bully of the world.'' Notes similarity of
struggles by blacks in America and Africa for human rights and self-respect.
Favors strong economic sanctions against South Africa, accuses Reagan
Administration of ''complicity in the apar th eid system.''

CENTRAL AMERICA


MONDALE

Criticizes Reagan for having ''militarized our policy'' in Central America. Says
he would terminate covert actions in Nicaragua. Would make aid to El Salvador
contingent on ''progress in land reform, human rights and halting the death
squads.'' Criticizes Hart for seeking ''unilateral withdrawal'' of U.S. forces.
Would remove the several hundred U.S. troops sent to Honduras for exercises but
would leave in place about 200 American advisers.

HART

Proposes to withdraw all U.S. military forces sent to Honduras, El Salvador,
Guatemala or Nicaragua since August 1983. This would leave about 200 American
advisers in Honduras. Would end support for the ''counterrevolutionaries'' in
Nicaragua. Would cut off military support for El Salvador until death squads
cease. Says Mondale wants to leave U.S. troops in Central America to serve as
''bodyguards to dictators.'' Warns that Mondale policy would lead to ''rather
large loss'' of U.S. lives.

JACKSON

Would ''end the covert war waged on Nicaragua.'' Says aid to El Salvador should
be linked to improvements in human rights record. Says U.S. must stop giving aid
to ''the barbarous elite in Central America.'' Says U.S. should stand with poor
people in El Salvador, rather than the ''landed gentry.'' Says U.S. should halt
military maneuvers in Honduras and work to normalize relations with Cuba.

MIDDLE EAST

MONDALE

Has been a strong supporter of Israel. Opposes homeland for Palestinians. Says
Reagan Administration policy was flawed by ''illusions'' about Jordan's
willingness to negotiate and Saudis' value as a diplomatic ''broker.'' As Vice
President, lobbied for sale of F-15's to Saudi Arabia, but now says he privately
opposed sale. Favors moving U.S. Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. Says
Israeli settlements on West Bank are legal.

HART

Says U.S. should not go to war to protect Middle East oil supplies for itself or
European allies. Has been a strong supporter of Israel. Opposed sale of F-15
fighters and Awacs radar planes to Saudi Arabia. Opposes homeland for
Palestinians, says they must abandon commitment to destroy Israel. Says he would
move U.S. Embassy from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, but earlier said move should await
outcome of negotiations on status of Jerusalem.

JACKSON

Supports creation of ''an independent Palestinian state on the West Bank and
Gaza.'' Says Israel should withdraw from occupied territories and establish no
more settlements. Says Palestine Liberation Organization should recognize
Israel's right to exist. Urges ''normalization of relations between the U.S. and
the Arab world.'' Says U.S. could be a more effective mediator in the region if
it would talk with P.L.O.


MILITARY

MONDALE

Would allow military spending to rise 4 to 5 percent a year, after allowing for
inflation. Opposes MX missile, B-1 bomber, new nuclear-powered aircraft carriers
and nerve gas.

HART

Would increase military spending by 3 percent a year, after allowing for
inflation. Opposes MX missile, B-1 bomber, new nuclear powered aircraft carriers
and nerve gas. Has been leader of bipartisan ''military reform'' movement in
Congress, challenging many Pentagon assumptions.

JACKSON

Says there should be ''zero real growth'' in military budget in next five years,
meaning no increase except to make up for effects of inflation. Opposes MX
missile, B-1 bomber, new nuclear- powered aircraft carriers and poison nerve
gas.

ARMS CONTROL

MONDALE

Supports nuclear freeze. Opposes ''build-down'' as inconsistent with freeze.
Favors modernization of U.S. nuclear forces, but says all weapons would be
''subject to the freeze.'' Would not renounce first use of nuclear weapons until
conventional forces were improved. Says Hart's position on arms control has been
inconsistent and confusing. Advocates annual meetings between Soviet and
American leaders.

HART

Supports freeze on testing, production and further deployment of nuclear
warheads and missiles. But has also supported ''build-down'' proposals that call
for destruction of two nuclear weapons for each new one built. Says U.S. cannot
renounce first use of nuclear weapons until it improves its conventional forces.
Calls for U.S.- Soviet negotiations to stop the production of plutonium and to
prevent accidental use of nuclear weapons.

JACKSON

Supports nuclear freeze. Opposes further deployment of U.S. missiles in Europe.
Says he would be willing to promise no first use of nuclear weapons by U.S. Says
the Reagan Administration has shown no real commitment to arms talks.

JOBS AND INDUSTRIAL POLICY


MONDALE

Says the nation needs ''a coherent industrial strategy,'' including more
investment in job training and education. Strongly supported Federal loan
guarantees for Chrysler Corporation. Supports highway-rebuilding program as
source of jobs.  HART

Advocates industrial modernization and growth agreements to revitalize basic
industries. Proposes individual training accounts, as a way for employees and
employers to finance retraining of jobless workers. Prefers indirect financial
incentives, rather than direct Government subsidies, to help troubled
industries. Opposed Federal loan guarantees for Chrysler Corporation in 1979.
Advocates major public works program to create jobs.

JACKSON

Would establish ''a noncoercive national economic planning body'' to guide
investment and help allocate resources. Favors large public investment in
highways, bridges, railroads and mass transit, to generate a ''high growth''
economy.

CIVIL RIGHTS

MONDALE

Led Senate efforts to pass Fair Housing Act of 1968. Held hearings on school
desegregation in 1970-72. Defended busing when Nixon Administration and others
tried to restrict its use. Strongly supports affirmative action, but rejects use
of quotas. Supports proposed equal rights amendment. Opposes efforts to restrict
access to abortion.

HART

Supported extension of the Voting Rights Act. Proposed legislation to ban
economic discrimination against women. Says he supports quotas as an alternative
to ''weaker'' forms of affirmative action in cases where they are needed to
remedy effects of past discrimination. Supports proposed equal rights amendment.
Opposes efforts to restrict access to abortion.

JACKSON

Says he has spent all his adult life as a civil rights leader. Seeks to bring
minority groups together into a ''rainbow coalition.'' Promises stronger
enforcement of Voting Rights Act. Says numerical goals and quotas may sometimes
be necessary to eradicate effects of discrimination. Supports an equal rights
amendment and abortion rights. But says he would not advise a woman to have an
abortion ''except in medically extenuating circumstances.''

TRADE

MONDALE

Has made trade a major theme of his campaign. Supports ''domestic content''
bill, which would require use of American parts and labor in imported autos.
Denies he is a ''protectionist.'' Says U.S. must take a more aggressive stance
in trade negotiations to prod other countries to lower trade barriers and reduce
export subsidies.

HART

Warns against protectionism. Opposes legislation that would require use of
American parts and labor in imported automobiles. Says Mondale's support for the
bill shows his commitment to ''policies of the past.''

JACKSON

Opposes protectionist policies, in part because they harm developing industries
in third world. Opposes ''domestic content'' legislation.

ENERGY

MONDALE

Supported windfall profits tax on oil, proposed by the Carter Administration.
Denounces Hart's proposal for a new fee on imported oil as ''the worst idea'' of
the campaign, even though Carter proposed a similar fee.

HART

Says U.S. must not rely on foreign sources of oil. Voted against windfall
profits tax in 1980, saying it discouraged oil exploration and production. Would
retain tax for oil wells already in operation. Proposes a fee of $10 a barrel on
imported oil.

JACKSON

Wants a ''rapid phase-out'' of nuclear power plants. Says the history of nuclear
power industry is filled with ''lies and deceit.'' Favors Federal policies to
encourage energy conservation and greater use of solar energy.

BUDGET DEFICIT

MONDALE

Says his proposal would cut Reagan deficits by more than half. Anticipates
savings of $30 billion to $40 billion on military, $15 billion in health
programs, $10 billion in agriculture and $15 billion to $20 billion in interest
on Federal debt.

HART Says he could reduce deficit to less than one-third of the level now
expected for 1989 under Reagan policies. Promises savings of $44 billion in
military spending, $3.5 billion in Medicare, $55 billion in interest on Federal
debt.

JACKSON

Proposes deep cuts in military budget, big increases in domestic spending, to
produce a ''high growth'' economy. Says his proposals would reduce Reagan
deficits by about one-third. Would reduce military budget by $80 billion in
fiscal year 1985.

TAXES

MONDALE

Proposes a corporate minimum tax amounting to 15 percent of a company's taxable
income. Would defer linking tax brackets to inflation. Would limit final
installment of 1981 tax cut for people with incomes exceeding $60,000. Would
also impose a 10 percent tax surcharge on incomes above $100,000.

HART

Proposes a 10 percent surcharge on corporate income taxes. Would defer the
linking of tax brackets to inflation. Would limit final installment of 1981 tax
cut for people with incomes exceeding $50,000. Would impose a 5 percent surtax
on incomes above a certain level ($100,000 for couples, $70,000 for
individuals). Co-sponsored Bradley- Gephardt tax simplification bill.

JACKSON

Would impose temporary graduated surtax on incomes over $25,000. Rate would
range from 1 percent to 10 percent. Says his tax proposals would raise $50
billion in additional revenue.

GUN CONTROL

MONDALE

Supports a ban on sale, manufacture and possession of snub-nosed pistols.

HART

Says he has opposed Federal gun control laws. But tends to support a
''cooling-off period,'' which would provide time for law-enforcement authorities
to check whether a pistol buyer has a criminal record.

JACKSON

Supports gun control, licensing of pistol owners, and a ban on manufacture, sale
or possession of snub-nosed pistols.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of candidates

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PEABODY AWARDS GIVEN

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 455 words

DATELINE: ATHENS, Ga., April 1,


The CBS News ''60 Minutes'' segment on the life sentence of Lenell Geter, and
the series ''Vietnam: A Television History'' by WGBH-TV and two co-producers are
among the winners of the George Foster Peabody awards.

CBS News and CBS Entertainment each won or shared two of the 1983 awards for
distinguished broadcast programming, the University of Georgia has announced.
NBC shared three awards and ABC shared one. Cable News Network also received a
Peabody for significant news and informational programming.

Recipients of the awards, first given in 1941, are chosen by a national advisory
board. Administered by the University of Georgia's journalism school, they will
be presented at an April 25 luncheon at the Hotel Pierre in New York City.

The award for ''60 Minutes'' was for its broadcast about Mr. Geter, a black
engineer in Dallas who was convicted of armed robbery and given a life sentence
despite contradictory evidence. He was released from prison last month.

WGBH, Central Independent Television in London and Antenne-2 in Paris won an
award for their 13-episode history of the Vietnam War.

These were other winners: Don McGannon, Westinghouse Broadcasting Corp. WSM
Radio, Nashville, Tenn., ''The Grand Ole Opry.'' WCCO Radio, Minneapolis, Minn.,

''Debbie Pielow: Waiting for a Heart.'' South Carolina Educational Radio
Network, ''Piano Jazz.'' WMAL Radio, Washington, ''The Jeffersonian World of
Dumas Malone.'' KMOX Radio, St. Louis, ''Times Beach:

Born 1925, Died 1983.'' Thomas Looker, Montague Center, Mass.,

''New England Almanac: Portraits in

Sound.'' WRAL Radio, Raleigh, N.C., ''Victims.'' WNBC-TV, New York, ''Asylum in
the

Streets.'' CBS News, New York, ''The Plane That

Fell From The Sky.'' WCCO-TV, Minneapolis, ''I-Team: Ambulances.'' NBC and
Motown Productions, ''Motown

25: Yesterday, Today, Forever.'' WTTW, Chicago, ''The Merry Widow.''
Chrysalis-Yellen Productions and NBC,

''Prisoner Without a Name, Cell Without

a Number.'' WTTW, Chicago, and the BBC, ''The Making of a Continent.'' WTBS-TV,
Atlanta, ''Portrait of America.'' Sunbow Productions, New York, ''The

Great Space Coaster.'' CBS Entertainment and Smith-Hemion

Productions, ''Romeo and Juliet on

Ice.'' ABC and Dick Clark Productions, ''The

Woman Who Willed a Miracle.'' CBS Entertainment and Mendelson-

Melendez Productions, ''What Have We

Learned, Charlie Brown.'' WBBM-TV, Chicago, ''Studebaker: Less

Than They Promised.'' WBRZ-TV, Baton Rouge, La., ''Give Me

That Bigtime Religion.'' KRON-TV, San Francisco, ''Climate of

Death.'' WGBH-TV, Boston, ''Nova: The Miracle of

Life.'' NBC and Edgar J. Scherick Associates,

''He Makes Me Feel Like Dancin'.'' KCTS, Seattle, Wash., ''Diagnosis:

AIDS.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE: 'THE HARVESTING' AT CIRCLE REP

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 16, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 614 words


THE Circle Repertory Company, which has already produced one flat crime
melodrama this season (''Full Hookup''), has now made the mistake twice. ''The
Harvesting,'' a new play by John Bishop, commits almost the same sins as its
predecessor. Here again we have an incompetently told whodunit in which the
audience knows who did it (and why) long before the dull-witted authorities wise
up. And, as in ''Full Hookup,'' we're asked to accept sociological pretensions
in lieu of drama. Having run out of story by intermission, Mr. Bishop fills out
the evening with windy, knee- jerk ruminations about such subjects as the
Vietnam War, racial friction and the despoiling of America.

The setting is a once-idyllic, now- corrupted Middle American town called
Mansfield, Ohio. For the sake of leaden irony, the time frame is Independence
Day weekend during the Bicentennial year of 1976. The plot is a pale imitation
of those in Ross MacDonald's Lew Archer novels. To solve a seemingly
inexplicable double murder, a detective must dig into a family's past - and
unearth the other bodies, both figurative and real, that are buried there.


The detective is played by that good actor Jimmie Ray Weeks. His principal (and
therefore innocent) suspect is Edward Seamon - another good actor who, like Mr.
Weeks, has appeared in previous and better Bishop plays. Mr. Seamon's role is
that of the town's craven real estate tycoon, an alcoholic child beater who
somehow manages to administer an empire of parking lots and shopping malls. (All
too symbolically, he razed the town's courthouse for one of his projects.)
Though antagonists now, Mr. Seamon and Mr. Weeks were pals back in high school,
when they were both raised in the shadow of a steel mill. They drifted apart for
reasons that stretch both the play's credibility and running time.

As he's demonstrated in ''The Trip Back Down'' and ''The Great Grandson of
Jedediah Kohler,'' Mr. Bishop is not an untalented writer. Even here, one finds
the occasional funny line or snappy exchange. Yet ''The Harvesting'' is about as
lazily written a play as one could imagine. The structure hasn't been thought
out; the plotting is absurd, and, worse, every character is a cliche fashioned
to suit the author's thematic purposes. The superficially drawn people include
not only the pair of polarized leading players but also some interchangeable
black Vietnam veterans and three abjectly sentimentalized women (all victimized
by men).

Mr. Bishop has directed the play himself, on a bare stage surrounded by the
designer Loren Sherman's abstracted, black-and-white photo mural of the town.
The staging is smooth, and there are able secondary performances by Jane Fleiss,
Lionel Mark Smith, Paul Butler and James McDaniel. At the end, everyone
assembles for the town's Bicentennial celebration, but the fireworks are too
little and too late.

Ohio Mystery

THE HARVESTING, written and directed by John Bishop; sets by Loren Sherman;
costumes by Ann Emonts; lighting by Mal Sturchio; sound by Chuck London
Media/Stewart Werner; associate director, Chris Silva; dramaturg, Milan Stitt;
production stage manager, Fred Reinglas. Presented by Circle Repertory Company,
Marshall W. Mason, artistic director; B. Rodney Marriott, acting artistic
director; Richard Frankel, managing director. At 99 Seventh Avenue South. Carol
Ann LassiterKiya Ann Joyce Tommy HeislerTimothy Carhart Curtis GibsonLionel Mark
Smith John TorskiJimmie Ray Weeks Walter HollinsPaul Butler Joyce MillerJane
Fleiss Gary MajorsJames McDaniel Bim MillerEdward Seamon Louise ClineS. Epatha
Merkerson Police officersColleen Davenport and Tom Smith


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MARVIN GAYE IS SHOT AND KILLED; POP SINGER'S FATHER FACES CHARGE;
HE KEPT FANS GUESSING

BYLINE: By ROBERT PALMER

SECTION: Section D; Page 13, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 985 words


Marvin Gaye, an internationally popular singer, songwriter and musician, always
liked to keep his fans guessing. ''I've made it a point not to follow in my own
shadow,'' he remarked less than a year ago, shortly before winning two Grammy
awards for his 1983 hit ''Sexual Healing.'' And his career, which began in the
late 1950's when Mr. Gaye joined a former street-corner vocal group called the
Rainbows, had more than its share of surprising twists and turns.

Many listeners will remember Mr. Gaye as a handsome, sultry soul balladeer.
Several of his songs, from ''How Sweet It Is to Be Loved by You'' in 1965 to
''Let's Get It On'' in the mid-1970's and last year's ''Sexual Healing,'' were
perhaps the most overtly sensual recordings in recent popular music. But Mr.
Gaye was also a recording-session drummer who played on early Motown hits, and a
gifted instrumentalist who played almost every part on his most recent album,
last year's ''Midnight Love'' on Columbia Records.

Mr. Gaye was also the first artist associated with the Motown label to begin
producing his own albums, beginning with ''What's Going On'' in 1971, the first
album by a major black pop artist to grapple with the Vietnam War, industrial
pollution and similar issues.

Despite his image as a ladies' man, an image he delighted in cultivating, Mr.
Gaye also made music that was concerned with spiritual matters. ''I would like
for my music to raise people's consciousness,'' he said in 1983, ''to give
people hope.''

It was in church that Mr. Gaye, the son of a Washington preacher, received his
early musical training. learning to sing and play the organ from the age of 3.

He later served in the Air Force and then returned home to Washington, where he
sang with several street-corner vocal groups, including the Rainbows.

Marquees to Moonglows


Mr. Gaye made his first recordings in 1957 as a member of the Marquees, the
group he joined after leaving the Rainbows. In 1958, the popular rhythm-
and-blues singer Harvey Fuqua drafted the Marquees to replace his original
backing group, and the new group became the Moonglows. A 1961 Moonglows
performance in a Detroit nightclub attracted the attention of Berry Gordy Jr.,
who had recently formed his Motown recording enterprise.

But Mr. Gordy was not interested in the group. He signed Mr. Gaye to a contract
as a solo singer, although the new arrival's first duties were playing drums on
disks by Smokey Robinson and other early Motown artists. Shortly after coming to
work for Motown, Mr. Gaye married Mr. Gordy's sister Anna.

In 1962, Mr. Gaye's fourth Motown disk, ''Stubborn Kind of Fellow,'' became his
first hit. And throughout the 1960's, he enjoyed hit after hit. Among the most
successful and enduring of these were ''Can I Get a Witness'' and ''Hitch
Hike,'' both in 1963, ''Ain't That Peculiar'' and ''How Sweet It Is to Be Loved
by You,'' both in 1965, and his biggest hit of the decade, ''I Heard It Through
the Grapevine,'' a No. 1 record in 1968.

Mr. Gaye also made a successful series of duet recordings with Mary Wells, Kim
Weston, and most important, Tammi Terrell, who harmonized with Mr. Gaye on
''Ain't No Mountain High Enough'' and ''Your Precious Love,'' both in 1967,
''Ain't Nothing Like the Real Thing'' in 1968, and several other hits.

These songs have enjoyed a life far longer than that of most pop and soul hits.
They are still frequently heard in discos and rock clubs, both in their original
form and in newer versions by other artists. The Rolling Stones recorded
versions of ''Can I Get a Witness'' and ''Hitch Hike'' in the mid- 1960's, and
''Hitch Hike's'' characteristic instrumental riff was borrowed by a number of
bands, including the Velvet Underground. James Taylor had a No. 5 hit in 1975
with his version of ''How Sweet It Is.'' And ''I Heard It Through the
Grapevine'' is periodically revived, most recently for the film ''The Big
Chill.''

Jagger and Stewart Influenced


Rock singers like Mick Jagger and Rod Stewart were influenced by Mr. Gaye's
emotional and sweetly supple singing.

Mr. Gaye's most influential recording was ''What's Going On.'' As the first
Motown artist to compose, arrange and produce his own albums successfully,
beginning with ''What's Going On,'' Mr. Gaye provided a role model for other
black pop songwriters and singers. And the commercial success of ''What's Going
On'' showed popular artists that they could address controversial subjects and
still retain their audience. Stevie Wonder, Curtis Mayfield and other soul
artists wrote and recorded their own topical songs in the next few years.

Sensual and Romantic

Mr. Gaye's subsequent hits, from ''Let's Get It On'' in 1973 to last year's
''Sexual Healing,'' were sensual and romantic. On some of these recordings, Mr.
Gaye called in outside producers, but he continued to retain control of his own
musical direction, and in the late 1970's and early 1980's he made a series of
albums that blended soul, rock, African, Caribbean, jazz, and other influences
in a subtle and ingenious manner. Always a man of many talents, Mr. Gaye had
become one of the most gifted writer-arrangers, and one of the most musicianly
singers, in pop music.

His separation from his wife, Anna, and their subsequent divorce, inspired
''Here, My Dear,'' a double album that traced the course of the couple's
relationship from first meeting to final dissolution. It was an ambitious and
brilliant concept album, although it was not a big hit.

In 1983, after a hiatus of almost five years, Mr. Gaye returned to the stage.
His shows at Radio City Music Hall were a critical and commercial success.
''Midnight Love,'' his first album for Columbia after his 20-year association
with Motown ended, was one of the most successful albums of his career. The
songs on that album included ''Sexual Healing.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SPRING CLEANING

SECTION: Section D; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: A group of National Park Service volunteers washing down the Vietnam
Veterans' Memorial yesterday in Washington. The Lincoln Memorial is visible in
the background.  Associated Press

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORKERS TO VOTE TODAY IN PRIMARY;
JACKSON

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 878 words


Most of New York State's 285 delegates to the Democratic National Convention
will be chosen in today's Presidential primary. The polls will be open from 6
A.M. to 9 P.M. in New York City and in Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland,
Orange, Ulster and Erie Counties. They will be open from noon until 9 P.M.
elsewhere in the state.


The Rev. Jesse Jackson told supporters around the city yesterday to ''hold on,
joy is coming in the morning,'' as he concluded a hectic day of campaigning on
the eve of the New York Democratic Presidential primary.

Mr. Jackson appealed to what has proved to be his strongest constituency - the
poor and church groups - as well as black political leaders who support his
Presidential bid.

''It was Chicago, it was Philadelphia, it was Atlanta,'' he told 4,000
supporters at a noon rally in downtown Brooklyn, in a reference to cities where
blacks have been elected to top offices.  ''New York, your time has come.''

Asserting that Primary Day would be ''Brooklyn Day,'' he urged the crowd to vote
today, to volunteer to get out the vote if they did not have jobs and to take a
sick day or vacation day if they did.

''Don't feel bad about it,'' Mr. Jackson said. ''If you're sick and tired of
what's going on, you're sick enough to take a day off. Tomorrow, you have to
have a voter explosion at the polls.''

Later he used some of his strongest language against former Vice President
Walter F. Mondale, who has competed with Mr. Jackson for the black vote in other
primaries.

Speaking to a group of ministers at the Convent Avenue Baptist Church in Harlem,
he said: ''Mondale is the same man who tried to defeat Harold Washington,'' the
Mayor of Chicago, ''the same man who supported the war in Vietnam, the same man
who got lockjaw on Grenada.''

Mr. Jackson said of his other opponent for the Democratic Presidential
nomination, Senator Gary Hart, ''There's a Hart who you don't know at all.''

In an attempt to emphasize that he was pursuing a different campaign strategy
from his Democratic rivals, Mr. Jackson mentioned that he had spent evenings
with poor families in various parts of New York City.



Reagan Is Criticized

In addition, he lashed out at President Reagan, arguing that the President's
policies had resulted in cuts in programs that benefited the poor.

''Reagan took off the breakfast program, cut the lunch program, cut the food
stamp program,'' he said.

Children ''come to school half hungry, half sleepy, no breakfast, they get
behind in school, they get a complex, they drop out, they take up crime, they go
to jail and they kill somebody,'' he added. ''They have been programmed to
destruct.''

He continued: ''Wherever you go, you hear that the poor don't pay a lot of
taxes. The nation is held up on the blood of the poor, not the taxes of the
rich. While the rich give the overflow, the poor give their lives and their
blood.''

Mr. Jackson also criticized the delivery of services in some poor neighborhoods,
noting that he had visited a site on West 107th Street in Harlem that had been
filled with garbage. ''Ten blocks further north, there is no garbage in the
streets,'' he said. ''There is no excuse for the city not to clean up the
garbage in poor neigborhoods.''



Asks Ban on Handguns

Mr. Jackson also used his speech in downtown Brooklyn to call for a minute of
prayer in memory of the singer Marvin Gaye, who was shot to death in Los Angeles
on Sunday.

And he called for elimination of handguns, saying, ''Let us resolve this day to
ban handguns and to ban the bomb and to save the nation.''

In another development, Mr. Jackson said through a spokesman that he knew
nothing about a statement purported to have been made by one of his supporters
vowing to punish a newspaper reporter who disclosed that Mr. Jackson had used an
ethnic slur in referring to Jews. The supporter, Louis Farrakhan, head of the
Nation of Islam, was reported to have made the comment in a recent radio
broadcast from Chicago.

While most of Mr. Jackson's appearances yesterday focused on groups that
generally already supported him, he attempted to show that he had support from
other quarters.



Backing From Peace Activists

Earlier in the day, he got the endorsement of a number of white religious
leaders and peace activists who termed him the ''only peace candidate.'' Those
who endorsed him included the Rev. William Sloane Coffin; the Rev. John Collins,
co-director of Clergy and Laity Concerned, and the Rev. Carol Cox, pastor of
Fordham United Methodist Church in the Bronx.

He also spoke to a largely Hispanic group in the Sunset Park section of Brooklyn
and was interrupted frequently by applause.

In that appearance and in others he talked of the need for a change in foreign
policy toward Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and Latin America, and what he said
was the similarities between his two opponents.

Last night, Mr. Jackson was scheduled to attend an affair to raise funds at the
Tavern on the Green. He planned a 6 A.M. vigil today at the Abyssinian Baptist
Church in Harlem from which he was to lead voters to a nearby polling place.

In several speeches he vowed to hold a victory party in Times Square if he won
the primary today.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rev. Jesse Jackson in Brooklyn

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE BATTLE OVER WAR

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 2


There are clear signs that Congress and the President may be heading for a new
struggle over the War Powers Act. Last year the battleground for this
institutional rivalry was Lebanon; this year it seems likely to be El Salvador
and the neighboring countries of Honduras and Nicaragua.  In recent days the
Reagan Administration has renewed its accusations that Congress was using the
War Powers Act to undermine the executive's ability to make foreign policy. But
lawmakers from both parties argue that events in Central America last week
graphically demonstrated the need for a Congressional check upon foreign policy
initiatives by the executive branch.

The latest round in this struggle was touched off last Wednesday, when Secretary
of State George P. Shultz challenged the constitutionality of the War Powers Act
and told a Senate subcommittee that the Administration's ability to control its
foreign policy had been ''constantly undercut'' by Congressional meddling.

Flights by U.S. Pilots Reported

The next day legislators awoke to news reports that United States pilots had
been flying reconnaissance missions in direct tactical support of Salvadoran
combat units. Moreover, Senator Jim Sasser, a Tennessee Democrat, told the
Senate he had been informed by the Defense Department that United States
advisers in the region had been fired upon three times in recent months, a
statement that the Pentagon sought to modify the next day.

Many on Capitol Hill reacted with concern and alarm, and Speaker Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr. asked the House Foreign Affairs Committee to determine whether the
War Powers Act had been violated. Senator Sasser summed up a common view in this
way, ''Congress should reassert its effort to be a watchdog in Central America
and be even more demanding of the Administration in ascertaining what its
intentions are there.''

Republican strategists have long worried that Mr. Reagan could be vulnerable to
the charge that he charts a ''trigger happy'' and unstable course in foreign
matters. And some legislators maintain that the Administration's persistent
criticism of Congress and of the War Powers Act has a political purpose and is
aimed at shifting the blame for any foreign policy failures to Capitol Hill.

'Trying to Cover Themselves'

''There's no question,'' said Representative Sam Gejdenson of Connecticut, a
Democratic member of the Foreign Affairs Committee, ''that the Administration's
desire to focus attention on the process is a direct result of the failure of
their policy. They're trying to cover themselves before the election.''

Other legislators express concern that the President and his aides may be trying
to intimidate Congress and carry out a pre-emptive strike against the War Powers
Act before expanding the military involvement in Central America.  Senator
Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, noted that the Administration was
seeking a court test of the War Powers Act, and rhetorically asked the Senate
why that was so. His answer: ''Because Ronald Reagan does not want to be bound
even by the War Powers Act if he decides to go to war in El Salvador.''

The debate between the executive and legislative branches over foreign policy
goes back to the Constitution. Congress is granted the right to declare war, but
the President is the Commander in Chief, and, as Representative Dante B.
Fascell, Democrat of Florida and chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee, put
it, the key question about the two institutions is, ''Where do you draw the
line?''

Prompted by Vietnam War

In the aftermath of the Vietnam War, Congress adopted the War Powers Act to help
draw that line. Under the act the President is required to notify Congress
whenever United States troops enter a combat zone or face imminent hostilities.
The troops must then be withdrawn within 60 days unless Congress grants
authority for them to remain.

Congress has generally been reluctant to invoke the act, or, alternatively, to
set severe limits on Presidential actions through the appropriations process. In
the case of Lebanon, for instance, the lawmakers adopted a resolution under the
War Powers Act approving the Marine mission for 18 months, and defeated attempts
to shorten the time period or cut off funds for the mission.

Last week, as the Senate debated a bill providing $62 million in aid for El
Salvador, the legislators defeated two amendments by Senator Kennedy that would
have required the President to get Congressional approval before sending combat
troops to the region.

The main reason that Congress is reluctant to take such drastic legislative
steps is a widespread belief that the President must have considerable
flexibility in foreign policy. Moreover, the President's counterattack against
Congress has clearly made an impact.

Congress Said to Fear Blame

''There is a reluctance around here to be too assertive on Central America,''
Senator Sasser said. ''People fear Congress will be blamed by the Administration
for losing Central America if things go awry there.''

But Congress is becoming more outspoken as the news from Central America
suggests a deepening United States military involvement.  While the legislators
are reluctant to tie the President's hands too tightly, they also influence
policy in more subtle ways, through the sort of statements and signals that
emanated from Capitol Hill all last week.

Just by calling for an investigation of possible violation of the War Powers
Act, Speaker O'Neill puts pressure on the Administration to move more carefully.
Moreover, the War Powers Act, at least as seen by the legislators, provides
Congress with a continuing mechanism for consulting with the Administration on
an evolving policy.

Undue Constraint Seen

To Congress, that monitoring role is essential. But to Mr. Shultz and the
President, the whole process unduly constrains the executive branch in carrying
out foreign policy.

In addition, statements like Mr. O'Neill's focus public attention on the Central
American situation. So do amendments like Senator Kennedy's, even if they are
defeated. As a result, policy makers are forced to consider Congressional and
public opinion before expanding their commitments.

It was not an accident, for example, that immediately after Senator Sasser's
statement and the disclosure of the use of reconnaissance planes in direct
support of Salvadoran Government forces that the implications of all this on the
War Powers Act were immediately reviewed by White House officials. To that
extent, without ever being invoked by Congress, the law was serving as a
constraint upon the executive branch.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 3, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA REPORTS RETALIATORY SHELLING OF VIETNAMESE BORDER POSITIONS

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 314 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 2


China said its artillery gunners shelled Vietnamese frontier forces today,
wrecking a command post and two gun emplacements in retaliation for what it
called Vietnam's repeated provocations along their border.

It was the first reported Chinese shelling of Vietnam in a year, and it followed
Chinese accusations that the Vietnamese made more than 30 border attacks last
month.

''The bombardment was aimed at protecting the lives and property of the Chinese
border inhabitants and their spring farming activities,'' the official New China
News Agency said in a dispatch from southwest China's Yunnan province.

''The shelling began this morning along the boundary line at Jinping, Malipo and
Funing,'' the agency said. ''One Chinese artillery unit destroyed an enemy
command post and two gun emplacements in 10 minutes time.''

Earlier today, the agency quoted military sources as saying Vietnamese shelling
and other ''armed provocations'' occurred in the two districts of China that
border Vietnam, Yunnan and the Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region.

'A Horde of Vietnamese Troops'

At Yangwan Commune in Yunnan, it said, ''a horde of Vietnamese troops intruded
on March 17 for reconnaissance and harassment and were beaten back by Chinese
frontier guards.''

In the Guangxi region, armed Vietnamese on March 11 ''seized 14 Chinese
fishermen from Xiantian Commune, Beihai city, who were operating on the sea,''
the report said.

In addition, the report contended that on March 22, a detachment of Vietnamese
secret service agents crossed the Guangxi border and seized five Chinese
civilians. The report did not say whether the civilians were taken back to
Vietnam as prisoners or later released.

China backed Hanoi in the Vietnam war, but relations deteriorated because of a
border dispute and Vietnam's December 1978 invasion, and later its occupation,
of Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE POLITICS OF CHANGE

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 795 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 3


At least one thing is fairly clear these days: Everything seems to be changing
faster than the politicians. The scientists, the educators and the businessmen
are trying to adjust to a different future, but the politicians are still stuck
in the mud.

The New York Presidential primary election was merely the latest evidence of the
point. It was conducted with roughly the same old lines and whistles as the 1928
Presidential election, except that Al Smith said ''Let's look at the facts.''

Former Vice President Mondale, with the help of Governor Cuomo, Mayor Koch and
the unions, won big, as if Tammany Hall was still in charge. But these are funny
days, when you win one state, lose the next and, the way the world is going, the
winners often envy the losers.

The Democratic candidates were supposed to be leading us out of the puzzling
changes of the present, but they don't look at the facts, and don't even know
how to change themselves.

So maybe the time has come to protest against the cynical assumption that the
people are a collection of indifferent dummies, more interested in the
basketball playoffs than the political playoffs, who can be manipulated by
television, confused by popularity polls and convinced by anonymous officials
that the candidates' positions can be read from invisible mirrors to millions of
voters who don't quite believe, but still believe in believing.

Anyway, it would be interesting to see what would happen if by chance one of the
candidates treated the voters of Pennsylvania, Ohio, California and the
remaining primary election states with a little more respect than the voters got
in New York.

Walter Mondale still has a battle from here to the nominating convention in San
Francisco, not because he is a man of Old Ideas and a clone of Jimmy Carter -
this is a cheap shot against him - but because he has not been faithful to
himself.  He's a decent, intelligent, nice guy who, losing to Gary Hart in the
New England primaries, adopted Leo Durocher's baseball principle that ''nice
guys finish last'' and turned personal and mean. Maybe it will work out for him
in the end, as it has many times in the past, but don't bet the rent on it.  Mr.
Hart has come along as the latest young Lochinvar, presuming to represent the
young generation, unfairly pinning the tragedy of Vietnam on Mr. Mondale and
calling for ''new ideas,'' a lower defense budget and a more compassionate
policy toward the old and young.  He's a little fuzzy and a little phony with
his imitation of Jack Kennedy's gestures and themes, but he's more specific than
Kennedy ever was when Jack went for the White House against the elders of the
Democratic Party. And he's beginning to convince a lot of Democratic delegates
that he has the best chance of beating President Reagan in November. He sees Mr.
Reagan as an amiable well-meaning man, the Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer candidate,
appealing to the Hollywood and television fantasies of America, the conservative
economics of Adam Smith and the prejudices of Archie Bunker. Mr. Mondale
underestimated him. Mr. Reagan, who knows his own age, even if Gary Hart
doesn't, is not making the same mistake.

The conflict in this election, however, is not mainly between Mr. Mondale and
Mr. Hart, or even between the two major political parties - there are basic
differences within and between them. It is between the past and the future.

This is what we should be writing about now, and this is what the politicians
should be thinking about, though in this election so far they have been talking
about what divides them rather than what unites them, and arguing about who has
the beef, and what Ed Meese remembered and what he forgot. What may have been
forgotten by Mr. Mondale in his long, careful and expensive effort to win the
support of the unions in the state primaries and caucuses is that they are not
bound to vote for him unless he sweeps support in the primaries and comes into
the convention with a commanding majority.

The chances are that either Mr. Mondale or Mr. Hart will prevail in the Western
primaries, but much will depend not on their appeals to special interests, as in
the New York primary, but on the larger issue of what vision they have of the
1980's.

The New York primary cannot be a model for the coming tests farther West. The
Democratic New York performance was not only a disgrace but an insult to the
voters, and even worse, an embarrassment to the democratic process.

But we cannot be sure. Maybe the voters would rather be fooled than pay
attention. Even Thomas Jefferson wondered whether they would think, as he was
always thinking, about ''the coming generations'' or whether they would regard
their own selfish interest and think merely about themselves.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

INDIAN JOINS SOVIET PAIR IN 8-DAY SPACE MISSION

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 3


The Soviet Union today launched an Indian astronaut into space for the first
time, along with two Soviet astronauts.

Rakesh Sharma, a 35-year-old Indian Air Force pilot, joined the two Soviet
astronauts for an eight-day visit to the Salyut 7 space station, where three
other Soviet astronauts have been living since Feb. 8.

The joint flight, the 11th in the ''intercosmos'' series that has taken non-
Soviet astronauts into space along with Soviet astronauts, is to include medical
experiments in which Mr. Sharma will practice yoga as a possible means of coping
with space sickness. The experiments also include detailed space surveys of the
Indian subcontinent. But Western experts expect that, like the 10 previous joint
flights, this one will probably be less notable for scientific achievement than
for claims of new levels of Soviet-Indian relations.

The launching was televised live in the Soviet Union and in India, and soon
afterward Tass, the Soviet Government's official press agency, quoted Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi as saying the joint mission gave a ''new dimension'' to
friendship between India and the Soviet Union.

Launching Seen on TV


Unlike launchings that involve all- Soviet crews, which are announced only after
the fact, the time of the launching of the joint flight was announced in
advance, and at 5:09 P.M. Moscow time Soviet television showed the ignition of
the rocket's engines and the slow liftoff of the Soyuz T-11 spacecraft. The
voice of the commander, Col. Yuri Malyshev, could be heard giving radio reports
of the progress of the launching, terming each stage ''normal.''

Strapped alongside Mr. Sharma and Colonel Malyshev was the flight engineer,
Gennady Strekalov. They plan to join the three Soviet astronauts aboard the
Salyut orbiting laboratory, Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyov and Oleg Atkov, who
are taking part in a Soviet program to keep men in orbit for months at a time.

Indian dignitaries and reporters were shown peering into the clear central Asian
sky as the rocket rose quickly out of sight, and subsequent pictures showed the
giant display board of the flight control center monitoring the spacecraft's
trajectory.

Defense Minister Ramaswami Venkataraman of India, watching the launching in the
Baikonur cosmodrome at Leninsk in the Soviet republic of Kazakhstan, said he
hoped cooperation in the mission would be as successful as the launching, which
he said ''we will never forget.''

Intensive Soviet Publicity


The publicity surrounding Mr. Sharma's flight was intensive, and the launching
was accompanied by a torrent of reports on television and the press about
Soviet-Indian friendship and cooperation, India's achievements since gaining
independence in 1947 and the excitement that the joint mission had created in
India.

The press omitted any mention of the Sikh-Hindu rioting in the northern Indian
state of Punjab, and focused instead on India's success in shedding the legacy
of colonialism.

Before the launching, Mr. Sharma issued a statement saying it was a ''special
honor'' to be the first person from India to take part ''in this challenging
endeavor and to make a modest contribution to the mastering of new frontiers of
human knowledge.''

In an earlier interview with Tass, he said he was taking with him ''portraits of
the leaders of my country, a handful of soil of my native India and the national
flag.'' He predicted that India's economy would ''undoubtedly benefit'' from the
flight, particularly from the survey of Indian territory.

Tass also filed reports from Mr. Sharma's home city of Hyderabad, where his
mother, Tripta Sharma, said she had developed a ''great interest'' in the Soviet
Union after her son was chosen for the joint flight in 1982.

Mrs. Gandhi, in her interview with Tass, said that ''India's first cosmonaut, I
hope, will symbolize the message of peace which is Mahatma Gandhi's and
Jawaharlal Nehru's legacy to India.''

Astronauts From Soviet Bloc


It is this sort of favorable publicity, Western diplomats believe, that has led
the Soviet Union to invest heavily in sending a number of foreign astronauts
into space. The first graduates of the Soviet outer space academy, as Tass has
called them, were Soviet bloc allies from Czechoslovakia, Poland, East Germany,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Vietnam, Cuba, Mongolia and Romania.

But in June 1982, the Soviet space program included a French astronaut, Jean
Loup Chretien, and began training two Indian candidates. Future foreign
astronauts have not been announced.

To enhance the Indian character of the flight, the astronauts' food will include
mango juice and three traditional Indian dishes: fried rice and vegetables,
potatoes and lentils and wheat germ. The prospect of Mr. Sharma's practicing
yoga on the flight, however, has caused some amusement among Russians because
Soviet practitioners of this eastern form of meditation have come under
occasional attack in the Soviet press.

Beyond stressing the fruits of Soviet-

Beyond stressing the fruits of Soviet- Indian cooperation and friendship through
the flight, Soviet officials have stressed that the flight demonstrates the
peaceful uses of outer space. This has been indirectly held up as a contrast to
the United States, which is regularly described in the Soviet press as working
almost exclusively to develop its space program for military purposes.

Indeed, the launching of the Indian and Soviet astronauts coincided with a
barrage of attacks on President Reagan's report to Congress on the development
of antisatellite weapons.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soviet rocket

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

INDIAN JOINS SOVIET PAIR IN 8-DAY SPACE MISSION

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 3


The Soviet Union today launched an Indian astronaut into space for the first
time, along with two Soviet astronauts.

Rakesh Sharma, a 35-year-old Indian Air Force pilot, joined the two Soviet
astronauts for an eight-day visit to the Salyut 7 space station, where three
other Soviet astronauts have been living since Feb. 8.

The joint flight, the 11th in the ''intercosmos'' series that has taken non-
Soviet astronauts into space along with Soviet astronauts, is to include medical
experiments in which Mr. Sharma will practice yoga as a possible means of coping
with space sickness. The experiments also include detailed space surveys of the
Indian subcontinent. But Western experts expect that, like the 10 previous joint
flights, this one will probably be less notable for scientific achievement than
for claims of new levels of Soviet-Indian relations.

The launching was televised live in the Soviet Union and in India, and soon
afterward Tass, the Soviet Government's official press agency, quoted Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi as saying the joint mission gave a ''new dimension'' to
friendship between India and the Soviet Union.

Launching Seen on TV


Unlike launchings that involve all- Soviet crews, which are announced only after
the fact, the time of the launching of the joint flight was announced in
advance, and at 5:09 P.M. Moscow time Soviet television showed the ignition of
the rocket's engines and the slow liftoff of the Soyuz T-11 spacecraft. The
voice of the commander, Col. Yuri Malyshev, could be heard giving radio reports
of the progress of the launching, terming each stage ''normal.''

Strapped alongside Mr. Sharma and Colonel Malyshev was the flight engineer,
Gennady Strekalov. They plan to join the three Soviet astronauts aboard the
Salyut orbiting laboratory, Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyov and Oleg Atkov, who
are taking part in a Soviet program to keep men in orbit for months at a time.

Indian dignitaries and reporters were shown peering into the clear central Asian
sky as the rocket rose quickly out of sight, and subsequent pictures showed the
giant display board of the flight control center monitoring the spacecraft's
trajectory.

Defense Minister Ramaswami Venkataraman of India, watching the launching in the
Baikonur cosmodrome at Leninsk in the Soviet republic of Kazakhstan, said he
hoped cooperation in the mission would be as successful as the launching, which
he said ''we will never forget.''

Intensive Soviet Publicity


The publicity surrounding Mr. Sharma's flight was intensive, and the launching
was accompanied by a torrent of reports on television and the press about
Soviet-Indian friendship and cooperation, India's achievements since gaining
independence in 1947 and the excitement that the joint mission had created in
India.

The press omitted any mention of the Sikh-Hindu rioting in the northern Indian
state of Punjab, and focused instead on India's success in shedding the legacy
of colonialism.

Before the launching, Mr. Sharma issued a statement saying it was a ''special
honor'' to be the first person from India to take part ''in this challenging
endeavor and to make a modest contribution to the mastering of new frontiers of
human knowledge.''

In an earlier interview with Tass, he said he was taking with him ''portraits of
the leaders of my country, a handful of soil of my native India and the national
flag.'' He predicted that India's economy would ''undoubtedly benefit'' from the
flight, particularly from the survey of Indian territory.

Tass also filed reports from Mr. Sharma's home city of Hyderabad, where his
mother, Tripta Sharma, said she had developed a ''great interest'' in the Soviet
Union after her son was chosen for the joint flight in 1982.

Mrs. Gandhi, in her interview with Tass, said that ''India's first cosmonaut, I
hope, will symbolize the message of peace which is Mahatma Gandhi's and
Jawaharlal Nehru's legacy to India.''

Astronauts From Soviet Bloc


It is this sort of favorable publicity, Western diplomats believe, that has led
the Soviet Union to invest heavily in sending a number of foreign astronauts
into space. The first graduates of the Soviet outer space academy, as Tass has
called them, were Soviet bloc allies from Czechoslovakia, Poland, East Germany,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Vietnam, Cuba, Mongolia and Romania.

But in June 1982, the Soviet space program included a French astronaut, Jean
Loup Chretien, and began training two Indian candidates. Future foreign
astronauts have not been announced.

To enhance the Indian character of the flight, the astronauts' food will include
mango juice and three traditional Indian dishes: fried rice and vegetables,
potatoes and lentils and wheat germ. The prospect of Mr. Sharma's practicing
yoga on the flight, however, has caused some amusement among Russians because
Soviet practitioners of this eastern form of meditation have come under
occasional attack in the Soviet press.

Beyond stressing the fruits of Soviet-

Beyond stressing the fruits of Soviet- Indian cooperation and friendship through
the flight, Soviet officials have stressed that the flight demonstrates the
peaceful uses of outer space. This has been indirectly held up as a contrast to
the United States, which is regularly described in the Soviet press as working
almost exclusively to develop its space program for military purposes.

Indeed, the launching of the Indian and Soviet astronauts coincided with a
barrage of attacks on President Reagan's report to Congress on the development
of antisatellite weapons.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soviet rocket

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

INDIAN JOINS SOVIET PAIR IN 8-DAY SPACE MISSION

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 936 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 3


The Soviet Union today launched an Indian astronaut into space for the first
time, along with two Soviet astronauts.

Rakesh Sharma, a 35-year-old Indian Air Force pilot, joined the two Soviet
astronauts for an eight-day visit to the Salyut 7 space station, where three
other Soviet astronauts have been living since Feb. 8.

The joint flight, the 11th in the ''intercosmos'' series that has taken non-
Soviet astronauts into space along with Soviet astronauts, is to include medical
experiments in which Mr. Sharma will practice yoga as a possible means of coping
with space sickness. The experiments also include detailed space surveys of the
Indian subcontinent. But Western experts expect that, like the 10 previous joint
flights, this one will probably be less notable for scientific achievement than
for claims of new levels of Soviet-Indian relations.

The launching was televised live in the Soviet Union and in India, and soon
afterward Tass, the Soviet Government's official press agency, quoted Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi as saying the joint mission gave a ''new dimension'' to
friendship between India and the Soviet Union.

Launching Seen on TV


Unlike launchings that involve all- Soviet crews, which are announced only after
the fact, the time of the launching of the joint flight was announced in
advance, and at 5:09 P.M. Moscow time Soviet television showed the ignition of
the rocket's engines and the slow liftoff of the Soyuz T-11 spacecraft. The
voice of the commander, Col. Yuri Malyshev, could be heard giving radio reports
of the progress of the launching, terming each stage ''normal.''

Strapped alongside Mr. Sharma and Colonel Malyshev was the flight engineer,
Gennady Strekalov. They plan to join the three Soviet astronauts aboard the
Salyut orbiting laboratory, Leonid Kizim, Vladimir Solovyov and Oleg Atkov, who
are taking part in a Soviet program to keep men in orbit for months at a time.

Indian dignitaries and reporters were shown peering into the clear central Asian
sky as the rocket rose quickly out of sight, and subsequent pictures showed the
giant display board of the flight control center monitoring the spacecraft's
trajectory.

Defense Minister Ramaswami Venkataraman of India, watching the launching in the
Baikonur cosmodrome at Leninsk in the Soviet republic of Kazakhstan, said he
hoped cooperation in the mission would be as successful as the launching, which
he said ''we will never forget.''

Intensive Soviet Publicity


The publicity surrounding Mr. Sharma's flight was intensive, and the launching
was accompanied by a torrent of reports on television and the press about
Soviet-Indian friendship and cooperation, India's achievements since gaining
independence in 1947 and the excitement that the joint mission had created in
India.

The press omitted any mention of the Sikh-Hindu rioting in the northern Indian
state of Punjab, and focused instead on India's success in shedding the legacy
of colonialism.

Before the launching, Mr. Sharma issued a statement saying it was a ''special
honor'' to be the first person from India to take part ''in this challenging
endeavor and to make a modest contribution to the mastering of new frontiers of
human knowledge.''

In an earlier interview with Tass, he said he was taking with him ''portraits of
the leaders of my country, a handful of soil of my native India and the national
flag.'' He predicted that India's economy would ''undoubtedly benefit'' from the
flight, particularly from the survey of Indian territory.

Tass also filed reports from Mr. Sharma's home city of Hyderabad, where his
mother, Tripta Sharma, said she had developed a ''great interest'' in the Soviet
Union after her son was chosen for the joint flight in 1982.

Mrs. Gandhi, in her interview with Tass, said that ''India's first cosmonaut, I
hope, will symbolize the message of peace which is Mahatma Gandhi's and
Jawaharlal Nehru's legacy to India.''

Astronauts From Soviet Bloc


It is this sort of favorable publicity, Western diplomats believe, that has led
the Soviet Union to invest heavily in sending a number of foreign astronauts
into space. The first graduates of the Soviet outer space academy, as Tass has
called them, were Soviet bloc allies from Czechoslovakia, Poland, East Germany,
Bulgaria, Hungary, Vietnam, Cuba, Mongolia and Romania.

But in June 1982, the Soviet space program included a French astronaut, Jean
Loup Chretien, and began training two Indian candidates. Future foreign
astronauts have not been announced.

To enhance the Indian character of the flight, the astronauts' food will include
mango juice and three traditional Indian dishes: fried rice and vegetables,
potatoes and lentils and wheat germ. The prospect of Mr. Sharma's practicing
yoga on the flight, however, has caused some amusement among Russians because
Soviet practitioners of this eastern form of meditation have come under
occasional attack in the Soviet press.

Beyond stressing the fruits of Soviet-

Beyond stressing the fruits of Soviet- Indian cooperation and friendship through
the flight, Soviet officials have stressed that the flight demonstrates the
peaceful uses of outer space. This has been indirectly held up as a contrast to
the United States, which is regularly described in the Soviet press as working
almost exclusively to develop its space program for military purposes.

Indeed, the launching of the Indian and Soviet astronauts coincided with a
barrage of attacks on President Reagan's report to Congress on the development
of antisatellite weapons.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soviet rocket

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS SUMMARY;
 WEDNESDAY, APRIL 4, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 670 words


Guinea's armed forces seized power in a coup a week after the death of President
Ahmed Sekou Toure to end what they called a ''bloody and ruthless
dictatorship.'' All mass organizations were dissolved and the West African
nation's airport and borders were closed. (Page A1, Column 1.)

Assassins in Punjab killed a member of Parliament, a university professor who
was fatally shot at his home by killers who had said they were students waiting
to see him. The killers fled in a car. Meanwhile, at least 10 people were killed
and scores injured when the police fired on a crowd in Amritsar, the holy Sikh
city in the northern India state. (A1:2.)

American-Soviet talks have been held in the last two days. The discussions
reportedly covered all aspects of relations, including plans for the resumption
of negotiations on new cultural and consular agreements. (A1:3.)

The largest Soviet battle fleet ever seen has been assembled in the Norwegian
Sea and the North Atlantic for a naval exercise, according to Britain's Defense
Ministry. (A4:3.) National

Low-income families have lost the most money and high-income families have
gained the most from the cumulative effect of budget and tax reductions adopted
since January 1981, according to a report by the Congressional Budget Office.
The report was the first detailed study showing the effects of the tax and
budget cuts at different income levels. (A1:1.)

Cost overruns on the Seabrook nuclear plant in New Hampshire total 800 percent.
As a result, the customers of 53 electric companies from Connecticut to Maine
will face higher rates, and at least one utility, Seabrook's main builder, may
be forced into bankruptcy. (A1:2-4.)

Sexual abuse of children, often for commercial purposes, is increasingly
alarming law-enforcement and medical authorities. Experts say the arrests of the
operators of an exclusive nursery school in Manhattan Beach, Calif., on charges
of sexually molesting 18 children reflect a shadowed national phenomenon.
(A21:1-6.) Metropolitan

Walter F. Mondale scored a sweeping victory in the Democratic Presidential
primary in New York, giving him a major push toward the nomination. The former
Vice President's victory followed his success in the primary in Illinois two
weeks ago and positioned him for the Pennsylvania primary next Tuesday. (A1:6.)

A heavy vote among older whites for Walter F. Mondale and a surge of young black
voters for the Rev. Jesse Jackson put a generational squeeze on Senator Gary
Hart in the New York Democratic Presidential primary, according to a New York
Times/CBS News Poll. Mr. Mondale, in his first victory in the Northeast,
attracted a traditional Democratic coalition - Jewish and Roman Catholic voters,
union households and low- income groups. (B:1-2.)

Anthony J. Alvarado was formally charged with misconduct by the New York City
Board of Education. In a 15-page document, the board included new assertions
that the suspended Schools Chancellor had used employees to paint his house and
authorized pay for someone he knew had not worked for the money. (A1:5-6.)

A bill to aid Vietnam veterans in making college tuition payments was blocked by
leaders of the New York State Senate on the ground that the chief Assembly
sponsor of the measure was a conscientious objector to the war. (B1:4-5.)

An error by a switchman caused a derailment that started a smoky fire in a
tunnel near Grand Central Terminal last Jan. 30, according to a report by the
Metro-North Commuter Railroad. The report said the incident was caused by a
tower operator who changed a switch while two locomotives were passing over it.
The tower operator has been dismissed. (B2:6.)

American eating habits are changing, slowly but inexorably. In recent years
there has been a proliferation in New York City of small, fast-food purveyors of
so-called health or natural foods. Some of these restaurants are very good; many
are awful. (C1:1-6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 4, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

OBJECTION TO SPONSOR STALLS AID FOR VETERANS OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 903 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, April 3


The war that divided the nation a decade ago divided the State Legislature today
as Senate leaders blocked a bill to aid Vietnam veterans because the leading
Assembly sponsor of the bill had been a conscientious objector to that war.

There was talk once more of honor and principle, service and disgrace - and
complaints that the arguments were at the expense of Vietnam veterans who would
benefit from the tuition-assistance program in the stalled legislation.

The leading Assembly sponsor of the tuition bill is John F. Duane, a freshman
Democrat from Queens. In 1972, he was granted conscientious objector status
because of his religious beliefs as a Roman Catholic.

''I wanted to be of assistance to Vietnam veterans, who I didn't think were
being treated fairly, especially in comparison to other veterans,'' Mr. Duane
said of the bill. ''I think I have a lot more in common with Vietnam veterans
than the majority of Americans who watched the war on television. I had to
figure out what I stood for, what life was all about.''

But Senator Frank Padavan, a Queens Republican, moved Monday to block the bill.

''A bill honoring Vietnam veterans should not bear the name as a prime sponsor
of someone who dishonored them by his personal action,'' Senator Padavan said.
''To have his name on the bill is in bad taste, to say the least, if not an
affront to the guys who did go there. Many of them didn't want to go. But they
went.''

Vietnam veterans' groups have been lobbying here for years for a bill to help
veterans pay for college. Governor Carey vetoed such a measure two years ago.
Last year, Governor Cuomo said he would sign such a bill, but the Senate and
Assembly never agreed on one.

Last Wednesday, Mr. Duane and Senator John E. Flynn, a Yonkers Republican,
announced a bipartisan agreement on a bill to help Vietnam veterans pay for
college.

Under the measure, a veteran attending school full time would receive $500 a
semester and a part-time student would receive $250.

There are an estimated 150,000 Vietnam veterans living in New York State, but
veterans' groups estimate that only a small number of them would take adavantage
of the tuition-assistance program.

A news release had said that both the Assembly Speaker, Stanley Fink of
Brooklyn, and the Senate majority leader, Warren M.  Anderson of Binghamton,
supported the measure.

On Friday, the Democratic-controled Assembly passed the bill and sent it to the
Republican-controlled Senate. The normal procedure under legislative protocol
would have been for the Senate to pass the Assembly bill and send it to the
Governor for his signature.

But instead the Senate passed its own bill, identical in all respects except
that Senator Flynn's name was on it instead of Assemblyman Duane's.

This crossing of bills prevents either from becoming law.

On Monday, Senator Flynn moved to correct the situation. He substituted the
Assembly bill for his own, and the Senate approved it. ''It was on its way to
the Governor,'' Mr. Duane said.  But moments later, Senator Anderson, at Mr.
Padavan's urging, moved to reconsider the bill. The vote of approval was
overturned, and Senator Anderson then sent Mr. Duane's bill to committee.
Senator Flynn's bill was passed again.

'Warren, What's Going On?'


''I hit the button to Senator Anderson,'' Speaker Fink said today. ''I said:
'Warren, what's going on? You know very well I can't permit someone in your
house to tell me who's going to sponsor bills in my house.' ''

Mr. Fink said it was up to Senator Anderson to solve the problem. ''The bill is
not now on its way to the Governor - he can make it be on its way to the
Governor,'' the Speaker said.

A spokesman said Senator Anderson supported Mr. Padavan.

Assemblyman Duane, who is 30 years old, and Senator Padavan, 49, are political
adversaries from Queens.

Mr. Duane suggested that bad blood from local political fights was now spilling
onto a larger battlefield.

Mr. Daune narrowly defeated Douglas N. Prescott in a bitter Assembly race last
year. Mr. Padavan supported Mr. Prescott.

Mr. Padavan, who is a colonel in the Army Reserve, said he had received
complaints from veterans' groups about Mr. Duane's sponsorship of the bill. ''To
me and everyone who became aware of it, this is an afront,'' Mr. Padavan said.

Considering the Priesthood


Mr. Duane said that when he was 18, a graduate of Holy Cross High School, he was
politically and religiously opposed to American policy in Vietnam. He said he
had been considering the priesthood.  His conscientious objector status would
not have prevented him from being drafted. He took the physical examination and
was given a Selective Service number.

''I don't know if I would have been assigned as a medic or to clean bedpans,''
he said. His number was not called.

He decided against becoming a priest. Now, he said, he no longer thinks of
himself as a conscientious objector.

Before running for the Assembly, Mr. Duane, who attended Colgate College, worked
for Attorney General Robert Abrams.

The New York State Council of Vietnam Veterans of America supported Mr. Duane
and urged passage of his bill.

''No one asked the veterans if we were insulted by it,'' John Catterson, the
chairman of the group, said. ''We're not insulted. It's time this country laid
to rest the open wounds, the sores of the Vietnam War.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Assemblyman Frank Padavan (Page B5); photo of Assemblyman John
F. Duane (Page B5)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
OPERATION SUCCESS

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 790 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, April 4


Despite Vietnam and Cambodia and all the talk about the end of American
innocence, most Americans continue to think of our country as devoted to respect
for law and humanity in international life. They would be surprised, I think, to
realize that the United States today is involved in a war of terror and
subversion against an internationally recognized Government.

War is what the operations of the so-called contras against the Nicaraguan
Government have become. In two years of funding by the C.I.A. their numbers
under arms have grown from a few hundred to 15,000. They raid villages and
murder coffee- pickers in the fields. They do heavy economic damage by bombing
and mining Nicaragua's ports. They use high-powered speedboats to attack
shipping in harbors.

The Reagan Administration defends all this as realism in a hard world: necessary
measures to weaken a left-wing Government that makes trouble for us in Central
America. But there is a precedent that mocks the argument of realism.

Thirty years ago the United States overthrew a Government in Central America. In
June 1954 a coup organized by the C.I.A. removed the elected President of
Guatemala, Jacobo Arbenz. The Eisenhower Administration ran a massive
disinformation campaign to paint him as a dangerous radical.

The C.I.A. called that venture ''Operation Success.'' Some success. In place of
a democratic Government the U.S. installed a colonel, Carlos Castillo Armas.
Guatemala began years of military rule, violence, torture and misery - years
that have not ended.

''Guatemala has the worst civil rights record of any country in South America,''
Senator Jim Sasser of Tennessee said recently. Successive military leaders have
slaughtered their people in an effort to stamp out rebellion. Amnesty
International, in a report this week on the use of torture by governments,
mentioned thousands kidnapped in Guatemala between 1978 and 1982 and found
dumped dead by roadsides with flesh burned and limbs amputated.

Has the interest of the United States been served in Guatemala? Hardly. Central
America's most populous country has become a center of instability. A historian
of the 1954 coup, Ronald Schneider, said 10 years later:

''While the short-run outcome of the intervention in 1954 was viewed at the time
as a success for the United States in the Cold War, in a larger perspective it
is increasingly difficult to see it as such. Indeed, in light of subsequent
events it might reasonably be considered little short of disaster.'' The story
of the 1954 coup is told in chilling detail in a recent book, ''Bitter Fruit,''
by Stephen Schlesinger and Stephen Kinzer. It is chilling especially because it
shows the moral price paid by American officials for involvement in such dirty
business. John Foster Dulles, his brother Allen and other Americans appear in
shameful postures.  There is a worrying footnote to the Schlesinger-Kinzer book.
The authors got a good deal of official information on the American role in the
1954 coup, but they wanted the full records of the C.I.A. For five years the
agency said it had only a few papers. Then the authors sued under the Freedom of
Information Act. The agency ''discovered'' 180,000 documents on the coup in its
library but said they were too sensitive to produce.  Last month a Federal judge
in Washington, Thomas A. Flannery, upheld the C.I.A.'s refusal to produce what
are by now 30-year-old documents. ''Conditions in Central America are extremely
sensitive today,'' he said, ''and any information about past covert activity by
the United States in this area could have harmful effects.'' To the contrary,
information about what happened when the United States used force and subversion
against a Central American Government 30 years ago could have highly beneficial
effects today. It could save us from repeating disaster.  Americans on the whole
understand that, whatever other governments do, ours is bound by considerations
of law - and hurts itself when it breaks those bounds. We need more information,
not less, on secret, lawless, self-defeating American interventions abroad.  A
recent column erred in a reference to Richard Allen, former national security
adviser to President Reagan. I should have written that, during a Japanese
magazine interview with Mrs. Reagan that he had helped arrange, Mr. Allen
intercepted an envelope containing $1,000 as it was being handed to Mrs. Reagan.
The money was later found in his office safe, where his secretary had left it
instead of turning it over to authorities as she said she had been instructed.
Mr. Allen resigned after the matter came to light, but a Justice Department
inquiry found no wrongdoing on his part.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

LIBYA ACCUSED AT U.N., BUT U.S. IS THE TARGET

BYLINE: By RICHARD BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y. April 4


A week ago, after the Sudan accused Libya of carrying out a bombing raid on its
second biggest city, the Sudanese Foreign Minister came here to bring a formal
complaint to the Security Council.

A debate followed, and while there have been statements condemning the raid -
the United States and Egypt blamed Libya, which has denied the charge - a more
conspicuous target for condemnation has turned out to be the United States.

A number of speakers, 18 in all so far from Libya, the Soviet Union, Vietnam,
Iran, Poland, Nicaragua, Mongolia and other countries, have contended or, in
some cases, implied that the bombing of the city of Omdurman never took place.
The incident, they have said, was fabricated by the United States as a pretext
for sending Awacs surveillance planes to the area.

Libya's success in transforming the debate on the bombing raid into an occasion
for attacks against the United States provides a glimpse, some delegates said,
of the ability of some groups to set the tone and content of Security Council
debate, deflecting attention from their own actions. It also illustrates, the
delegates said, an apparent failure on the part of the United States and its
Western allies to find ways of avoiding such strategic losses.  Technically, the
debate on the attack against Omdurman, in which five people were reported
killed, occupied only one day of deliberations last week. During the
deliberations, nine countries, most of them members of the Security Council,
deplored the attack. Egypt and Zaire have now circulated a draft resolution that
will, if approved, condemn the ''unprovoked air attack and the indiscriminate
bombardment of civilian targets'' in Omdurman.

Then the Libyan Foreign Minister, Ali A. Treiki, formally lodged a complaint
against the United States for ''hostile and provocative American acts,'' namely
the dispatching of two early warning surveillance planes to the Sudan. As a
result, the Council has heard for two full days what the American
representative, Warren Clark, called a ''dreary litany'' by members ''not known
for their independent voting record.''

Mr. Treiki, for example, said there was ''no evidence'' that Libya had carried
out a bombing attack in the Sudan. It was a ''fabrication'' designed to give a
pretext for ''colonizing the Arab homeland.''

''The problem,'' Mr. Treiki said, ''is that the policy of the United States is
under the full control of Zionism.''

''The main point,'' said the chief Soviet representative, Oleg A. Troyanovsky,
''is that the forces of imperialism are ready to utilize any pretext, any
artifically contrived or provoked conflict, in order to flex their military
muscle and impose their will on young nonaligned states.''

Some delegates said that what the Libyan counterattack showed was the discipline
of the Soviet bloc and a small number of radical third world countries when
called upon to attempt to put the United States on the defensive.

''They are a well-organized group, the Communist bloc,'' a Western member of the
Council said in an interview.

The Western and American response to the Libyan offensive has been comparatively
subdued. The British representative, Sir John Thomson, in a brief statement,
said he ''smelled several red herrings'' in the attacks. The American delegate,
Mr. Clark, made two brief statements, dismissing the speakers' charges.

Recalling a similar episode last year, in which Libya mobilized support from 24
countries against American policy, a United States official said: ''I think the
effect is diminishing. In fact, I don't think that this kind of thing carries
much weight or greatly impresses people on the Council or other U.N. members.''

The official added, ''We could have gone to the Europeans and asked them to get
up and speak for us; but many of them would have been reluctant, not because
they're intimidated by Libya but because they're tired of this sort of thing.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING SAYS ITS GUNNERS SHELLED VIETNAMESE POSTS IN RETALIATION

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 454 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 4


China said today that its gunners on the southern frontier had destroyed
Vietnamese observation posts, gun emplacements and ammunition depots, killing or
wounding dozens of Vietnamese soldiers.

The official New China News Agency said the shelling, which it said had been in
retaliation for Vietnamese artillery attacks, took place Tuesday and today along
the mountainous border.

Chinese television showed what it said were Chinese gunners shelling Vietnamese
positions.

The Foreign Ministry's information director, Qi Huaiyuan, said at a news
briefing that Chinese troops were responding in self-defense to what he
described as Vietnamese provocations.

''Our principle is we will not attack unless we are attacked, and if we are
attacked, we will certainly counterattack,'' Mr. Qi said.

Relations Deteriorated

Peking backed Hanoi in the Vietnam War, but relations deteriorated because of a
border dispute and Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia starting in late 1978. China
invaded Vietnam in February 1979, and fought a monthlong war that ended in a
stand-off. Since then, border clashes have persisted.

The press agency said border troops in the two Chinese provinces bordering
Vietnam - Yunnan and the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region - had shelled and
destroyed dozens of Vietnamese artillery positions, observation posts and
shelters.

''A number of Vietnamese field pieces, military vehicles and ammunition depots
have been smashed and a group of Vietnamese soldiers killed or wounded,'' the
press agency said.

Along the Yunnan border, several hundred Vietnamese shells killed or wounded
civilians and destroyed about 35 acres of cropland, the press agency said. It
said Chinese artillery had retaliated, destroying eight Vietnamese observation
posts and firing positions and killing or wounding several dozen Vietnamese
soldiers.

The report said more than 250 Vietnamese shells had hit the Guangxi town of
Dongxing in the last few days, killing a food mill worker and wounding a number
of people. Chinese gunners fired back, destroying several enemy positions, it
said.

On Monday, in the first reported Chinese shelling of Vietnam in a year, China
said its artillery gunners shelled Vietnamese frontier forces, wrecking a
command post and two gun emplacements on the border of the Yunnan counties of
Jinping, Malipo and Funing.



Vietnam Asks Halt in Shelling

BANGKOK, Thailand, April 4 - Vietnam's Foreign Ministry demanded an immediate
end to the shelling by China, according to a Vietnam News Agency report
monitored here.

The Vietnamese said the Chinese shelling was meant to save Cambodian insurgents
fighting Vietnamese forces along the Thai-Cambodian border.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map highlighting area of shelling

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATORS UPHOLD AID TO INSURGENTS

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 888 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


The Republican-controlled Senate today rejected Democratic efforts to bar funds
for the insurgents in Nicaragua and to prohibit the use of American combat
troops in El Salvador.

The votes were the highlight of a heated debate over Congress's proper role in
the nation's decision to wage war.

The Senate voted 59-36, mostly along party lines, to table and thereby kill a
proposal that would prohibit the introduction of American troops ''into or over
El Salvador for combat'' without Congressional approval.

While the United States has military advisers in El Salvador, it has no combat
troops there. Several Democrats predicted that if President Reagan were
re-elected he would dispatch combat troops to Central America, but Republicans
dismissed these remarks as ''almost demagogic.''

Aid to Rebels Upheld

The proposal was the last of more than two dozen attempts by Senate opponents of
the Administration's policy in El Salvador to dilute, delay and restrict the use
of $61.7 million in emergency military aid to that country.

The Senate did agree on a voice vote to withhold emergency military aid for El
Salvador if a new president elected in runoff elections there soon is deposed by
a military coup.

It then rejected, 61 to 30, a proposal to delete $21 million for aid to the
insurgents in Nicaragua. The money, like the emergency aid to El Salvador, is
contained in a stopgap spending bill that also contains domestic funds.

Opponents of the aid to the rebels, or contras, said that it was intended to
undermine the Nicaraguan Government, but supporters said that it was merely
intended to prevent Nicaragua from exporting revolution and destabilizing its
neighbors.

''The whole purpose is to get stability in Central America so that there can be
a chance for democratic governments to work,'' said Senator Barry M. Goldwater,
Republican of Arizona and chairman of the Intelligence Committee.

Reagan Letter Is Read

The Senate acted after after the majority leader, Senator Howard H. Baker Jr.,
Republican of Tennessee, received a letter from President Reagan assuring the
Senate that the United States had no desire to overthrow the Nicaraguan
Government.

''The U.S. does not seek to destabilize or overthrow the Government of
Nicaragua,'' Mr. Reagan wrote.

Senator Baker read the letter aloud in response to concern expressed by Senator
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, that the President had indicated
another purpose for covert aid in an interview published last week in The New
York Times.

The President said in the interview: ''I see no dichotomy in our supporting the
Government, the democratic Government of El Salvador and the contras here - and
we made it plain to Nicaragua - made it very plain that this would stop when
they keep their promise and restore the democratic rule and have elections. Now,
they've finally been pressured, the pressure's led them to saying they'll have
an election.''

The President went on to say that there was nothing to indicate that this
election would be other than ''the kind of rubber stamp that we see in any
totalitarian government.''

Mr. Moynihan told the Senate that he agreed with Mr. Reagan's ''rubber stamp''
prediction, but added, ''If the Government there cannot be changed by elections,
how is it to be changed save by violent overthrow? That is a necessary if
unintended conclusion to be drawn from the President's statement yesterday.''

The Senator indicated tonight that he was satisfied by the President's letter.

Vietnam Issue Is Raised

The debate today reflected the Republicans' commitment to an assertive United
States policy in Central America, which they said was needed to counter Soviet
and Cuban efforts in the region, and Democrats' fears of a deepening United
States involvement in the region reminiscent of the American role in Vietnam.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, a Vermont Democrat and chief sponsor of the resolution
to bar United States troops in El Salvador, said that although the military aid
package was likely to be approved ''there is no majority mandate in this country
to have Americans fight and die in El Salvador.''

The Senator nevertheless predicted that ''American troops are going to go in and
fight in El Salvador, if not this year then next year or the year after'' if
President Reagan continued in office.

But Senator Nancy Landon Kassebaum, Republican of Kansas, said that such
predictions were ''almost demagogic.'' She opposed the Democrats' proposal as
''usurping the authority that does lie with the President as Commander in
Chief.''

The President's warmaking powers and those of Congress were a central issue in
the debate. Senator Goldwater said, ''We gave him and him only the right to send
troops.''

''To placate the Congress, we gave Congress the right to declare war,'' the
Senator continued. ''We can declare war every five minutes. But I don't think
the Founding Fathers ever had an idea that Congress would be involved with the
movement of troops.''

Some Democrats also opposed their party's proposal, adopted Tuesday by the
Democratic caucus. Senator David L. Boren, Democrat of Oklahoma, noted that with
the advent of nuclear weapons ''the Commander in Chief has only 15-20 minutes to
unleash massive amounts of power.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Reagan Gives Views On the Vietnam War

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 204 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


President Reagan said tonight that Gen. Douglas MacArthur was not allowed to
''lead us to a victory'' in the Korean War because of undue fears that the war
there would widen and indicated that similar constraints hampered the American
cause in Vietnam.

Mr. Reagan made his observation at the very close of his press conference while
offering an explanation of his views on the Vietnam War.

The President said he had long felt there should have been a formal declaration
of war against North Vietnam during the Vietnam conflict, which was instead
fought under a vaguely worded Tonkin Gulf resolution. ''We should have asked for
a declcration of war and called it a war,'' he stated.

When asked if such a declaration might not have ''widened the war and gotten us
stuck in an even greater quagmire,'' he said:

''I know that there was great concern about the possibility of the war widening
- just as there was in Korea, that prevented us from allowing General MacArthur
to lead us to a victory in Korea.'' ''Everyone thought that you have to fight a
war without winning it or you might find yourself in a bigger war,'' he said.
''Well, maybe General MacArthur was right, there is no substitute for victory.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT'S NEWS CONFERENCE ON FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC ISSUES Following is a
transcript of President Reagan's news conference last night in Washington, as
recorded by The New York Times:

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4894 words


OPENING STATEMENT

f821I have an important announcement: In two weeks I will send Vice President
Bush to Geneva to present to the 40-nation conference on disarmament a bold
American initiative for a comprehensive worldwide ban on chemical weapons.

Our proposal would prohibit the production, possession and use of chemical
weapons. The shortcomings of earlier chemical weapons treaties have been made
tragically clear in recent years.

Chemical weapons have been used against defenseless peoples in Afghanistan and
Southeast Asia and in the conflict between Iran and Iraq.

The use of these terrible weapons also has serious implications for our own
security.

The Soviet Union's extensive arsenal of chemical weapons threatens U.S. forces.
It requires the United States to maintain a limited retaliatory capability of
its own, until we achieve an effective ban.

We must be able to deter a chemical attack against us or our allies and without
a modern and credible deterent, the prospects for achieving a comprehensive ban
would be nil.

He Sees Verification Difficult


Our comprehensive treaty proposal can bring the day closer when the world will
prohibit all chemical weapons. But verification of a chemical weapons ban won't
be easy. Only an effective monitoring and enforcement package can insure
international confidence in such an agreement.

The United States is therefore developing bold and sound verification
procedures. This latest initiative reflects my continuing strong commitment to
arms control.

Our Administration seeks to move forward in several areas. I'm pleased, for
example, that the United States is also participating in a promising new
multilateral negotiation dealing with confidence-building measures in Europe and
in the recently resumed East-West talks on reducing conventional forces in
Europe. We're working closely with our NATO allies to try to make progress in
all these areas.

I can't report these promising developments however, without expressing my deep
personal regret that the Soviet Union still has not returned to the two
negotiations on the nuclear arms reductions - the Start and the I.N.F. talks
which it walked away from late last year.

The United States and many other countries have urged repeatedly that the
Soviets return to these talks. So far, they have ignored the will of the world.

I hope that the Soviet leadership will respond to our new initiative, not only
by negotiating seriously on chemical weapons but also by joining us in the
urgent task of achieving real reductions in nuclear arms.

And the Vice President's mission is a vital one and we wish him Godspeed.

And now, Helen.




QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS




Military Involvement


Q. Mr. President, Secretary of State George Shultz is advocating a wider - a
greater use of military force, a show of force, around the world, and also
preemptive strikes against potential terrorists. And this week you slammed the
door on negotiations for killer satellites, which could lead to an arms race in
space. My question is, how do these moves serve the cause of peace and do you
think that the country is really ready for wider involvement, military
involvement, around the world?

A. I don't think that George meant to imply anything of that kind, or that we're
going to get more militant or anything. I think he was trying to express to
those people who have been so concerned about arms and whether there's an arms
race and that is that your military strength is a definite part of diplomacy.
And I think this is what he was trying to explain. With regard to the space
weapons, this is a situation in which the Soviet Union is ahead of us; it
already has, and has in place, such a weapon.

We are still in a stage of studying such a thing. The great problem that we have
- and we're very willing to enter into a treaty with regard to outlawing such
weapons, except that it so far seems almost impossible to verify such a weapon
if not actually impossible. And if that's true, then we again must have a
deterrent.

Q. But Mr. President, you're one who always says nothing is impossible and
you're going to try on chemical weapons. Why don't you on the killer satellites?

A. Well, in both of them we're trying but, as I say, we have to face the reality
that before you can place any confidence in such a treaty you must be confident
that you have the one thing that the Soviets have been the most reluctant to
give in any treaties that we've ever or that we have with them, and that is
verification procedures.



White House Integrity


Q. Mr. President, more than a dozen members of your Administration have left
under some sort of a cloud, and this is what the Democrats are calling the
''sleaze factor.'' Are you concerned the voters might think there's a lack of
integrity in the people that you've hired, and how are you going to deal with
this as a campaign issue.

A. Well in the first place I reject the use of the word ''sleaze'' and I don't
think that it fits any situation that we have here. I'll repeat what I have said
many times before and over a period of years - I believe the halls of government
are as sacred as our temples of worship and nothing but the highest integrity is
required of those who serve in government. But at the same time I also respect
very much something that is very typically American, and that is you are
innocent until proven guilty, and we are having an awful lot - and have for the
past several years - of guilt by accusation, and I intend to protect that
particular American tradition and I would think that you would all feel a shared
responsibility in doing the same thing - that you're not guilty simply because
you've been accused.

Now I will be the first to remove anyone in the Administration that does not
have the highest integrity and I adhere to that. At the same time, however, I'm
not going to take any action that is based on accusation without proof and I'm
not going to take any action in any case for political expediency.

Q. Well is this all politics that's behind this, and if that's the case, why
have you let some of these people leave?

A. Well some of these people have simply - they have left on their own, and they
have left simply because they recognize that while they remain a part of the
Administration, the accusations and the charges will continue. Others have not
felt that way, and a great many have been cleared. But it's a strange thing that
their names keep popping up again by the same ones who were the first to throw
the accusations out.





Chemical Weapons


Q. Mr. President, with regard to your proposals to ban chemical weapons, isn't
this proposal another way to get Congress what they've failed to do for the last
three years, which is appropriate money for chemical weapons? And what do we say
if our adversaries accuse us of talking peace but preparing for war?

A. Well I don't think the accusation would stand up if they said that. The
situation is that we haven't produced any such weapons for 15 years. The Soviet
Union has a massive arsenal and is ahead of us in many areas having to do with
chemical warfare. Now if there is ever one place where there is an example of
the power of a deterrent force it is in the field of chemical weapons, and I
hand you World War II, when all the nations had them and no one used them, even
in the most desperate moments when defeat was staring at them because they knew
that the others had them and could use them in return.

The second thing is, if we're going to have a chemical warfare ban, or a treaty
banning them, you've got to have something to bargain with. and therefore, it's
just the same as it is with the other weapons. They must know that the
alternative to banning them is to then face the fact that we're going to build a
deterrent.



Impact of Cuts


Q. Mr. President, the Congressional Budget Office has just released a study on
the impact of your budget and tax cuts, the budget and tax cuts that have been
enacted since you took office, and it found that the poorest families lost the
most and the richest families gained the most. For instance, families earning
under $10,000 a year lost almost $400 and families earning over $80,000 a year
gained more than $8,000. Is that fair?

A. It not only wouldn't be fair but I don't think it's true. You know, as
Disraeli once said, there are lies, blankety-blank lies and statistics. When you
- we have a tax program that was a 25 percent cut across the board. Now that's
25 percent reduction in the tax burden of everyone. If you have someone whose
tax burden is $20 that cut means that they save $5 and they still owe $15. But
someone who owns a hundred times as much, pays 100 times as much tax, $2,000,
gets $500 but still owes $1,500. In other words, the progressivity of the tax
program stays the same so there is no way that the tax program could have
benefited someone at one end of the scale and not the other. It's based on
proportions.  The other thing is that makes me doubtful of those figures is what
we have done for everyone with regard to inflation. And here you do benefit the
people at the lower end of the scale more than you do at the top. Now the fact
of that is, someone at the beginning of 1979 with an $8,000 income, they were
about $500 or so above the poverty-level income. By the end of 1980, two years
later, with that same income they were some $500 below the poverty-level income
in purchasing power.

The figures - oh, maybe some of the things they were talking about is that in
our program - and it wasn't an executive order, it was passed by Congress and
signed by me - with regard to some cuts, for example in the Aid for Dependent
Children program, now every protection was made for all of those totally
dependent on welfare - there's some there million of them still there, there
were 943,000 families that were removed but they were families that had
considerable outside earnings plus their welfare grants. Now we were told when
we did this that, oh, these people would quit their jobs just to take the
security of being on welfare. Well, only a very few did and two-thirds of the
people that did not then sizably increased their actual earnings and became
independent of welfare.

Q. Mr. President, just to follow up, whatever the interpretation of this
particular report, are you concerned that the perception that your
Administration has been a friend of the wealthy at the expense of the poor is
going to be a political problem for you this year?

A. Well, I'm concerned about it, it's a political problem if people believe it
but there's absolutely no truth in it. It's probably the most glaring example of
political demagoguery that our friends have been engaging in. Yes, Sam?





Marines and Lebanon

Q. Mr. President, last October you said the presence of U. S. Marines in Lebanon
was central to our credibility on a global scale. Now you've withdrawn them and
terminated our presence in the M.N.F. So to what extent have we lost credibility
worldwide?

A. We may have lost some with some people, but situations change, Sam. It was
true when I said that, but I can, I think, explain, and I'll try to make it as
brief as I can, what the situation, or what the change was.

We, and three of our allies, our four Governments decided that in an effort to
straighten out the situation that was so out of control in Lebanon that we would
send in a combination force, a multiple force, not to participate in a war, but
to be on hand to help provide stability while the Lebanese were allowed then to
create a government.

You will remember civil war had been going on there for about 10 years. And at
the time this was decided, the Israelis were at the border of Beirut, the P.L.O.
10,000 to 15,000 of them were fighting from within the heart of Beirut, the
Syrians were also involved. The idea was that if a government could be created
in Lebanon, and then we could help them re-create their military and the foreign
forces withdraw, then as their military moved out into the areas previously
occupied by the foreign powers to hopefully pacify some of the internecine
fighting groups, the militias that were fighting each other as well as the
official forces of Lebanon. But the multi-national force would be a kind of a
stable peacekeeping force behind keeping order while they went out to do their
job, because they wouldn't have the manpower to do both. Now this was the task.
The first success was the leaving Lebanon of some 10,000 to 15,000 P.L.O., who,
up until then, were unwilling to surrender, even though they faced defeat,
because they feared a massacre at the hands of those that were fighting them.
So, with the multi-national force there to guarantee against that, they were
ushered out.

Now the government was formed, of Lebanon, the same government that today is
negotiating, and has been holding meetings in Geneva and elsewhere to bring
about a peaceful settlement. We did train, and there was no attention paid to
this - our Army had a unit in there training the Lebanese military, and
equipping them, and made a very capable military. What did happen, the
deterioration, when Syria insisted on staying in and backing some of the rebel
radical forces there, was that with religious and ethnic differences, some units
of the army refused to take up arms against some of their same ethnic background
or religious background.

Now, the Government of Lebanon went forward then in trying to bring together the
kind of a consensus government of the radical elements and all, and take them
into a broadened based government. In the meantime, because the multi-national
force had been successful, to that extent, it was determined by those who don't
want that kind of a solution in Lebanon, but they had to put the pressure on to
get our forces and the others out. And with the terrorist attacks that brought
such tragedy, our forces dug in, but once dug in, while this was offering
security to them from the kind of attacks they'd been subjected to, they were no
longer visible as the kind of force they were supposed to be. And so with
agreement with our allies, we redeployed. Some of them redeployed to other
areas. But then as these efforts went forward on their own for peace, it was
agreed that there was no longer any point in the four Governments keeping their
forces there. And we withdrew.

We are still engaged diplomatically with anything that we can do to help, and
there are those in the area who say that they doubt that there can be any
solution or peace without our help. And so we'll do that.



Placing the Blame

Q. If I may, you began your answer by saying we lost some credibility. Are you
to blame for that, or like Secretary Shultz, do you blame Congress?

A. I have to say this, Sam, and then I'll move on another subject. I have to
say, that this was one of the things, and they must take a responsibility, when
you're engaged in this kind of a diplomatic attempt and you have forces there,
and there is an effort made to oust them, a debate as public as was conducted
here, raging with the Congress demanding, Oh, bring our men home, take them
away. All this can do is stimulate the terrorists and urge them on to further
attacks because they see a possibility of success in getting the force out,
which is keeping them from having their way. And it should be understood by
everyone in government that once this is committed, you have rendered them
ineffective when you conduct that kind of a debate in public.




Salvador Proposal


Q. Mr. President, the Senate today unanimously adopted a proposal to withdraw
U.S. military aid from El Salvador if the government there is overthrown by a
military coup. Some people have suggested that might happen if Mr. Duarte is
elected. Do you support the proposal that passed the Senate today, and would you
veto it if it came to your desk?

A. Well, I'm not going to talk about whether to veto it or not, but I think here
again this is not helpful in what we're trying to accomplish, and I think it's
something that I just don't think they should be doing at this time.

Q. Does that mean you don't support it, sir?

A. No. Chris?

War Powers Act


Q. I'd like to follow up on Sam's question if I could, Mr. President. Secretary
of State Shultz says one of the problems in Lebanon is the War Powers Act and
that Congress is always meddling in foreign policy that neither our foes nor are
friends know who's in charge. How much of a problem do you have with the War
Powers Act and would you like to see a Supreme Court test of whether or not it's
constitutional?

A. Well there's been no talk of such a test or doing anything of that kind but,
Chris, I do have to say this: In the last 10 years, the Congress has imposed
about 150 restrictions on the President's power in international diplomacy. And
I think that the Constitution made it pretty plain way back in the beginning as
to how diplomacy was to be conducted. And I just don't think that a committee of
535 individuals, no matter how well intentioned, can offer what is needed in
actions of this kind or whether there's a necessity. Do you know that prior to
the Vietnamese War, while this country only had four declared wars, Presidents
of this country had found it necessary to use military forces 125 times in our
history.

Q. Let me, if I could follow up on that - people do cite Vietnam where
Presidents waged an undeclared war for years, and they say with the War Powers
Act that's going to continue?

A. Well, I'll tell you, Chris, this is a time for me to say, 'I told you so.'
For a long time - even before I became Governor, I was saying that the war in
Vietnam had reached a position, or a state, in which we should have asked for a
declaration of war and called it a war.





Prayers in School


Q. Mr. President, while you were lobbying for the school prayer amendment
recently, the gist of one of your arguments was that Congress should pass it
because polls showed the American people were overwhelmingly in favor of it.
Public opinion polls, sir, also show that Americans favor stricter control
handgun sales and an immediate verifiable U.S.-Soviet nuclear freeze. In light
of that and in light of your argument, do you see any change in your position on
these two issues?

A. No, I don't. And I think that calling attention to the fact that the
overwhelming majority of the people favored prayer being permitted in schools
was a logical thing to say to the Members of Congress, when I was trying to get
that amendment passed. My only regret is that the debate was never on the real
issue. I don't know how to explain it. But for them to sit there and debate,
hour after hour, as they did, that somehow we were asking for prayer to be
mandated on schools - we were asking nothing of the kind, quite the contrary we
were asking that the Constitution be restored to neutrality, with regard to
religion.

The Government is - can neither be an advocate of, nor a controller of or
preventer of the practice of religion. And all the amendment would do is say if
someone wants to pray in schools they can, under the Constitution. And then we
did add some provisions that no one could mandate, no one could write or prepare
any prayer for them. And they didn't debate that at all.

They debated openly - all the time - in spite of a few people trying to bring
them back on track, that no, this would be a Government mandate that the schools
the very next day would have to wake up and say, 'alright, how are we going to
plan the prayers.'

Well, I was in - I told many of the Congressmen I was in more elementary schools
than most people. My father moved around a great deal. I was in five of 'em
before I got out of eighth grade, And I don't recall there ever being in a
mandatory or a prayer session in any of the schools. But we all knew that prayer
was not denied in schools.

Q. But sir, if I could just follow up. I understand your disappointment - the
Senate debate and the vote - but I guess what I'm trying to ask you is why are
the public opinion polls a valid argument for the school prayer amendment, which
you do favor, and not a valid argument for the handgun control and the nuclear
freeze issues, which you do not?

A. Well, there are methods of handling it. I have always preferred a different
method, with regard to handguns and one that we used in California.

In California, knowing that the wrong people would probably never have any
problem getting a gun and the law-abiding citizen would be denied the right to
have one, we simply passed a law that said that anyone who commits a crime - is
convicted of a crime - and had in his or her possession a gun at the time of the
commission of the crime, whether they used it or not, add 5 to 15 years to the
sentence, by virtue of their having carried or - carried a gun in the commission
of a crime.

You'd be surprised how effective it became.




Mining Off Nicaragua


Q. Mr. President, recently the U. S.-backed opponents of the Sandinista regime
have gone beyond their warfare on land to mining ports off the Nicaraguan coast.
Are you concerned that these mines there, which neutral freighters or others
could hit, run a risk of widening the war in Central America? And do you think
there's any point at which we ought to try to call a halt to the activity of the
Contras?

A. No, our interest in Nicaragua - I'm not going to comment on that one way or
the other, or the tactics that are used in a war of that kind - our interest in
Nicaragua is one and one only: The present government of Nicaragua is exporting
revolution to El Salvador, its neighbor, and is helping, supporting and arming
and training the guerrillas that are trying to overthrow a duly elected
government. And as long as they do that, we're going to try and inconvenience
that government of Nicaragua until they quit that kind of action.

Q. I'd like to follow up, sir. We are training troops down there in Honduras. Do
you see, from your perspective, a danger of a wider war in Central America at
this point?

A. No, I think these maneuvers are something we've done before. Theyre not
something unusual or aimed at anyone down there. They are combined exercises
that we hold with our own units, and when one unit goes through some of these
and gets the training we send another one down to do the same thing and that's
all they are is war games.



Relations With Japan


Q. Mr. President, until recently your Administration had handled trade disputes
with Japan with relatively little public fanfare, but over the last few days
three of your Cabinet members and several other Administration officials have
spoken out publicly and firmly in criticizing Japan. Why the change in strategy?

A. Well, there is not a change in strategy, it's just talking frankly about
what's going on. It's like any government with its various interests and its
bureaucracies and so forth. We're not making as much progress as we would like
to make with regard to the things that I had discussed in Japan with Prime
Minister Nakasone and here at the Williamsburg summit. I know where he stands
and I know that he sincerely and honestly wants better trade relations and some
of the obstacles removed that are impairing free and fair trade between us. But
then there are other elements and they're subject to political pressure and
public opinion pressure the same as we are in our own country. And I think what
you've been hearing is some complaints about those who are trying to negotiate
these things. Jimmy?

Q. Mr. President, you mentioned the public pressure. Is there any difference
between your position on these trade disputes and the position of the Democratic
Presidential candidates?

A. Well, I'm not going to comment on them other than to say that I think there's
a difference with them on almost everything. Jerry?






On Lamm's Remarks

Q. Mr. President, some people might say that you're a man whose approaching the
golden years, and I'd like to know what your reaction is to Governor Lamm of
Colorado who said that some elderly people have a duty to die and get out of the
way and fall like leaves to provide humus for the younger generation. What is
your reaction to that statement?

A. Well, I think I was as shocked as anyone was to hear such a statement. I
since, however, have seen reports that that was not exactly the way it was said
and that he was referring outright to terminal cases of the kind that have been
under so much discussion over recent years of someone who had a very limited
time and was, for example, in a coma and simply being artificially kept alive -
that this is what he was talking about. I don't know. All I know is the way the
stories were carried, I have not had anyone fill me in on the actual case and
how he said it. And having been interpreted incorrectly myself sometimes, I'm
not going speak out until I know.





Middle East Talks


Q. Mr. President, you've been saying recently that you're trying to encourage
moderate Arab leaders to join the Middle East peace process yet King Hussein,
the key moderate Arab, seems to have shut the door rather firmly. In view of
that, what is your future course regarding your '82 peace plan and how do you
intend to try to remove the obstacles on that course?

A. That continues to be our plan and I believe that King Hussein still feels and
believes that he would have to be an important part, being the next- door
neighbor to Israel, in bringing about such negotiations. And I continue to
believe in this; this is the answer, it's what started us from the very
beginning in the Middle East, to continue the Camp David process, to persuade
other nations to do what Egypt did in making that peace.

At the present moment, you have a group of Arab nations who still are of that -
haven't ever retreated from their position that Israel does not have a right to
exist as a nation, and we're trying to persuade them that we can be even-handed
and that we're not trying to dictate any peace of any kind but we simply want to
be of help if we can, an intermediary, in bringing about a negotiation that will
erase the issues and the problems that have kept them apart so that they can
settle back and live in peace together. And we're going to continue to do that.
Dean? Then I'll take you.



Soviet Exercises


Q. Mr. President, the Soviet Union is currently engaged in perhaps its largest
military exercise ever in the Atlantic Ocean - an exercise that involves some 40
vessels including submarines, destroyers and a nuclear- power battle cruiser. I
wonder if you could tell us what you think the Soviet Union is up to in all of
this?

A. I think it's spring in Russia as well as in the United States, and that's
when you have war games and maneuvers. We've been having some of our own. We
always tell them when we're going to have them. We wish they'd tell us. But I
think this is nothing more than that.

Your war games are actually, whoever is conducting them, based on your own
thoughts as to what contingencies could arise that would find you in an
emergency situation, so you set up to train or practice for that. Some 40 ships,
I know, sounds like an awful lot, but when you stop to think that we're talking
about a navy of almost 1,000 ships, it kind of comes down in size a little bit.

No, I think these are regular and routine maneuvers that usually begin in the
spring of the year for most of us.

Q. You don't think that the Soviet Union is trying to send us any particular
signal?

A. No, I really don't. Nor are we trying to send them a signal with our own war
games.



Declaring War


Q. Mr. President, getting back to your earlier statement that you felt for some
time that we should have declared war during the Vietnam period. Against whom
would we have declared war and if we had done so, wouldn't that have widened the
war and gotten us stuck into an even greater quagmire?

A. Well, I could only say, with regard to that, I said that at a time when it
was going on because of what was going on here in our own country, in which none
of the rules of warfare could apply with regard to lending comfort and aid to
the enemy.

Who we would've declared war against would've been a country, North Vietnam. The
settlement of French Indochina created two nations, South Vietnam and North
Vietnam. They were two separate nations. In fact, back through history they had
pretty much been separate countries before.

You say that because of the situation at the time whether I would still feel the
same way or not, I know that there was great concern about the possibility of a
war widening - just as there was in Korea, that prevented us from allowing
General MacArthur to lead us to a victory in Korea. Everyone thought that you
have to fight a war without winning it or you might find yourself in a bigger
war.

Well, maybe General MacArthur was right, there is no substitute for victory.

Q. Thank you Mr. President.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

On the Record ;
Jackson on Foreign Policy

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 436 words


From a speech in Philadelphia yesterday to the World Affairs Council:

Instead of learning from their mistakes, the leaders of this country have
decided to invest more and more money in the arms race. Since 1980 the military
budget has grown 60 percent in real terms. Programs for meeting human needs have
declined from 14 percent to 10 percent of the Federal budget at a time of
increasing unemployment and misery.

If Reagan has his way this year, the military budget will be as great as it was
in real terms during the Vietnam War. Hart and Mondale are not far behind him.
Reagan calls for a 1.9 trillion dollar military budget over the next 5 years,
Mondale for a 1.8 trillion budget, Hart for a 1.6 trillion.

They all call for increasing it. I believe that we should decrease it. We must
learn the lessons of Vietnam. We cannot have guns and butter. We do not need
dangerous destabilizing weapons systems. We do not need the hungry, the
homeless, the unemployed walking the streets of America.



We should not try to protect our jobs with unfair, unjust immigration policies.
They represent no solution to the problems of plant closings. The workers who
see their jobs exported to the Philippines, to Korea, to Honduras, to Haiti and
Guatemala cannot afford a foreign policy that props up right-wing dictators who
torture trade union organizers in their own lands. The interests of working
people in our own land will be far better served by a foreign policy that
promotes the development of other nations than by desperate attempts to shore up
our economy with ''content legislation'' and restriction to trade.



The only thing that will improve the efficiency of our industry is a decision to
invest in it, to reverse tax policies that encourage mergers and disinvestment,
a decision to stop pouring our nation's resources into defense spending and to
put them into rebuilding our nation's industries and cities, into developing our
most precious resource, the minds of our children.



When we change direction in foreign policy, in domestic policy, everything else
falls into place. It becomes easy to renounce the first use of nuclear weapons
because we have a policy for peace - a policy that makes sense, a policy that
can guarantee our security as a nation. It is because they do not have such a
policy, because they do not call for any real change in direction, that my
opponents cannot even renounce the first use of nuclear weapons, one step that
even former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara thinks is a critical step toward
reducing the danger of nuclear war.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rev. Jesse Jackson

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 5, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HERS

BYLINE: By Phyllis Rose

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 1; Home Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words


A FRIEND asked me to explain why she had seen ''Coming Home'' eight times.
''Coming Home'' is the film in which Jane Fonda plays the wife of a macho Marine
officer. While he is serving in Vietnam she falls in love with a disaffected
Vietnam veteran, paralyzed from the waist down. I asked my obsessed friend if
she had liked ''Jane Eyre'' and if she was aware of the appeal of a wounded man.
She saw the connection.

Charlotte Bront"e, in her 1837 novel, spoke to the female fantasy of caring for
a wounded man. Jane Eyre, an unloved orphan, works as governess in the gloomy
mansion of the mysterious and attractive Edward Rochester. They fall in love
and, against all odds, he proposes marriage. At the altar dreadful news is
revealed: Mr. Rochester already has a wife and a legally binding marriage.
Although his wife is insane he may not remarry. Jane Eyre flees the intended
bigamist and finds herself a home elsewhere. But she can't get Rochester out of
her mind and returns to him to find that his wife has started a fire in which
she herself has been killed, the house destroyed and Rochester blinded and
maimed. He and Jane live happily ever after.

Why is the conclusion of ''Jane Eyre'' so satisfying? What is the nature of the
wounded man's appeal to women? Is it a sadistic desire to see men suffer?


Luis Bunuel's film ''Belle de Jour'' provides an even more upsetting version of
the fantasy of the wounded male (this is the best film I know about several
female sexual fantasies). Catherine Deneuve plays an upper-class Parisian
married to a successful surgeon. She seems to have everything - looks, money, a
terrific husband - but apparently she wants something else, for she takes a job
working afternoons in a brothel. One of her clients, a gangster, follows her
home and shoots her husband in an attempt to get her for himself. But ''Belle de
Jour,'' demurely dressed in black, stays by her crippled and blinded husband.
She looks disturbingly happy as she pilots his wheelchair around their elegant
apartment.

Is she glad her husband is hurt? Or is she glad she's now the pilot? I'd suggest
that in ''Belle de Jour,'' ''Coming Home'' and ''Jane Eyre,'' the man's injury
encourages a redistribution of power between a man and a woman. The women take
to it.

Let me give another kind of example. John L. Michela, a Columbia University
psychologist, discovered to his surprise that marriages generally improve after
husbands suffer heart attacks. In a 1981 study, he interviewed married couples
about a year after the husbands had had heart attacks and found that most of the
couples reported that the marriages had improved. Professor Michela concluded -
blandly, I think - that ''marriages can get better if you learn that you love
your partner and your partner loves you.''

I'd suggest that his findings are another mystery best solved by invoking the
fantasy of the wounded man. I'd suggest that the husbands' illnesses initiated a
change in the balance of power between marriage partners. Initially the women in
the study were ''anxious, angry, depressed,'' no doubt resenting the unfamiliar
position of responsibility into which their husbands' misfortunes had thrust
them. But many seem eventually to have found new sources of vigor and
satisfaction in the situation.

Many marriages still assume that the woman is the weaker partner and the man her
protector. But women, like other human beings, have formidable resources of
strength that they rejoice in deploying and not all of which are mobilized by
taking care of children. Some women may need permission to be strong and to take
pleasure in their own strength. The illness of their male partners may give them
this license to thrive.

On the other hand, some men may have to be in some way disabled to reconcile
themselves to their wives' power. A striking finding in the study of
contemporary couples by Philip Blumstein and Pepper Schwartz (''American
Couples,'' William Morrow, 1983) is the intensity with which men resent and are
made uncomfortable when their wives earn more money than they do. This tangible
sign of their wives' power is a blow to their masculine identity. But if a man
is ill or wounded he too may have permission to enjoy his wife's strength and to
allow himself some weakness. If it's a drag for women to always have to be weak,
it must be equally a drag for men to always have to be strong.

A man's wounds can be metaphorical - handicaps, in the sense in which golfers
are given handicaps to equalize tournaments. Men have been expected to enter
marriage with a surplus or advantage: they were supposed to be older, taller,
richer and more successful than the women they married. Women were supposed, in
every way, to look up to the men they married. The absence of one of these
advantages - height, age, money, success - constitutes a handicap as I am using
the word. Power has always been appreciated as a turn-on to women, but the
absence of power in a man may be equally attractive. Short men, poor men,
younger men, flops may all have their allure to women because of - not despite -
their handicaps.


It may seem amusing that I include youth as a handicap for men. What I mean is
that people still regard it as a violation of the natural order of things when a
woman marries a younger man. Consider all the fuss about Mary Tyler Moore's
marriage at the age of 45 to a 29-year-old doctor. If a 45-year-old doctor
married a 29-year-old actress would anyone give it a second thought? Our uneasy
response to such matches reveals how traditional are our assumptions about power
in marriage.

We don't like to talk about the element of power in relations between a man and
a women. Just the opposite. The more power is at issue the more we tend to talk
about love. Perhaps that's why marriage has always been draped in so much
romantic folderol. The engagement ring, the wedding dress, the bridal showers,
the honeymoon, the rhetoric of love may all be seen as taking a woman's mind off
how much she's giving up. Personally I'd welcome a moratorium on the word love,
which blurs so many distinctions, and on romantic plots, which make it seem that
the chief good and goal of a woman's life is finding a man to look up to.

The popularity of the film ''Educating Rita'' could be a sign that there are
others like me who enjoy antiromantic treatments of relations between men and
women. The professor who educates Rita, enabling her to move beyond her limited
life as a hairdresser, goes to Australia at the end. She does not go with him;
she does not devote herself to helping him recover from alcoholism. He has
helped her to have better things to do.

The fantasy of the wounded male can be seen as women's revenge against men for
the disabilities imposed on them by marriage. I prefer to see it as a reflection
of women's desire to be strong and to release men from the burden and
responsibility of unwavering strength.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SANDINISTAS' FOES AND EL SALVADOR WIN A SENATE VOTE

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1469 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 5


The Senate approved $61.75 million today in new emergency military aid for El
Salvador and $21 million in funds for Nicaraguan rebels.

The vote was 76 to 19, with 53 Republicans and 23 Democrats supporting the
Administration-backed compromise bill.

Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut was the only Republican to join 18
Democrats in opposing the aid package, among them Senator Christopher J. Dodd of
Connecticut.

All four senators from New York and New Jersey voted for the bill.

Strong Opposition Predicted

The passage of the legislation was regarded by many Administration supporters as
an important, although anticipated, victory for President Reagan after his
recent defeat on efforts to have a school prayer amendment to the Constitution
passed in the Senate and after delays on his nomination of Edwin Meese 3d, his
White House counselor, to become Attorney General.

Nonetheless, Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. gave fresh warning today that the
Central American aid legislation would face strong opposition when it moved to
the House of Representatives, where many Democrats have said they prefer to
await the outcome of the next round of presidential voting in El Salvador before
approving more American aid to that country.

''I am opposed to any military aid,'' he told reporters. ''I am against further
money to Nicaragua and funding for El Salvador.'' From the context of his
remarks and his past positions, it was clear Mr. O'Neill was talking about the
Nicaragun rebels and not Nicaragua itself. The Speaker But he acknowledged that
the House Democratic leadership was divided on the issue and that the majority
leader, Jim Wright of Texas, favored more aid to El Salvador.



Stiff Senate Opposition

Last year majorities in the House voted against a bill to provide aid to
Nicaraguan rebels, channeled through the Central Intelligence Agency. In the
last three days of Senate debate the Nicaraguan part of the aid package
encountered stiffer opposition and ran into more Republican defections than the
Administration's request for more aid to El Salvador.

Before the final vote today, the Republican majority rejected the two attempts
by Democrats to impose conditions on aid to the Nicaraguan rebels and United
States American military construction in Honduras. The Democrats argued on the
ground that creeping American involvement in the region would draw the United
States toward military intervention.

With Republicans accusing liberal Democrats of ''election-year snake oil,'' the
Republican leadership picked up five crucial conservative Democratic votes to
defeat a proposal by Senator Carl Levin of Michigan to bar aid to any Central
American group ''which is known by the U.S. Government to have as one of its
intentions the violent overthrow'' of a Central American government.

In the 50-to-44 vote, Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, Republican of New York, was
the only senator from New York, New Jersey or Connecticut who voted to kill the
amendment. The other five senators from the region supported it. the bill.

Senator Levin asserted that his amendment merely tried to embody the policy of
the President, who reaffirmed in a letter to the Senate majority leader, Howard
H. Baker Jr., on Monday that the United States ''does not seek to destabilize or
overthrow the Government of Nicaragua; nor to impose any particular form of
government there.'' Mr. Levin he said the amendment would also ''emphasize the
sincerity of our stated policy.''

The only Republican to speak against the proposal was the Republican whip,
Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska, who charged that this was yet another effort by
the Democrats to cut off all aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.

'Execution of 8,000 People'

''This is an amendment that will bring about the execution of 8,000 people who
have sought tht to put pressure on that fantastic base of military power in
Central America,'' he said. ''I talked to those partisans. There is no question
they would like to overthrow their Government. They would not get any money
under this amendment.''

But, Quoting the President's letter, he said insisted that the overthrow of the
Sandianista regime in Nicaragua Government was not the Administration's goal.
objective.

His argument brought a rebuttal from Senator Daniel K. Inouye, the Hawaii
Democrat who worked out the compromise on the level of aid to El Salvador.
Without the Levin amendment, he contended, United StatesAmerican backing for
Nicaraguan rebels would violate the charter of the Organization of American
States and the guideliness of Congressional intelligence committees.  ''What I
am trying to say, very simply, is that we cannot have a document saying we are
against murder and provide money to someone else to commit murder,'' Senator
Inouye said. ''We would be responsible for that act.'' Likewise, if we know that
the contras are out to overthrow the Government of Nicaragua, we have no
business providing funds to that group.''

This afternoon the Senate voted even more narrowly, 50-to-44, against a proposal
by Senator Jim Sasser of Tennessee that sought to prevent the Defense Department
from using United StatesAmerican- built installations in Honduras for anything
but military exercises or training sites or to upgrade or convert those
installations into permanent bases, without Congressional approval.

Last of Dozen Proposals

This was the last of more than a dozen proposals from Democrats over the lpast
two weeks to try to delay, diminish or limit American aid to Central America
over the past two weeks on the ground that the United States was being drawn
into deeper involvement in that region.

At one point today, Senator John P. East, a conservative North Carolina
Republican, accused the Democrats of beging naive about the East-West power
struggle going on in Central America.

''They are niggling and nitpicking and nipping at the heels of anything that
would seem to offer serious resistance to the expansion of Soviet power in our
own hemisphere.'' ,'' he declared. ''People say, how many Vietnams can you
afford? I say, how many Vietnams can you afford to lose?''

At one point during today's debate, Senator Stevens said:

''There's not one single fighting man of the United States in Honduras involved
in combat. ,'' added Senator Stevens. ''This has been a training zone. One of
the most cost- effective things we are doing is in Honduras. I just can't
understand an attept to make Honduras into Vietnam. This is snake oil for a
political year.''

In response, Senator Sasser asserted that he was not drawing a parallel between
Honduras and Vietnam but was disturbed that the Reagan Administration will have
built or have access to 14 separate military installations by the end of the
Ganadero I exercises now under way.

WASHINGTON, April 5 (AP) - Following is the 76-19 roll-call today by which the
Senate approved $61.7 million in emergency military aid for El Salvador and $21
million to assist guerrillas fighting the leftist government of Nicaragua.

On this vote, a vote for was a vote to approve the funds, while a vote against
was a vote not to approve them.

FOR THE BILL - 76

Democrats - 23 Bentsen, Tex. Boren, Okla. Bradley, N.J. Bumpers, Ark. Byrd,
W.Va. Chiles, Fla. Dixon, Ill. Eagleton, Mo. Ford, Ky. Heflin, Ala. Hollings,
S.C. Huddleston, Ky. Inouye, Hawaii Johnston, La. Lautenberg, N.J. Long, La.
Moynihan, N.Y. Nunn, Ga. Pryor, Ark. Randolph, W.Va. Sasser, Tenn. Stennis,
Miss. Zorinsky, Neb.

Republicans -

53 Abdnor, S.D. Andrews, N.D. Armstrong, Colo. Baker, Tenn. Boschwitz, Minn.
Chafee, R.I. Cochran, Miss. Cohen, Maine D'Amato, N.Y. Danforth, Mo. Denton,
Ala. Dole, Kan. Domenici, N.M. Durenberger, Minn. East, N.C. Evans, Wash Garn,
Utah Goldwater, Ariz. Gorton, Wash. Grassley, Iowa Hatch, Utah Hatfield, Ore.
Hawkins, Fla. Hecht, Nev. Heinz, Pa. Helms, N.C. Humphrey, N.H. Jepsen, Iowa
Kassebaum, Kan.  Kasten, Wis. Laxalt, Nev. Lugar, Ind. Mathias, Md. Mattingly,
Ga. McClure, Idaho Murkowski, Alaska Nickles, Okla. Packwood, Ore. Percy, Ill.
Pressler, S.D. Quayle, Ind. Roth, Del. Rudman, N.H. Simpson, Wyo. Specter, Pa.
Stevens, Alaska. Symms, Idaho Thurmond, S.C. Tower, Texas Trible, Va. Wallop,
Wyo Warner, Va. Wilson, Calif.

AGAINST THE BILL - 19



Democrats - 18 Baucus, Mont. Biden, Del. Bingaman, N.M. Cranston, Calif. Dodd,
Conn. Exon, Neb. Glenn, Ohio Kennedy, Mass. Leahy, Vt. Levin, Mich. Matsunaga,
Hawaii Melcher, Mont. Metzenbaum, Ohio Mitchell, Maine Pell, R.I. Proxmire, Wis.
Riegle, Mich. Sarbanes, Md.

Republicans -

1 Weicker, Conn.

NOT VOTING - 5Democrats - 5 Burdick, N.D.  DeConcini, Ariz.  Hart, Colo.
Stafford, Vt.  Tsongas, Mass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Senators Ted Stevens and Jim Sasser

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ESSAY;
DENIABLE WARFARE

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section A; Page 35, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 794 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


The national security adviser invited the Media Movers and Shakers (Thumbsucking
Division) to a non-lunch in the Roosevelt Room of the White House the other day
to tout a rare event: at week's end, President Reagan will deliver a serious and
thematic foreign policy address.

The button-eyed apparatchik who was doing the briefing (and whose pretentious
demand for anonymity reveals a craving for the limelight) could make Lincoln's
Second Inaugural sound tedious. Even so, it is noteworthy that Mr. Reagan,
playing catch-up policy-enunciation ball in the fourth quarter, has decided to
supplement his weekly radio diatribes with a series of substantive half-hour
speeches.

Weighty speeches require heavy thinking and deserve a load of analysis.
Television's coverage-by-snippet often distorts the speaker's message, but
public figures who make the effort to explore the underpinnings of policy should
receive a hearing.

Earlier this week, without fanfare, Secretary of State George Shultz delivered a
reasoned exposition of what he sees as four related challenges in foreign
affairs. These are:

(1) Recognizing the rise of state- sponsored terrorism as a threat to our
interests; (2) mixing diplomacy with the credible threat of force in countering
an aggressor's use of terror; (3) evoking a moral purpose in the painful and
perhaps bloody support of allies under duress; and (4) establishing
''accountability without paralysis'' in the Congressional oversight of the
President's power to threaten or to use military forces.

That is an original formulation of the problem facing a muscle-bound power in
the new era of deniable warfare. Let's deal with the parts about diploforce and
accountability.

Secretary Shultz, a former marine who was profoundly affected by the attack on
the Marine barracks in Beirut, holds that the writers of the Long Commission
report on that defeat - who differentiated between ''diplomatic alternatives''
and ''military options'' - fundamentally misunderstood the relationship between
power and diplomacy.

''Sometimes, regrettable as it may be,'' he writes, ''political conflict
degenerates into a test of strength. It was precisely our military role in
Lebanon that was problematical, not our diplomatic exertion.'' Because the
Syrians knew our military staying power was weak, our diplomacy had no chance to
work.  I think he's wrong on the example and right on the principle. American
forces should never have been sent to Lebanon to stop the Israelis from crushing
the P.L.O. and reestablishing a pro-Western state. But when it came to making
the best deal we could before getting out, our diplomats surely were hamstrung
by the public anxiety of the dovecote in the Pentagon.  The Weinberger Joint
Chiefs, traumatized by Vietnam, want to undertake only Grenada quick-fixes that
require no public patience. ''The need to avoid no-win situations,'' writes Mr.
Shultz in a passage that applies well to Central America, ''cannot mean that we
turn automatically away from hard-to-win situations that call for prudent
involvement.'' Might does not make right, but right has little chance without a
mighty friend ready to use its might. A Shultz point is that the credible threat
of retaliatory force, which has worked on the nuclear level in the cold war,
should be one tactical response to the new deniable war.  What if Americans
accept this hard-line approach - what controls should apply to Presidential
power? The War Powers resolution sets deadlines that Secretary Shultz thinks
''practically invite an adversary to wait us out. Our Commander in Chief is
locked in battle at home at the same time he is trying to act effectively
abroad.'' The noise of Congressional and media criticism need not be
debilitating, as Mr. Nixon showed in 1969, and President Reagan cannot serenely
call for partisanship to end at the water's edge at the same time he is slashing
at Democrats for counseling ''surrender.'' ''Congress has the right, indeed the
duty,'' Mr. Shultz grants, ''to debate and criticize. . . . But micro-management
by a committee of 535 independent-minded individuals is a grossly inefficient
and ineffective way to run any important enterprise.'' The pendulum has swung
too far away from Presidential primacy in the conduct of foreign policy,
especially against deniable war. On that, I agree with Mr. Shultz: In foreign
affairs, Congress's power is the power to restrain, not to act; when Congress
takes the reins, restraint goes unrestrained, and enterprises of great pith and
moment lose the name of action.  Ain't speeches stimulating? Now even the
President will mount the bully pulpit to tell us why he has been doing what he
is doing. That's what is so good about election years.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM TRANSCRIPT OF DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES' DEBATE

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4739 words


Following are excerpts from a transcript of a Democratic Presidential debate
last night in the David Lawrence Convention Center in Pittsburgh, as recorded by
The New York Times through the facilities of Cable News Network.

The participants were Senator Gary Hart, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Walter F.
Mondale. The moderator was Elizabeth Drew of The New Yorker magazine.

The participants were Senator Gary Hart, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Walter F.
Mondale. The moderator was Elizabeth Drew of The New Yorker magazine.


Panel Discussion



Future of Party



Mrs. DREW: There is a central issue in this campaign, it seems, of where the
Democratic Party ought to be going from here. What do you think the direction of
the Democratic Party, the new direction of the Democratic Party, ought to be
from here, and how do you differ on this from your opponent?

Mr. MONDALE: I see three central essential objectives in dealing with our
nation's future. The first is to lead the world toward a safer world. This means
policies that will get those God-awful nuclear weapons under control. I favor a
freeze, I favor a broad range of initiatives that will move us toward arms
control. It means electing a President who knows both the dangers and the
complexities of the world - who understands that American foreign policy must be
undergirded by our values and by understanding and respect so that we have the
leadership necessary in the world. Secondly, I think it is clear that America
must have sound, effective, tough new economic policies that restore the
competitive edge of our economy so that the jobs, the future and the prosperity
are here and not elsewhere. And finally, we must have a President who insists on
restoring the fundamental fairness that's so basic to American values. That
means the enforcement of laws against discrimination, the protection of our
senior citizens, a fairness across the whole range of American life and a
President who understands that he's been elected by the people to serve the
people.



Mr. JACKSON: The great challenge of our party and our nation today is to alter
the misery index. Under Mr. Reagan there are now 8 million more people in
poverty, 3 million more children. Now 15 percent of our nation, the richest
nation in the history of the world, is in poverty - 34 million people, at the
present rate 41 million by the end of this year. Because they cut back in the
Head Start program for impoverished children, they cut back on breakfast
programs, they cut back in lunch programs, they cut back in food stamp programs,
they cut back in job development and job training.

One mission of our party is to protect our children in the dawn of life. It's so
much cheaper to feed the child than to jail the man or to jail the woman; so
much cheaper to feed that child and educate that child than to incarcerate that
child as an adult in jail. We have some obligation to begin to build houses
again - there's a tremendous crisis in public housing. Economic revitalization
affecting the misery index.

On the other hand, under this Administration the danger index is on the rise.
We've now lost the lives of your young men in Honduras, in Grenada, in Lebanon;
surely, we must go another way. Our party, therefore, must have an obligation to
fight for a peace policy and not a war policy. We can, in fact, go another way.

If we impact the misery index, the poor will support us. If we impact the danger
index, those who feel threatened by war will support us. Beyond us there's a new
Democratic constituency. I mention 53 percent female, 50 percent of our nation -
or 50 percent of our party is female, 70 percent of all poor children live in a
house headed by a woman. The women, the wives -

Mrs. DREW: Excuse me, Mr. Jackson -

Mr. JACKSON: Hispanics, the Latinos, the poor, that's the wave of our future.

Mr. HART: I believe each of us here are here on purpose, and that is because
each of the three of us fundamentally share the basic ideals and goals of the
Democratic Party. Otherwise, we would not have ended up as the finalists for our
party's nomination in this critical year. It has been suggested that perhaps
there are degrees of commitment to civil rights and to the fundamental rights of
human citizens in this country and abroad; I don't see that difference. I think
Fritz Mondale, Jesse Jackson and I are all equally committed to those
fundamental values and goals of equality, of social justice, of opportunity for
all of our citizens.

This is a critical period of change in this country. I'm a Democrat not only
because of those fundamental ideals and principles but because to achieve them
our party has always been willing to change in periods that required change. The
theme of my campaign of new leadership is one that addresses a new generation of
problems. The sweeping revolutions that have brought this country into the
international marketplace in the 70's, that have transformed our own economy
from one principally based on manufacturing to one increasingly diverse requires
new ideas and new proposals. That's what Franklin Roosevelt did; that's what
President Kennedy did; that's what our other great Democratic leaders have done.

That's why I put so much emphasis on addressing the new problems of the 1980's
and not going back to the old policies of the past that are not working. We've
lost the confidence of the majority of the voters in this country; to regain it
we must convince them that we are prepared to govern this country. To do that,
we must put forward proposals that do in fact address the real needs of this
nation and the world.



Mrs. DREW: Spell out what you see as the differences among you as to where the
party ought to go from here.

Mr. MONDALE: One point of major emphasis in my campaign has been to focus
attention on a development in American life that I think is now crying out for
solution. And that is over the last several years a rising precentage of women
who used to stay in the home are now working. And the life that they face is one
that is often very discriminatory. Often they are paid unequally for the same
work that they perform compared to a man - as a matter of fact, often
dramatically so. They are often discriminated against period becuase we haven't
ratified the Equal Rights Amendment. There is a growing tragic phenomenon known
as the feminization of poverty, where women working on marginal incomes find
that they're actually being punished for work and for not going on welfare and
their children as well.

I want to be the President who breaks the ice in that issue and finally achieves
justice for the women of this country.



Mr. JACKSON: To me the matter is an issue of priorities, to where our stress
lies. I've stayed in the homes of the poor in the projects, in the ghettos, in
the el barrios. Because the democracy does not work for the people at the
bottom, it fails a litmus test that it really must work.

Last night I lived in the home of Mitch and Mary Marcos Hualgos here in
Homestead, Pa. These are people who simply lost their jobs; they want to work.
The plant closed on them without notice. Their ideas as to how to save it, their
ideas were not solicited. Their jobs were taken to slave labor markets abroad.

Somehow we must solve their problem. That's really where the crisis lies. I am
convinced that if our party, as a matter of emphasis, is willing to cut down on
the waste, fraud, abuse concept towards our military budget and move toward a
peace economy, as opposed to a war economy, we can rebuild these 50,000 bridges,
create a new demand for steel, create a new demand for housing, for health care
and for jobs. And that becomes the central issue: Put America back to work.



Mr. HART: I think we are at a crossroads, as I said, and I think that happens
both domestically and internationally; here at home and abroad. Our party is
struggling over where we go from here. And there are two schools of thought. One
of those is that the way to put Pennsylvania steelworkers back to work is item
by item, or case by case, bail-outs or hand- outs, or Bandaids. Others of us
believe very strongly, particularly those of us who have come into office more
recently, that we need industrywide policies. I think that is the major
difference in our party. And secondary is the - are the lessons of Vietnam. We
haven't touched on foreign policy. I think there's also a struggle in our party
over what those lessons were and how to save young American lives from
unnecessary involvement abroad and still meet all of our commitments to our
allies.



Mrs. DREW: When you talk about revitalizing industry, beyond the fact that, as
you say, you want to get industry, labor and Government around the table and you
want to retrain workers, and you say that it should be industrywide, the
question I have, and I think a lot of people have, is which industries or
companies would you revitalize? Any of them that are in trouble or how would you
decide?

Mr. HART: No, I don't think the President of the United States, and I'm talking
about Presidentially negotiated agreements among those parties, can go into
every industry in America. There are what I think the experts and the economists
call keystone industries. Steel is certainly at the top of that list. Autos,
machine tools, perhaps farm implements or one or two other basic industries that
not only employ a lot of people and dominate the economies of states like
Pennsylvania and the whole region, but also have tremendous spill-over effects
in their supplier industries as well.

So when you put steel back on its feet, you're putting back hundreds, if not
thousands, of other businesses at the same time. I'm talking about the President
getting the management of the American steel industry in the Oval Office, the
United Steelworkers, and private capital and literally negotiating a compact or
agreement that has duties and obligations and rewards for every party. And that
is what will get the capital to modernize its plants and equipment and train its
workers, but only under the condition that every dollar of that private loan
went into those purposes; not mergers, not conglomerations, not acquisitions,
where tens of billions of productive dollars are gone.

Second, workers would be guaranteed jobs in modern and efficient steel mills in
exchange for deferring wage demands or conditioning them on profitability or
productivity of that industry. And private loans will be induced to go into
those industries by Presidential leadership and guidance and Federal loan
guarantees if necessary. But that would be a costly industry. Not a company at a
time; not a bailout here or a hand-out there - the entire American steel
industry.



Mrs. DREW: Are there certain industries or companies you would allow to let go
though? How would you make these decisions?

Mr. HART: I don't think this country can be a leading economy in the world or an
industrial power without a steel industry, without an auto industry, without a
machine tools industry, and perhaps all political leaders and economists and
others could agree on two or three other industries. We cannot - we cannot let
our smokestack industries go off shore. Those are central to this nation's
national security. And the President must tell the American people steel is key,
autos are key, machine tools are key, if for no other reason to re-employ
unemployed people and to defend this country. I think that's a very easy
decision to make, but you can't, as I said, go into every industry in this
country and do the same thing.

Mr. MONDALE: The question on jobs. There's no question in my opinion, that this
nation cannot tolerate the disappearance of fundamental basic industries like
steel. The question is how do we restructure them in a way that they can be
competitive and be healthy again. The most key issue is of course bringing those
deficits down. Cause the deficit doubles real interest rates and that is just
like a dagger in the heart of basic industry and it's one of the reasons that
Pennsylvania suffers 11 percent unemployment because like so many other
Midwestern states, including my own, it is basic industry.

Secondly, we need a realistic trade policy. This just academic talk while other
nations undermine our legitimate posture in international trade must change and
be headed by a President who knows the difference.

Finally, I don't know what Gary Hart thinks about Chrysler, whether that's one
of those ad hoc things. But I helped save 600,000 jobs and restored an auto
industry to prosperity and I am very proud of that.

Mrs. DREW: The former head of the Congressional Budget Office says that there is
no way the deficits can be got hold of unless there is a surtax and a freeze on
cost-of-living increases in entitlement programs. Do you think she's wrong?

Mr. MONDALE: What I don't understand is the Social Security Trust Fund
Commission that is estimating a surplus in the Social Security Trust Fund in the
90's. Every person I've talked to believes that. I do not believe; in other
words, I know what those seniors are going through. They're living on nickels
and dimes. They are anxious about whether this bargain we made with them will be
kept. And there's a lot of things we can't afford, but I for one am not going to
pick on those old folks; theyre entitled to secure retirement.

Mrs. DREW: In the past year, about a half-dozen major reports on education have
all agreed that we've got to improve the quality of teaching. What would you do
to improve the performance of teachers in the schools?



Mr. JACKSON: It's not just the quality of the teacher, it's also the quality of
parenting. The teachers give the homework; parents must have the children home
to do the work. The teachers have the best of intentions and children their -
teachers have the best of intentions and give homework and children watch a
national average of five hours of TV a night, and if there're able to choose
entertainment over education then the best of teachers cannot save them.

We need an increasing opportunity for teachers who have more discipline and are
more determined, but I I have not found that to be the real crisis. We need more
adequate funding so that we can appeal to the most aggressive and perhaps our
best minds to keep teaching. But there is really a crisis in effort, and to me
that is a real critical factor in this whole arrangement. We must increase the
quality of teaching and parenting.

And lastly, this is the first generation where by age 15 has watched 17,000
hours of TV and more radio than that. Which means that mass media quantitatively
has more access to our children's minds than home, church and school combined,
and qualitatively it penetrates deeper. To that extent, if media has 15,000
hours and school 11,000 hours and church 3,000 hours, there must be an
appreciation that education involves parents, mass media, teachers and church.
Education is a community affair, not just a teaching affair.



Candidates' Questions



Mrs. DREW: Each of the candidates is going to ask each other a question. In this
round they will ask each other questions on domestic policy.

Mr. MONDALE: Reverend Jackson, as you know Pennsylvania now has 11 percent
unemployment. This is the worst trade year in American history. It is estimated
now that we may well import $120 billion more than we export. Three years ago we
had a commercial trade surplus; somewhere between three and four million jobs
have or will be lost as a result. America's market shares are shrinking
tragically, and the future of our economy is heavily tied up with competitive
dominance and international affairs. Things are getting worse. That's why I've
called for a strong aid policy. What do you think we should do?

Mr. JACKSON: Now, after that term-paper question, I'm going to try to give a
post-card answer. Number one is the issue of fair trade versus free trade. I
believe in free trade but also the issue of fair trade. When other governments
will subsidize their industries to protect their workers' jobs, and our
Government becomes insensitive to saving vital industries, then we are in a very
difficult competitive posture. As a matter of fact we cannot complete; that's
why at some level bailing Chrysler out made good judgment of a temporary gesture
because our Government has some obligation to save workers to keep them as tax
producers as opposed to tax consumers.

So one part of protecting that - of moving from that deficit, is our Government
must be sensitive enough to keep us in a competitive posture, so we have fair
trade as well as free trade. On the other hand, so long as we have the high
interest rates, we're going to have the dollar so high that we will not have
investment here. We're going to have high interest rates as long as you have the
large deficit; you'll have the large deficit as long as you keep raising the
military budget.

And to that extent we have some obligation to really look at the ability to cut
cost overruns in the military budget; looking at $150 billion a year we've
handed to Japan and Europe 40 years later. I submit we can cut that budget
without cutting our defense and that will reduce deficits, that will reduce
interest, that will give us a greater ability to compete in the world, and at
that level we're moving in a futuristic way because we're not hiding behind
content legislation, we're going forward with aggressive competition.



Mrs. DREW: The next question is by Mr. Jackson to Mr. Hart.

Mr. JACKSON: I've planned this all week! The real difficult question: Would you
enjoy beating Mr. Mondale?

Mr. HART: What a question!

Mr. JACKSON: On a more serious note, the crisis as I see it is workers - 140,000
unemployed in the Allegheny area here - and plants are closing on workers
without notice, the workers never have a chance. They even have a tax incentive,
some of these plants, to close and therefore leave the American worker high and
dry. What would you do in terms of a tax approach that would take away the
incentive to close plants on workers in this economy and transport those jobs
abroad, or to acquire and merge and leave the workers still out.

Mr. HART:.  It's a very important question not only for this state but, I think,
throughout the industrial area of this country. Two things have to be done: tax
incentives to export jobs have to be canceled whether it's foreign tax credits
or aspects of the program that actually reward American companies for taking
their manufacturing and their jobs abroad. Second, we have to have tax laws that
only provide tax reductions for corporations that invest their own tax profits
in the modernization of their own plants and the training of their own workers.
We cannot have these across-the-board corporate tax cuts which lead to tens of
billions of dollars going into unproductive mergers and conglomerations, and
abandoning hundreds of thousands of workers.

I think there has to be a national plant closure law in this country that at the
very least provides notice to communities, provides notice to workers,
authorizes workers if necessary, or to come up with alternative financial
arrangements or try to devise some means of keeping that plant open through new
financing, and at the very least give the community and the workers in that
plant a chance to transition to something else.

That's one reason why I've put forward the idea of an individual training
account so that when workers are dislocated they have some financial means to
fall back on and they do not end up out in the street and leaving their families
and their homes right up in the cold. We are one of the least humane societies
in the world in terms of how we treat our workers and that has to be reversed,
and it will not be reversed under Ronald Reagan.




Mrs. DREW: If you were President right now, what would your policy towards the
Philippines be? I'll begin with Mr. Jackson.

Mr. JACKSON: My policy would never be to negotiate away human rights as a
measurement of our relationship. We need bases in the Philippines and we need
our self-respect in the Philippines.

That Government, if it remains in a state of tyranny as it is now, does not
deserve our support. We have no right to determine the quality and the kind of
that government by propping up a dictator and propping up tyranny. We can
protect our interests there without involving ourselves in the internal affairs
of that government.

I would reduce aid and use aid as a method to help humanize that society.
Because we do not do that, there will be a long range rebellion and revolution.
If we do not make the adjustment now, we'll be on the wrong side of that
revolution.

When the people rebel, seeking to be measured by one set of human rights rules,
it is inevitable. We should not make the mistake in the Philippines that we have
made in Nicaragua. It is inevitable that there will be a change there. We should
be on the right side of history.

Mrs. DREW: A quick follow-up, Mr. Jackson. If you had to choose between keeping
the bases and being friendly with the regime, which would you choose?

Mr. JACKSON: At this point, if I had a choice, I would never negotiate away
human rights, even for the base. I do not think our options are that limited. We
have enough leverage to deal a bold hand. And we ought never negotiate away that
ability.

They need the bases to protect themselves as well as we need the bases to
protect ourselves. But we, more than anything else in the world today, we need
our self-respect. And we cannot keep our self-respect embracing dictators.

Mrs. Drew: Mr. Hart.


Q. Same question.

Mr. HART : Same answer. Well, it is unfortunate that this country has gotten
itself in the fix it is. Not only there, but in South Africa and a lot of other
places, particularly under this Administration, but also even before 1980.
Reverend Jackson's exactly right. Mr. Marcos needs us as badly as we need him
and in fact, I think politically and economically, he needs us more. And he is
not going to kick us out of that country or close those bases down. His economy
would collapse and he would have to flee to some foreign capital that's more
hospitable to him.



Mrs. DREW: Thank you very much. I must ask you also to keep your questions brief
if you do want to get your closing statements in. The next is a question from
Mr. Jackson to Mr. Mondale.

Ties to South Africa



Mr. JACKSON: South Africa represents a great source of shame in the world today.
It operates as if it were a democracy, but, of course, blacks have to have pass
books. There's racial oppression. They have nuclear capability. Westinghouse,
from this town, is aiding them with their nuclear capability which threatens the
entire human race. And then, beyond that, South Africa, of course, becomes a
great recipient of jobs because it's a slave labor market. What would you do to
break off or change that relationship with South Africa and therefore make it
compatible with America's highest and best values?

Mr. MONDALE: This gets back to the earlier question about human rights. The
practice of apartheid in South Africa is exactly the way you described it. It is
vicious. It is profound. It is an insult to human rights and to our values. We
tried for years to get them to change. I think we now have to start turning the
screw tighter and tighter. I have made several suggestions of what I would do.
Number one, I would expand the restraint which now embargoes arms to cover all
police equipment. Secondly, I would support, I think it is the Bill Gray
amendment, which would prohibit any new investments by American businesses in
South Africa. Third, I would support the IMF provision which would prohibit any
international loans to South Africa. Next I would prohibit the sale of
Krugerrands into the United States. I would finally, if that didn't make any
progress, prohibit the flights of South African airlines into the United States
and begin to work multilaterally to make it known that our country cannot stand
by and permit this profound abuse of human dignity to continue.



Mrs. DREW: Thank you. Now we'll have the closing statements. So that you all do
get to complete them, I'm afraid we have to shave them a bit more briefly. There
will be a minute 15 seconds so everybody gets their chance. We begin with Mr.
Mondale.

Mr. MONDALE: Last evening, along with most Americans, I watched the President's
news conference. I thought I saw something happening that we've seen happen too
often before. That President is getting detached from what's really happening in
our country. He said his tax and his budget policies were fair and we know
better. He said his policies were controlling arms and we know better.

I've been in that White House, and you need somebody as President who keeps a
sense of reality and stays close to the American people. If the President is not
careful, he can start inhaling the royal treatment he receives - the stewards,
the White House, the trumpets, Camp David. It's very intoxicating, and with a
little bit of trouble a President can very quickly think that the state of the
nation can be judged by the condition of the Rose Garden.

Look for somebody who knows the difference, who knows what it's like to be
unemployed, to be unfairly taxed, to see your children not get a decent
education, to watch your jobs go overseas, to retire and worry about that Social
Security, to be discriminated against because of race or for other reasons. Get
a President who remembers that it was the people who put him there.




pick up 2400 add DEBATE TEXT




Mr. JACKSON: As I have participated in this debate tonight, April 4, 1968, Dr.
King was assassinated. Tonight we sit here, April the 5, 16 years later, in so
many ways that was a crucifixion 16 years ago and a period of mourning and
riots, explosion and tragedy. And tonight a moment of resurrection, a new life
and new possibilities.

In some sense, I must express my gratitude to our nation for I represent the
element that once had the challenge to pick cotton and now we can pick
Presidents and make a directional difference.

It is significant that tonight the issue is not a new generation, it's a new
direction, a new direction.

To share our ticket with a woman is the right direction.

To cut the military budget and move to the peace policy is the right direction.

To train our youth to end the slums and rebuild America is the right direction.

A high production economy to rebuild 50,000 bridges in the country and build
hospitals and houses, the move towards an economy away from workfare and welfare
to one of self- respect is the right direction.

When I had the challenge, a few months ago, to go to Syria to try to get
Lieutenant Goodman, it reinforced in my mind that our strength as a nation is in
developed minds, not in guided missiles.

I didn't believe that Goodman should come home, I went and got him. Diplomacy
does work. Let's choose peace.

Mr. HART: I grew up in a working- class household where neither of my parents
were able to finish high school. I helped to earn my way through school working
on the railroads of Kansas and Colorado.

Unlike many of my generation, I was attracted to public service and commitment
to this country by a President 25 years ago named John Kennedy. That President
challenged our generation as I would like to challenge this generation to commit
to this nation a new path and a new vision under new leadership that understands
the changing times in which we live.

This country cannot rebuild its steel mills and rebuild this economy of this
great state of Pennsylvania, put ourselves on the path to full equality, social
justice and opportunity for our citizens, unless and until we have a President
who understands these changing times, who represents that new leadership, who
stands upon the basic convictions and values of the Democratic Party and who
offers to this country new hope and promise because of those ideals and because
of those solutions. Thank you very much.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Hart, Jesse Jackson and Walter F. Mondale

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By William E. Farrell and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 891 words


General Stays on Top

President Reagan has decided to

reappoint Gen. John W. Vessey

Jr. to a second two-year term as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the
highest military post. Although the new term will not begin until mid-June, the
White House is expected to announced the action within the next few days.

General Vessey is one of the last active Army leaders who served in World War
II. He received a battlefield promotion, from first sergeant to second
lieutenant, on the Anzio beachhead in Italy. He did not earn his college degree,
from the University of Maryland, until he was 41 years old and a lieutenant
colonel. He won the Distinguished Service Cross as a battalion commander in
Vietnam.

The White House decision to give General Vessey the maximum legal term as
chairman, four years, indicates that his record has the full support of the
President and the Secretary of Defense, Caspar W. Weinberger. General Vessey was
reportedly opposed to sending the Marines into Lebanon but was overruled.

The Korean Airliner

The parents of Rebecca Beal

Scruton, a Connecticut woman who was killed when a South Korean airliner was
shot down by a Soviet jet fighter over Sakhalin Island last September, are going
into Federal District Court in Washington with an unusual legal argument.

In a $5 million lawsuit to be filed today, Robert and Mary Beal of Del Rio,
Tex., are suing the Soviet Union, as well defendants named in an earlier series
of actions, on behalf of other victims. They charge that Sakhalin Island was
United States property under the treaty with Japan after World War II, and thus
the Russians had no right under international law to protect it, with fighter
planes or otherwise.

The Beal suit will also seek damages from the United States, Korean Air Lines
and the manufacturers of the airliner and its navigation equipment, all of whom
are already in court in lawsuits resulting from the episode that claimed 269
lives.

Mrs. Scruton was a 28-year-old widow living in Meriden, Conn., who left two
children, aged 2 and 6. She was on her way to visit her parents, who were living
in South Korea.

Gems at the Smithsonian

With a kind of ostentatious understatement, the Smithsonian Institution is
calling the centennial party for its National Gem Collection this evening
''Baubles, Bangles and Beads.''

The display of the Hope Diamond and a supporting cast of large and dazzling
gemstones is one of the museum's most valuable and popular attractions, drawing
about four million viewers last year.

For the occasion, the National Museum of Natural History is making two major new
additions: the 182- carat Star of Bombay sapphire, given by Mary Pickford, and a
318-carat black Australian opal, the Dark Jubilee.

When the collection first appeared in 1884, it consisted of two flat- topped
exhibition cases whose contents had been assembled from 38 years of
miscellaneous donations for the New Orleans Exposition. The greatest growth in
large and valuable stones has come since Harry Winston, the New York jeweler,
contributed the Hope Diamond in 1958; it was mailed to the museum, insured for
$1 million in transit.

John S. White Jr., curator of the gem collection, says the present collection is
not insured because the premiums would be prohibitive and ''the money is better
spent on first-class security.''

A Greater Grandparent

Clement E. Conger, the White House and State Department curator, sat down this
week and calculated that George Washington's grandparents on his mother's side
had been the curator's great-great- great-grandparents, or one more generation
removed than he had been quoted as saying earlier in this space. The original
reference prompted a correspondent to estimate that Mr. Conger must be ''at
least 100, possibly 200 years old.''

Mr. Conger says cheerfully that he is a mere 71 and that inserting one more
''great'' into his lineage could account for a considerable span of time,
because his family is unusually long-lived, its generations averaging 35 years
rather than the conventional 20. His mother lived to 103, her father to about 90
and her great-grandfather to 92, he said with some satisfaction.  Simplify,
Simplify

Although Tom Murawski went on duty at the White House last year, spreading the
insidious doctrine of simplicity, his assignment escaped public attention.
Perhaps the White House regarded it as too close to revolutionary.

Mr. Murawski is the White House Adviser on Clear Government Writing. He is on
leave from the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs, where he has taught
English for nearly two decades.

Although he is officially an aide to the President, his principal duty in
Washington consists of giving a one- day course in better writing to senior and
middle-level Government officials. He estimates that he talks to 2,000 or 3,000
people every week.

Mr. Murawski says he tries to eliminate conspicuously bad usage from Government
prose, rather than starting with the declarative sentence. Among his targets are
long sentences, unnecessarily large words, the passive voice and legalisms.

He says he has not been overwhelmed by the enormity of government language.
''There's really some pretty good writing coming out of Washington,'' he said,
''but it goes unnoticed, like the absence of pain.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOODS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 929 words


DEMOCRACY. By Joan Didion. 234 pages. Simon & Schuster. $13.95.

''I KNOW the conventions and how to observe them,'' the character named Joan
Didion writes in one of her many asides to the reader about the kind of fiction
that her new novel, ''Democracy,'' is turning out not to be. ''I know,'' she
writes, ''how to fill the canvas I have already stretched; know how to tell you
what he said and she said and know, above all, since the heart of narrative is a
certain calculated ellipsis, a tacit contract between writer and reader to
surprise and be surprised, how not to tell you what you do not yet want to
know.''

''I appreciate the role played by specificity,'' she continues. ''I mean
specificity of character, of milieu, of the apparently insignificant detail.''
She could give you those details. ''I could definitely do that,'' she assures
us. But she hasn't the time or the inclination to write that sort of fiction,
under the circumstances. Like her sinister hero, Jack Lovett, and her
publicity-scarred heroine, Inez Christian Victor, ''I no longer have time for
the playing out.''

''Call this a travel advisory,'' she continues in one of her typical single-
sentence paragraphs.

''A narrative alert,'' she adds.


This is actually not a bad strategy on Miss Didion's part - this thrust and
parry with the reader, this breaking into the narrative with remarks such as
''Call me the author'' and ''Let the reader be introduced to Joan Didion, upon
whose character and doings much will depend of whatever interest these pages may
have.'' It creates the illusion that journalism instead of fiction is going on
in the pages of ''Democracy,'' and that is good, because on the evidence of her
first six books at least, Miss Didion has always been more sure-footed as a
reporter (''Slouching Towards Bethlehem,'' ''The White Album,'' ''Salvador'')
than as a novelist (''Play It as It Lays,'' ''The Book of Common Prayer'').

But what is it that has distracted her from the familiar conventions? What is so
shocking that she no longer has time ''for the playing out''? Can it be the
fatuousness of her heroine's politically liberal husband, Harry Victor, former
Representative, Senator and Presidential candidate, whose ''phantom
constituency'' was ''based on comfort and its concomitant uneasiness''? One has
to doubt it, for as acid a portrait of a 1960's liberal as this picture of Harry
Victor may be, it is hardly the first of the species to have blundered onto Miss
Didion's stage.

Is it murder, then, that has knocked her narrative props from under her - the
shooting by Inez Victor's father, Paul Christian, of his daughter Janet (Inez's
sister) and her lover, Representative Wendell Omura from Honolulu? It may just
be, but if it is, then Miss Didion remains alone in finding it so ominous. She
has a little too much fun with the decline and fall of the Christian family. As
models of WASP degeneracy, the Christians are merely amusing caricatures.

Surely, she can't be dumbstruck by her heroine's discovery of ''the long view.''
''By 'the long view' I believe she meant history,'' Miss Didion writes of Inez
Victor, who ends up, in ''a state of rather eerie serenity,'' running a refugee
camp for children at Kuala Lumpur in Malaysia. Or more exactly, Miss Didion
continues her speculation, Inez meant, ''the particular undertow of having and
not having, the convulsions of a world largely unaffected by the individual
efforts of anyone in it, that Inez's experience had tended to deny. She had
spent her childhood immersed in the local conviction that the comfortable
entrepreneurial life of an American colony in a tropic without rot represented a
record of individual triumphs over a hostile environment. She had spent her
adult life immersed in Harry Victor's conviction that he could be President.''

Or maybe it's the corruption that has taken Miss Didion's breath away, and
snapped ''the long spell of suspended judgment in which a novel is written''?
Maybe it's the corruption surrounding Jack Lovett, who understands ''the
assistance effort'' in Vietnam to be ''a specifically commercial enterprise''
and is concerned with ''the whole skein of threads necessary to transfer the
phantom business predicated on the perpetuation of the assistance effort.''

I think we are getting close to it now. Miss Didion does seem mightily impressed
with the corruption. Or maybe it isn't corruption, but her idea of how democracy
is managed. In any case, she is greatly taken with the language of the fix and
the deal. Her dialogues are cadenzas of smart talk, in which the participants
are continually assaulting one another with their cool and deadly wit.


But there may be less behind it all than meets the eye. Miss Didion quotes
Wallace Stevens's ''Of Mere Being'' - The palm at the end of the mind, Beyond
the last thought, rises In the bronze distance, A gold-feathered bird Sings in
the palm, without human

meaning, Without human feeling, a foreign

song.  - as everyone weary with Western rationalism seems to be doing these
days. She also gives us God in the form of a series of atomic explosions. ''The
light at dawn during those Pacific tests was something to see,'' says Jack
Lovett to Inez Victor at the beginning of ''Democracy.''

''Something to behold,'' Jack Lovett adds.

''Something that could almost make you think you saw God.''

But in the aftermath of the brilliant glare, Miss Didion gives us little more
than shadows. What she is portending with these blasts turns out to be mostly
fashionable gestures of despair.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Joan Didion

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT ASSAILS CONGRESS OVER USE OF FORCES ABROAD

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 1364 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


President Reagan criticized Congress today for what he said was its reluctance
to support the use of military force to advance foreign policy goals.

In a speech here, Mr. Reagan said that Congressional second-guessing on the use
of force had already undermined American diplomatic efforts in Lebanon and
Congressional wavering had encouraged ''enemies of democracy'' in Central
America.

The President's remarks were the latest in an intensifying series of
Administration complaints that Congress bears considerable responsibility for
recent foreign policy problems. The criticisms, aimed at Congress in general and
Congressional Democrats in particular, began after the withdrawal of the marines
from Lebanon last month. Then, on Tuesday, Secretary of State George P.  Shultz
called for closer foreign policy collaboration between Congress and the
Administration, and on Wednesday Mr. Reagan said Congress ''must take a
responsibility'' for American setbacks in Lebanon.



Call for Consensus

Both Mr. Reagan and Mr. Shultz have expressed their concern in the context of
calling for ''a bipartisan consensus'' in the formation of foreign policy. A
senior Reagan aide explained today that this meant that once a foreign policy
was set, Congress should not publicly attack it, but express members' concern
privately.

In his speech today, before a national leadership forum of Georgetown
University's Center for Strategic and International Studies, Mr. Reagan said
many legislators believed they were ''still in the troubled Vietnam era.'' He
assserted that they saw their role only as ''vocal critics, not responsible
partners in developing positive, practical programs to solve real problems.''

The President, while calling again today for a ''bipartisan consensus in support
of U.S. foreign policy,'' at the same time offered a partisan criticism of the
Carter Administration. Alluding to Mr. Carter's policies, Mr. Reagan vowed that
''we will not return to the days of hand- wringing, defeatism, decline and
despair.''



The Democrats Respond

His latest criticism of Congress drew rebuttals from several Democrats,
including Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Senator Robert C. Bird of West
Virginia, the minority leader, and Senator Edward M. Kennedy. Mr. Kennedy, who
led the losing fight in the Senate to block approval of emergency military aid
to El Salvador, said the speech was ''an outrageous attempt to blame Congress
for his own failures in foreign policy.''

''I regard Ronald Reagan as the most dangerous President of the nuclear age,''
he said in explaining his refusal to back Mr. Reagan's military buildup and his
other policies.

Mr. Reagan's speech today broke no new ground in foreign policy.  Robert C.
McFarlane, his national security adviser, said the address was meant to lay the
groundwork for speeches on more specific issues.



The Timing of Criticism

Mr. McFarlane originally briefed reporters with the understanding that he not be
identified. But Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, inadvertently
identified Mr. McFarlane as the briefer today during his regular news
conference.  In outlining what he said was the President's thinking on the role
Congress should play, Mr. McFarlane said that ''full and open debate and
criticism is fine'' before a policy decision was made.

But once a decision has been made, there should be only ''full and private
criticism,'' Mr. McFarlane said. He said this could take the form of
confidential letters to the President and private meetings with him.

In his remarks on Tuesday, Mr. Shultz said there were so many restrictions
imposed by law on the President's ability to act that they hampered creation of
an effective national policy.

The Role of Military Force

Mr. Reagan, continuing that criticism today, said that ''military force, either
direct or indirect, must remain an available part of America's foreign policy.''

''But clearly, the Congress is less than wholly comfortable with both the need
for a military element in foreign policy and its own responsibility to deal with
that element,'' he said.

''If we are to have a sustainable foreign policy, the Congress must support the
practical details of policy, not just the general goals,'' he said. ''We have
demonstrated the capacity for such jointly responsible leadership in certain
areas. But we have seen setbacks for bipartisanship, too.''

He said that after agreement was reached with Congress last October on a joint
resolution to keep the marines in Lebanon for 18 months, ''the subsequent
second-guessing about whether to keep our men there severely undermined our
policy.''

Mr. Reagan was speaking of the debate begun by House Democrats in January on
withdrawing the marines after publication in December of the Long commission
report. That report, sponsored by the Pentagon, criticized the sending of
marines to Lebanon and said more attention should be paid to diplomatic efforts
to withdraw them.

The debate in Congress, he said, ''hindered the ability of our diplomats to
negotiate, encouraged more intransigence from the Syrians and prolonged the
violence.''

The Effect on Syria

Mr. Shultz has said that once the debate began, Syria concluded that the marines
would be withdrawn because of opposition in the United States and it thus had no
need to force the Druse or Shiites in Lebanon to make any political concessions
to end the turmoil there.

''Similarly, Congressional wavering on support'' for the Kissinger commission
report on Central America, which calls for large increases in aid, ''can only
encourage the enemies of democracy who are determined to wear us down,'' Mr.
Reagan said.

''Presidents must recognize Congress as a more significant partner in foreign
policy making, and, as we have tried to do, seek new means to reach bipartisan
executive-legislative consensus,'' he said. ''But legislators must realize that
they, too, are partners. They have a responsibility to go beyond mere criticism
to consensus building that will produce positive, practical and effective
action.''

Mr. Reagan said that ''we must restore bipartisan consensus in support of U.S.
foreign policy.''

''We must restore,'' he said, ''America's honorable tradition of partisan
politics stopping at the water's edge, Republicans and Democrats standing united
in patriotism, and speaking with one voice as responsible trustees for peace,
democracy, individual liberty and the rule of law.''

Problems Since the War

Virtually every President has had problems in foreign policy with Congress,
given the balance of powers written into the Constitution. But in the immediate
postwar years, administrations were able to work out compromises with the
leaders of Congress to help insure passage of important foreign policy
legislation.

Senator Arthur H. Vandenberg, the Republican leader, is often credited with
helping President Truman obtain passage of legislation permitting the United
States to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and providing enormous
military and economic aid to Europe through the Marshall Plan and to other
countries fighting Communist threats.

Likewise, President Eisenhower was able to work out arrangements with Senator
Lyndon B. Johnson, the majority leader, that insured passage of key legislation.
By the time Mr. Johnson was President, however, the ability to work out such
arrangements with Congressional leaders had broken down over Vietnam.

Today, Mr. O'Neill, who on Thursday accused Mr. Reagan of being responsible for
the deaths of the marines in Lebanon, said the President ''has no credibility on
Lebanon and no credibility on bipartisan foreign policy.''

He said that Mr. Reagan had made his reputation ''and advanced his political
career'' not by being ''a bipartisan supporter of our foreign policy, but as
perennial critic'' on matters ranging from the strategic arms limitation treaty
to the Panama Canal to Vietnam.

When asked about Mr. Reagan's record in opposition to bipartisan foreign policy
achievements, Mr. McFarlane said, ''I think there's been a certain evolution in
his thinking.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Edwin Meese, Robert C. MacFarlane and Michael K. Deaver (page
6)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT VS. CONGRESS

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


President Reagan's speech today began as what the White House described as an
attempt to define a constructive bipartisan relationsip with Congress on foreign
policy. But it has set off one of the sharpest confrontations between the Reagan
White House and Congress.  Administration officials said the wrangling may
therefore make it harder than ever for Mr. Reagan and Congress to achieve
cooperation in this election year on such issues as the Middle East, Central
America and relations with the Soviet Union.

White House aides said they had no hope or expectation of softening the
criticism on foreign policy aimed at Mr. Reagan from the Democratic Presidential
candidates.

But in the coming weeks Mr. Reagan is going to have to win Democratic votes if
he expects to win passage for new funds for the MX missile and increased
military spending, as well as aid to El Salvador and to rebels in Nicaragua.
There were signs today that those and other measures were in greater jeopardy
because of the reaction to Mr. Reagan's comments.

In his speech today, Mr. Reagan charged that attempts by Congress to assert
itself had undermined United States influence and interests around the world.
Amplifying what he said at his news conference Wednesday, Mr. Reagan charged
that ''second guessing'' on Lebanon had ''severely undermined our policy''
there.

In response, leading Democrats used some of their harshest terms to accuse Mr.
Reagan of bad faith. The Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., said Mr.
Reagan ''has no personal credibility'' to seek bipartisanship because, accord to
Mr. O'Neill, the President had not been candid with Congress on Lebanon or other
issues.

This evening White House officials expressed dismay at the turn of events.

For at least a month, the White House officials said, Mr. Reagan had planned to
give an address on the historic problems of Congress seeking to exercise its
prerogatives in foreign policy. A recent flurry of difficulties on Capitol Hill
for Administrative initiatives gave the speech some urgency, White House aides
said.

There was some conciliatory language in the speech, such as Mr. Reagan's
statement that ''Presidents must recognize Congress as a more significant
partner in foreign policy making.'' But the plea for bipartisanship may have
been undercut by sharp attacks on critics of his policies.

Mixes Appeals With Reprimands

Warning against ''simplistic solutions'' in dealing with Moscow, for example,
Mr. Reagan said ''bipartisanship can only work if both sides face up to
real-world problems - and meet them with real-world solutions.'' He then
appealed for support of increased military spending.

At another point, regarding Central America, Mr. Reagan said: ''I welcome a
debate. But if it is to be productive we must put aside mythology and uninformed
rhetoric.'' This was an appeal for support of his aid package for El Salvador
and the Nicaraguan rebels.

To his critics today, Mr. Reagan sounded as though he was asking for support,
but only on his terms.

And because the President again suggested that criticism of his policies in
Lebanon had invited terrorist attacks, Democrats charged that Mr. Reagan was
blaming the Congress for his own ''failures'' in protecting United States
marines from attack last fall.

Aide Criticizes Congress

Making matters more complicated, Robert C. McFarlane, the national security
adviser, who talked with reporters about the President's speech, went even
further than Mr. Reagan in suggesting that criticism of Mr. Reagan's foreign
policy was improper.

Mr. McFarlane said Congress ''should be encouraged'' to disagree with the
President in the ''formation'' of policy. He added, however, that ''once that
policy is formed, it can seriously undermine its hope of success if there is a
continuing repetition of this earlier disagreement.''

At another point, referring to the Senate and the House of Representatives, Mr.
McFarlane said that ''if there is to be an effective U.S. foreign policy, the
squabbling between or among 535 members has to come to a stop.''

He said that once a policy is formed, members of the Congress who want to
criticize it should do so in writing to the President, but not in public forums,
at least concerning such situations as Lebanon, where American lives were at
stake.

Opposed Ford and Carter

There was some irony in Mr. McFarlane's comments, since Mr. Reagan was a critic
of the foreign policy of President Ford in 1976 and President Carter in 1980.

Specifically, Mr. Reagan called for rejection of both the Panama Canal Treaty
and the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty with the Soviet Union negotiated by Mr.
Carter. Both treaties had considerable bipartisan support at the time, although
the strategic arms treaty was never ratified.

Asked what had changed, Mr. McFarlane smiled and said, ''I think there's been a
certain evolution in his thinking, and I don't apologize for that.''

The difficulties of managing foreign policy, while seeking continuous approval
from Congress for means, have plagued all modern Presidents since since Woodrow
Wilson's failure to win Congressional approval for joining the League of Nations
after World War I.

Problem Grew in '70's

Many experts say, however, that the problem has grown since the end of the
Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal, when Congressional distrust of
Presidential power reached a peak. According to Mr. Reagan, in the last decade
Congress has created at least 100 legislative mechanisms hampering Presidential
power.

One of the most well-known is the War Powers Act of 1973, which requires a
President to notify the Congress if United States forces are in danger, and to
withdraw them within 60 days unless there is Congressional approval for them to
remain.

The War Powers Act forced Mr. Reagan to bargain with Congress to keep United
States marines in Beirut last year, despite the argument of some in the
Administration that the Act is unconstitutional. A debate over the applicability
of the War Powers Act is cited by Mr. Reagan as inviting terrorism in Lebanon
earlier this year.

More recently, Democrats in Congress have begun saying that the War Powers Act
is applicable to United States forces in Honduras and El Salvador, an idea that
is anathema to Mr. Reagan.

In arguing for bipartisanship in the ''formation'' of policy, Mr. Reagan comes
to Congress with what his critics view as a major weakness.

The weakness, they charge, is that each time he formed policies in consultation
with Congress, he changed some of his basic assumptions without continuing the
consultation.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM PRESIDENT REAGAN'S SPEECH ON FOREIGN POLICY AND CONGRESS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2057 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


Following are excerpts from President Reagan's speech today at the Georgetown
University Center for Strategic and International Studies, as made available by
the White House:

All Americans share two great goals for foreign policy: a safer world and a
world in which individual rights can be respected and precious values may
flourish.

During the past three years we have been steadily rebuilding America's capacity
to advance our foreign policy goals through renewed attention to these vital
principles. Many threats remain and peace may still seem precarious. But America
is safer and more secure today because the people of this great nation have
restored the foundation of its strength.

When we took office in 1981, the Soviet Union had been engaged for 20 years in
the most massive military buildup in history. Clearly, their goal was not to
catch us but to surpass us. Yet the United States remained a virtual spectator
in the 1970's, a decade of neglect that took a severe toll on our defense
capabilities.

With bipartisan support, we embarked immediately on a major defense rebuilding
program. We've made good progress in restoring the morale of our men and women
in uniform, restocking spare parts and ammunition, replacing obsolescent
equipment and facilities, improving basic training and readiness and pushing
forward with long-overdue weapons programs.

Peace Through Strength

The simple fact is that in the last half of the 1970's we were not deterring, as
events from Angola and Afghanistan made clear. Today we are, and that fact has
fundamentally altered the future for millions of human beings. Gone are the days
when the United States was perceived as a rudderless superpower, a helpless
hostage to world events. American leadership is back. Peace through strength is
not a slogan, it's a fact of life - and we will not return to the days of
handwringing, defeatism, decline and despair.

We have also upgraded significantly our intelligence capabilities - retoring
morale in the intelligence agencies and increasing our capability to detect,
analyze and counter hostile intelligence threats.

Our principles don't involve just rebuilding our strength; they also tell us how
to use it. We remain true to the principle of nonaggression. On an occasion when
the United States, at the request of its neighbors, did use force - in Grenada -
we acted decisively but only after it was clear a bloodthirsty regime had put
American and Grenadian lives, and the security of neighboring islands, in
danger. As soon as stability and freedom were restored on the island, we left.

Talks With Moscow

Though we and the Soviet Union differ markedly, living in this nuclear age makes
it imperative that we talk with each other. If the new Soviet leadership truly
is devoted to building a safer and more humane world rather than expanding armed
conquests, it will find a sympathetic partner in the West.

In pursuing these practical principles, we have throughout sought to revive the
spirit that was once the hallmark of our postwar foreign policy - bipartisan
cooperation between the executive and the legislative branches of our
Government.

Much has been accomplished but much remains to be done. If Repubicans and
Democrats will join together to confront four great challenges to American
foreign policy in the 80's, then we can and will make great strides toward a
safer and more humane world.

Nuclear War and Arms

Challenge number one is to reduce the risk of nuclear war and to reduce the
levels of nuclear armaments in a way that also reduces the risks they will ever
be used. We have no higher challenge, for a nuclear war cannot be won and must
never be fought. But merely to be against nuclear war is not enough to prevent
it.

By the beginning of this decade, we faced three growing problems: the Soviet
SS-20 monopoly in Europe and Asia, the vulnerability of our land- based ICBM
force and the failure of arms control agreements to slow the overall growth in
strategic weapons. The Carter Administration acknowleged these problems. In
fact, almost everyone did.  Our strategic policy represents a careful response
to a nuclear agenda upon which even our critics agreed. Many who would break the
bonds of partisanship, claiming they know how to bring greater security, seem to
ignore the likely consequences of their own proposals.

Those who wanted a last-minute moratorium on I.N.F. deployment would have
betrayed our allies and reduced the chances for a safer Europe; those who would
try to implement a unilateral freeze would find it unverifiable an destabilizing
because it would prevent restoration of a stable balance that keeps the peace,
and those who would advocate unilateral cancellation of the Peacekeeper missile
would ignore a central recommendation of the bipartisan Scowcroft report and
leave the Soviets with little incentive to negotiate meaningful reductions.
Indeed, the Soviets would be rewarded for leaving the bargaining table.

Helping Troubled Regions

Our second great challenge is strengthening the basis for stability in troubled
and strategically sensitive regions.

Obviously no single abstract policy could deal successfully with all problems or
all regions. But as a general matter, effective regional stabilization requires
a balanced approach - a mix of economic aid, security assistance and diplomatic
mediation - tailored to the needs of each region.

Perhaps the best example of this comprehensive approach is the report and
recommendations of the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America. It is
from this report that we drew our proposals for bringing peaceful development to
Central America. They are now before the Congress.

Other critics say that we shouldn't see the problems of this or any other region
as an East-West struggle. Our policies in Central America and elsewhere are in
fact designed precisely to keep East-West tensions from spreading, from
intruding into the lives of nations that are struggling with great problems of
their own. Events in southern Africa are showing what persistent mediation and
an ability to talk to all sides can accomplish.

A New Hope for Peace

The states of this region have been poised for war for decades, but there is new
hope for peace. South Africa, Angola and Mozambique are implementing agreements
to break the cycle of violence. Our Administration has been active in this
process and we will stay involved, trying to bring an independent Namibia into
being, end foreign military interference and keep the region free from East-West
conflict.

In Central America we have also seen progress. El Salvador's presidential
elections express that nation's desire to govern itself in peace. Yet the future
of the region remains open. We have a choice: Either we help America's friends
defend themselves and give democracy a chance or we abandon our responsibilities
and let the Soviet Union and Cuba shape the destiny of our hemisphere. If this
happens, the East-West conflict will only become broader and much more
dangerous.

In the Middle East, which has so rarely known peace, we seek a similar mix of
economic aid, diplomatic mediation and military assistance and cooperation.
These will, we believe, make the use of U.S. forces unnecessary and make the
risk of East- West conflict less. But given the importance of the region, we
must also be ready to act when the presence of American power and that of our
friends can help stop the spread of violence.

Because effective regional problem-solving requires a balanced and sustained
approach, it is essential that the Congress give full, not piecemeal, support.
Indeed, where we have foundered in regional stabilization it has been because
the Congress has failed to provide such support. Halfway measures - refusing to
take responsibility for means - produce the worst possible results.

Economics and Liberty

Expanding opportunities for economic development and personal freedom is our
third great challenge. The American concept of peace is more than absence of
war. We favor the flowering of economic growth and individual liberty in a world
of peace.

Just as we believe incentives are key to greater growth in America and
throughout the world, so, too, must we resist the sugar-coated poison of
protectionism everywhere it exists. Here at home, we're opposing inflationary,
self-defeating bills like Domestic Content.

We are helping developing countries grow by presenting a fresh view of
development - the magic of the marketplace - to spark greater growth and
participation in the international economy. Developing nations earn twice as
much from exports to the United States as they received in aid from all other
nations combined.

We have recently sent to the Congress a new economic policy initiative for
Africa. It, too, is designed to support the growth of private enterprise in
African countries by encouraging structural economic change and international
trade.

Bipartisan Foreign Policy

This brings me to our fourth great challenge: We must restore bipartisan
consensus in support of U.S. foreign policy. We must restore America's honorable
tradition of partisan politics stopping at the water's edge, Republicans and
Democrats standing united in patriotism and speaking with one voice as
responsible trustees for peace, democracy, individual liberty and the rule of
law.

In the 1970's, we saw a rash of Congressional initiatives to limit the
President's authority in the areas of trade, human rights, arms sales, foreign
assistance, intelligence operations and the dispatch of troops in times of
crisis. Over a hundred separate prohibitions and restrictions on executive
branch authority to formulate and implement foreign policy were enacted.

The most far-reaching consequence of the past decade's Congressional activism is
this: Bipartisan consensus- building has become a central responsibility of
Congressional leadership as well as of executive leadership. If we are to have a
sustainable foreign policy, the Congress must support the practical details of
policy, not just the general goals.

Successes and Failures

We have demonstrated the capacity for such jointly responsible leadership in
certain areas. But we have seen setbacks for bipartisanship, too. I believe that
once we established bipartisan agreement on our course in Lebanon, the
subsequent second-guessing about whether to keep our men there severely
undermined our policy. It hindered the ability of our diplomats to negotiate,
encouraged more intransigence from the Syrians and prolonged the violence.

To understand and solve this problem of joint responsibility, we have to go
beyond the familiar questions as to who should be stronger, the President or the
Congress. The more basic problem is: In this post-Vietnam era, Congress has not
yet developed capacities for coherent, responsible action needed to carry out
the new foreign policy powers it has taken for itself. To meet the challenges of
this decade, we need a strong President and a strong Congress.

Unfortunately, many in the Congres seem to believe they are still in the
troubled Vietnam era, with their only task to be vocal critics, not responsible
partners in developing positive, practical programs to solve real problems.

Lessons of Vietnam

Much was learned from Vietnam - lessons ranging from increased appreciation of
the need for careful discrimination in the use of U.S. force or military
assistance, to increased appreciation of the need for domestic support for any
such military element or policy. Military force, either direct of indirect, must
remain an available part of America's foreign policy. But, clearly, the Congress
is less than wholly comforable with both the need for a military element in
foreign policy and its own responsibility to deal with that element.

Presidents must recognize Congress as a more significant partner in foreign
policy making and, as we have tried to do, seek new means to reach bipartisan
executive-legislative consensus. But legislators must realize that they, too,
are partners. They have a responsibility to go beyond mere criticism to
consensus- building that will produce positive, practical and effective action.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Pres. Reagan

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Says It Is Ready To Ease China Turmoil

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 63 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 6


Vietnam's Foreign Minister says his nation is ready to discuss ways to ease
tensions with China, which today called Vietnam ''the main threat to Southeast
Asia.''

In an interview published by Vietnam's official press agency, Foreign Minister
Nguyen Co Thach also denied Chinese accusations that Vietnamese troops had gone
into Thailand to attack Cambodian resistance camps.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

6 EX-DIPLOMATS CRITICAL OF CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 876 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, April 6


Six former high- ranking American diplomats indicated in their separate ways
today that the current Presidential campaign was producing little serious debate
on foreign policy.

Dean Rusk, Secretary of State in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, viewed
the ''quadrennial silly season'' fatalistically. But another participant in a
lunchtime forum here, George W. Ball, former Under Secretary of State in the
Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, said he was ''appalled'' by the campaign
and that two candidates, Walter F. Mondale and Senator Gary Hart, had been
behaving ''like badly brought up children.''

Still another participant, Warren M. Christopher, Deputy Secretary of State in
the Carter Administration, said that the campaign had avoided profound and
intricate issues ranging from arms control to the fate of militaristic countries
that are allies of the United States.

''Are we destined to have a dialogue of distraction aimed at the lowest common
denominator and the highest common vulgarity?'' Mr. Christopher asked. ''Are we
going to have a campaign that assaults our sense and insults our intelligence?''


Kissinger Declined to Attend

The forum, organized by the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy at Tufts
University in nearby Medford, was originally scheduled to include former
Secretary of State Henry A. Kissinger. But Mr. Kissinger, saying that a planned
student demonstration against American policy in Central America threatened to
become ''an assault on reasoned democratic debate,'' decided last weekend not to
attend.

The remaining half-dozen speakers included C. Douglas Dillon, Under Secretary of
State in the Eisenhower Administration as well as Secretary of the Treasury in
the Kennedy Administration; Elliot L. Richardson, who held several Cabinet posts
in the Nixon Administration and later represented the United States at the Law
of the Sea Conference; and Walter J. Stoessel Jr., who recently retired from the
Foreign Service as a Deputy Secretary of State.

Several of the speakers, including Mr. Dillon and Mr. Stoessel, criticized
Senator Hart for saying that American troops should not be sent to the Persian
Gulf if Iran tries to close the Strait of Hormuz in its war with Iraq.

Mr. Richardson, a Republican now running for the Senate from Massachusetts,
agreed. They all suggested that it was imprudent to make such a promise publicly
even if it seemed wise in private. Mr. Richardson added that the candidates'
''readiness to commit forces'' was one of the main differences among them.

The recent pledges of Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart to move the American Embassy in
Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem came in for censure as well.

'Real Issues' Suggested


Citing ''real issues'' that the public should demand be discussed, Mr.
Christopher illustrated:

''Profound issues such as whether we can accept the risks of an arms control
agreement that's less than perfect but will nevertheless make it safer.
Intricate issues such as whether or not we can see a small country evolve out of
a friendly militarism into a benign but risky neutrality without intervening and
driving the country into the arms of our adversaries.''

He also mentioned ''unglamorous issues'' such as a stable system of foreign aid
to developing countries, and such ''practical issues'' as how to keep a
President and Congress from each other's throats.

The speakers disagreed on whether foreign affairs would have much effect on the
Presidential campaign. Mr. Christopher predicted that they would, adding that he
expected President Reagan to experience ''some difficulty'' over the way he had
managed foreign crises.

Mr. Dillon said he expected domestic economic issues to predominate. Mr. Rusk,
who said candidates' positions were a poor predictor of what Presidents actually
did, said what mattered most in any case was ''whose finger is on the button''
of nuclear war.

A Question for Rusk


Mr. Rusk was asked by a member of the audience, one of of about 400 people at
the Westin Hotel, whether he saw any similarities between present American
policies in Central America and earlier ones in Vietnam.

The former defender of the Vietnam War replied that the two cases had ''little
in common'' and that he wished the Reagan Administration would put more faith in
nonmilitary solutions. ''I regret that we're not trying to deal with that
situation through the Organization of American States,'' said Mr. Rusk.

Before they gathered for lunch, the forum met in a Fletcher Auditorium and
discussed Soviet-American relations before 300 Fletcher students and faculty
members. Reporters were excluded from the session on instructions from its
sponsor, the Sloan Foundation of New York City, which videotaped the meeting as
part of a ''living history'' project.

The tapes will be withheld, said officials at Tufts, until the participants
agree to their release. The reason for excluding reporters was said to have been
to allow everyone to speak more candidly.

About 150 students from Tufts and other Boston area colleges demonstrated
peacefully across the street against the Reagan Administration's use of troops
in Central America as the session was being taped.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HART PRESSES FOR SUPPORT IN WISCONSIN'S CAUCUSES

BYLINE: By FRANK LYNN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 30, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 701 words

DATELINE: MADISON, Wis., April 6


Speaking in a state and a city noted for political independence, Gary Hart today
called on Democrats to break with ''the failed leadership and failed policies''
of the party's past.

''As much as we want to remove Ronald Reagan, that will not be as easy as it
seems,'' said the Colorado Senator, who is seeking the Democratic Presidential
nomination. He addressed one of the biggest crowds of his campaign, at least
2,000 people, on the steps of the state Capitol here atop a hill in the center
of the city on a sunny, warm day.

On Tuesday, while he was being resoundingly defeated in New York State by Walter
Mondale, Mr. Hart nosed out Mr. Mondale in this state's nonbinding primary, in
which, unlike the closed New York primary, independents and Democrats can cross
over and vote in the Democratic contest. On Saturday, Wisconsin will begin the
process of choosing convention delegates in caucuses.

In previous primaries such as New Hampshire's and Vermont's where there has been
crossover voting, Mr. Hart has appealed to Republicans and independents more
than Mr. Mondale, who has long been identified with the Democratic Party.

'Failed Policies of the Past'

Mr. Hart did not mention his opponent, but he was clearly alluding to the former
Vice President when he said that ''we cannot win the election by just returning
to the failed leadership and failed policies of the past.''

''The Democratic Party, the party that has led this nation through transition
and change in critical periods in our nation's past, must break with the failed
leadership, break with the old agenda, break with the narrow arrangements and
put this country on a course of the national interest, not the special
interest,'' the Senator told an enthusiastic crowd that applauded frequently.

Mr. Hart said he was ''the only candidate in the race who has not accepted one
cent from any political action committee.''

Later, in Green Bay, his press secretary, Kathy Bushkin, said that the Hart
campaign had filed a complaint with the Federal Election Commission in
Washington charging that Mondale delegate committees in New York had accepted
individual and union PAC contributions in excess of the $1,000 and $5,000
limits, respectively, and had also spent more than the $1,000 for such
committees.

Mrs. Bushkin could provide no specifics. She said that the complaint was based
on newspaper articles about the delegate committees. ''The burden of proof is on
them,'' she said.

Mr. Hart, standing atop a tractor at a farm exposition here, said that the union
PAC contributions, ''would tie the hands of any future President.''

'Domestic Content' Legislation


He also obliquely assailed Mr. Mondale as ''a protectionist'' when the Senator
said he opposed ''domestic content'' legislation that would mandate some
American parts in foreign cars imported into this country. Mr. Mondale favors
such legislation, which is controversial here because of fears that foreign
governments would retaliate against Wisconsin farm equipment exporters.

''The Democratic Party and this nation has always been a nation of free trade,
fair trade and open trade,'' the Senator said.

Mr. Hart's trip here, his first since last June, was aimed at encouraging
supporters in the caucuses. He has also sponsored a modest radio and television
advertising campaign in the state for the last week.

The Wisconsin primary was once one of the nation's most important, but the
Democratic National Committee has ruled that it must be a nonbinding one because
Republicans and independents were allowed to vote in it. Mr. Hart promised today
to change that if he were elected President.

Senator Hart devoted much of his speech here to an attack on the Reagan
Administration.

''We cannot stand the immorality of $200 billion annual deficits that represent
an economic Vietnam and a mortgage on the country's future,'' he said. ''And
most of all, as human beings we cannot tolerate a costly, unnecessary, dangerous
nuclear arms race that threatens the survival of humanity.''

''We must make the highest priority putting the nuclear demon back in its cage
and sealing up that cage forever,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Hart at Widener University

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 7, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SKETCHES OF THE 5 MEN ABOARD THE CHALLENGER

BYLINE: By Walter Sullivan

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 924 words


James D. Van Hoften

Dr. Van Hoften, nicknamed ''Ox,'' stands 6 feet 4 inches tall and weighs 200
pounds . . . chief task on this mission is to don a space suit, enter the cargo
bay and replace a defective guidance module in the ailing Solar Max satellite .
. . Born in Fresno, Calif., on June 11, 1944, he attended the University of
California at Berkeley before joining the Navy aviation program in 1969 . . .
flew about 60 combat missions over Southeast Asia while assigned to the carrier
Ranger . . . In 1974 returned to academic studies and obtained a doctorate from
Colorado State University on his research into inteactions between waves and
turbulent channel flow. . . . As an assistant professor at the University of
Houston he taught fluid mechanics . . . selected as an astronaut candidate in
1978 and, after one year of training, was certified as a mission specialist . .
. From 1979 until the first shuttle flight in April 1981 took part in the
testing of shuttle guidance, navigation and flight control systems . . . His
hobbies include skiing, jogging, handball and racquetball . . . is married and
has three children.


Robert L. Crippen

Captain Crippen of the Navy is on his third shuttle mission . . . was born in
Beaumont, Tex., on Sept. 11, 1937 and graduated in 1960 from the University of
Texas with a degree in aerospace engineering . . . acted as pilot on the first
space shuttle mission in April 1981 and commanded the seventh flight last June .
. . After graduation from the university entered the Navy's aviation officer
program and from 1962 to 1964 served as an attack pilot aboard the carrier
Independence . . . then entered the Air Force's aerospace research pilot school
for test pilot training at Edwards Air Force Base in California . . . remained
there after graduation as an instructor until he was selected in 1966 for the
Air Force's manned orbiting laboratory program . . . was appointed an astronaut
in 1969 and took part in a 56-day simulation of medical tests and other
procedures to be conducted in orbit on the Skylab mission . . . was in the
astronaut support crew for the second, third and fourth Skylab missions . . .
performed a similar role for the 1976 Apollo-Soyuz test project in which Soviet
and American spacecraft docked with one another in orbit. Captain Crippen is
married and has three daughters.


George D. Nelson

The chief task of George Nelson is to fly off into space, capture the Solar Max
satellite and slow its roll so that the space shuttle's remotely controlled arm
can pull it into the cargo bay . . . Born July 13, 1950, in Charles City, Iowa,
he attended Harvey Mudd College in Claremont, Calif., and obtained a doctorate
in astronomy from the University of Washington in 1978, the year he was
appointed an astronaut candidate . . . has conducted astronomical research at
the Sacramento Peak Solar Observatory in Sunspot, N.M., at the Astronomical
Institute in Utrecht, the Netherlands, and the University of G"ottingen in West
Germany . . . Before starting his astronaut training he served as a
post-doctoral research associate at the Joint Institute for Laboratory
Astrophysics at the University of Colorado . . . performed a variety of roles in
the astronaut program, including development of the space suit, or the space
shuttle extravehicular mobility unit, that he will wear this time . . . married
and has two children . . . has been known since his childhood as ''Pinky'' . . .
enjoys music, reading and a variety of sports.

Terry J. Hart

It is Terry Hart who, from inside the shuttle, will operate the mechanical arm
that grasps the Solar Max satellite and pulls it into the cargo bay . . . Born
Oct. 27, 1946, in Pittsburgh, he obtained a degree in electrical engineering
from Lehigh University in 1968 and, for the next 10 years served intermittently
on the technical staff of the Bell Telephone Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J. .
. . Meanwhile, in 1969, entered active duty in the Air Force Reserve, completed
flight training in 1970, and until 1973 flew F-106 intercepters out of Air Force
bases in Maine, Florida and Delaware . . . then flew the F-106 as a member of
the New Jersey National Guard until selection as an astronaut candidate in 1978
. . . In that year was awarded a master's degree in electrical engineering from
Rutgers University . . . was the voice of Mission Control on the first, second,
third and seventh shuttle missions . . . married, has two children and enjoys
running and woodworking.


Francis R. Scobee

On this, his first space flight, is serving as pilot . . . His experience,
however, includes more than 6,500 flight hours in 45 types of aircraft . . .
born May 19, 1939, in Cle Elum, Wash., enlisted in the Air Force in 1957 and
rose from the enlisted ranks to that of major . . . attended night school while
stationed at Kelly Air Force Base, Texas, and was appointed to an officer's
training program . . . In 1965 received a bachelor of science degree in
aerospace engineering from the University of Arizona . . . After earning his
wings in 1966, served in Vietnam, then trained as a test pilot . . . qualified
and flew such diverse aircraft as the Boeing 747, the X-24B, F-111 and C-5 . . .
was chosen for the astronaut program in 1978 and has served as an instructor
pilot on the aircraft used to ferry shuttle spacecraft between ground stations .
.  Known to his colleagues as Dick, married and has two children . . . enjoys
woodworking, oil painting, motorcycling, jogging and various indoor sports.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Capt. Robert L. Crippen, Dr. James D. Van Hoften, Terry J.
Hart, Francis R. Scobee and Dr. George D. Nelson leaving Kennedy Space Center

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI ACCUSES CHINESE OF INCURSION

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 909 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 7


Vietnam said today that up to 2,000 Chinese troops had crossed into its
territory in two locations and were locked in combat with defending Vietnamese
forces.

China said the Vietnamese report was not true, but said artillery duels had
taken place.

It was the latest in a series of border incidents that began Monday, when China
said it shelled Vietnamese border posts in retaliation for what it said were
repeated border provocations by Vietnam. Monday's shelling was the first
reported Chinese bombardment of Vietnam in a year.

Backed by Artillery and Rockets

According to Vietnamese diplomats here, the Chinese troops, backed by artillery
and rockets but without air cover, crossed into Vietnamese territory on Friday
at 9 A.M. (9 P.M. Thursday, New York time) several miles east of the Chinese
city of Pingxiang.

The Hanoi radio broadcast similar reports of a Chinese attack across the border.

The Vietnamese diplomats told Western journalists who called to ask about the
reports that the Chinese troops had been ''defeated'' in their assaults on two
hills although fighting was continuing.  However, one Eastern European diplomat
said the Vietnamese had said the Chinese troops, whose strength was estimated
from a battalion to a regiment, held the high ground at both points.

Fought Border War in 1979

Relations between China and Vietnam soured soon after Hanoi's victory over the
United States-backed Government in Saigon in 1975. The border crossing known as
Friendship Pass, through which Chinese aid to Hanoi was funneled in the Vietnam
War, was closed in 1978. In February 1979, Chinese infantry supported by tanks
crossed the border and fought a 16-day war.

The two former allies still have diplomatic relations, but China refuses to hold
discussions with Vietnam to improve their ties until Hanoi agrees to pull its
troops out of Cambodia.

A duty officer at the Chinese Foreign Ministry, reached by telephone this
evening, denied any knowledge of an incursion by Chinese forces across the
border. The Foreign Ministry later issued a statement calling the Vietnamese
allegation a ''complete fabrication.''

But the New China News Agency reported today that Chinese border guards had
retaliated against continuing Vietnamese ''armed provocations'' with artillery
bombardments, killing or wounding ''a number of Vietnamese soldiers'' and
destroying ''many Vietnamese military installations.''

The reports could not be independently confirmed from Peking, but they came at a
time when both Peking and Hanoi have reported new clashes along their border.

Peking Issues Warning On Wednesday the Chinese Government issued a statement
accusing the Vietnamese of new ''provocative acts'' and warning that Peking
might retaliate. ''Our principle is we will not attack unless we are attacked,
and if we are attacked we will certainly counterattack,'' the Chinese statement
said.

Peking and Hanoi have traded similar allegations before, but the latest
incident, if true, would be one of the biggest battles since the brief Chinese
invasion of Vietnam in February 1979.

Two foreign military attaches said today that the Vietnamese gave them separate
details about the purported Chinese attack. The attaches said they were told the
Chinese crossed the rugged frontier to try to seize two hills east of Pingxiang,
which were identified by their metric altitude as Hills 820 and 636.

One military attache said the Vietnamese told him that the Chinese attacked in
two battalions of about 1,000 men each. A Vietnamese diplomat said by telephone
that one Chinese regiment crossed into Lang Son province in two places. A
Chinese regiment contains about 2,500 men.

Incursion Appears Limited

Even if the reports are correct, there is no sign that China is embarking on the
kind of invasion of Vietnam that it launched in early 1979. The short but
violent border war was fought over the same lush mountain terrain where the
latest clash has been reported.

The lack of any Vietnamese mention of Chinese armored assaults or air strikes
would suggest that such an incursion was temporary and limited in scope.

While China denied that it had crossed into Vietnamese territory, the Hanoi
radio today broadcast details similar to those given by the Vietnamese Embassy
here.

The Hanoi radio broadcast, which was monitored by the British Broacasting
Corporation, quoted the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry as saying that several
Chinese infantry battalions had attacked two peaks in Lang Son province on
Friday and said that the Vietnamese defenders had beaten back waves of Chinese
assualts. The Hanoi radio report accused Peking of ''another brazen act of war
grossly violating Vietnam's sovereignty.''

A Western diplomat familiar with Vietnam suggested that China previously had
used the border battles to tie down Vietnamese troops who might otherwise be
dispatched to Cambodia to fight the guerrillas loyal to Pol Pot, whom Peking
supports. Vietnam recently launched a fresh offensive against Pol Pot's forces
along the Thai- Cambodian border.

The New China News Agency reported on Monday that China was shelling Vietnamese
forces in response to ''armed provocations'' against Chinese civilians in Yunnan
province and the Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region. Chinese television on Monday
evening showed what it said was damage to Chinese border villages caused by
Vietnamese artillery.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of southeast Asia

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

4 TO RECEIVE THE ASIA SOCIETY'S ANNUAL AWARDS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM G. BLAIR

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 39, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 649 words


Three Americans and a Japanese will be honored Wednesday by the Asia Society for
their contributions to a greater understanding between this country and Asian
nations.

The New York-based society's annual awards will go to Robert O. Anderson,
chairman of the Atlantic Richfield Company, which has large investments and
business interests in Asia; Prof. John King Fairbank, a China specialist at
Harvard University, which has named its center for East Asian studies for him;
I. M. Pei, the architect, who designed a new hotel in China and several other
structures in Asia, and Saburo Okita, Japan's Minister of Foreign Affairs in
1979 and 1980, who played a central role in efforts to resolve American-Japanese
trade and economic problems.

In announcing the award winners last week, Robert B. Oxnam, president of the
society, said that ''each in his unique way effectively has spread knowledge and
appreciation for another culture.'' The awards will be presented at a dinner at
the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.

The Asia Society, a nonprofit organization with 18,000 members, was founded in
1956 by John D. Rockefeller 3d, who died in 1978. The renowned collection of
Chinese, Japanese, Indian and Southeast Asian art of Mr. Rockefeller and his
wife, Blanchette, is permanently housed at the society's new headquarters at 725
Park Avenue.

During its first 25 years the society's headquarters was at 112 East 64th
Street. Its new building, which opened about three years ago on the northeast
corner of Park Avenue and 70th Street, was designed by Edward Larrabee Barnes.
The center includes an auditorium, two galleries, conference and seminar rooms,
a reference library and administrative offices.

The society was established to enhance and expand American perceptions of Asia
and Asian perceptions of America. Over the years it has developed a growing
range of activities to achieve these goals.

Its budget of $5 million a year is dependent largely on private and corporate
donations.

The society, which has regional offices in Washington, Houston and Los Angeles,
serves as a forum for visiting Asian scholars, politicians, economists and other
specialists to meet their counterparts in this country and to bring their views
before general audiences around the country.

Through its increasingly active business council, which focuses on the needs of
American businesses that trade and invest in Asia, the society brings together
Asian experts and government officials and American business people in seminars,
briefings and lectures. The society sponsors a full spectrum of cultural
programs, including exhibitions of Asian art and tours by Asian performing
artists. This summer the art galleries at the Park Avenue building will exhibit
paintings done by some of China's leading contemporary artists.

Since its performing arts department was established in 1960, the society has
sponsored more than 1,200 presentations of Asian theater, music, dance and
puppetry in 250 cities. In addition, it offers a variety of videocassettes on
the performing arts in Asia that can be purchased or rented.

The society also seeks to stimulate and enrich instruction about Asia in
American elementary and secondary schools through publications - such as a
recent teacher's guide on the history of Vietnam - scholarly monographs,
workshops and special projects.

For years the society published a bimonthly magazine called Asia. It was
discontinued late last year for financial reasons and will be replaced by a
newsletter to members and other subscribers. It will contain a calendar of
events and short articles on Asian affairs and issues.

The society produces film, television and radio programs for national
dissemination. It also collaborates with other public and world affairs
institutions and religious, professional and educational groups to develop
programs on Asian affairs.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FRANK CHURCH OF IDAHO, WHO SERVED IN THE SENATE FOR 24 YEARS, DIES AT 59

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 44, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1468 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 7


Frank Church of Idaho, a member of the Senate for 24 years and for a time the
chairman of its Foreign Relations Committee, died today at his home in suburban
Bethesda, Md. He was 59 years old and had been suffering from pancreatic cancer.

The White House issued a statement from President Reagan praising Mr. Church for
''his abiding interest in foreign policy'' that he said made ''an important
intellectual contribution to our country.''

A Senate colleague, Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said Mr.
Church was a ''courageous leader against the war in Vietnam.''

A memorial service will be held at 11 A.M. Tuesday at the National Cathedral.
The speakers will be Senator Kennedy, Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode
Island, former Senator George A. McGovern of South Dakota, Cecil D. Andrus, a
former Secretary of the Interior and Governor of Idaho, and one of Mr. Church's
sons, the Rev. F. Forrest Church, minister of the Unitarian Church of All Souls
in New York City.

Frank Church, at one time the ''boy orator'' of the United States Senate, had
two major ambitions. He wanted to be President of the United States and he
wanted to be chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.

In the spring of 1976, he waged a three-month campaign for the Democratic
Presidential nomination, making a surprisingly strong initial showing by winning
primaries in Idaho, Nebraska, Oregon and Montana. He eventually withdrew,
however, and endorsed former Gov. Jimmy Carter of Georgia, who went on to become
President.

But Mr. Church achieved his other goal, becoming chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee in 1979. He lost his Senate seat to Steven D. Symms, a
Republican, in the l980 landslide election of Ronald Reagan.

In his 24 years in the Senate, starting in 1957, when he was 32 years old, Frank
Church became a leading, often eloquent voice of liberalism, strongly supporting
civil rights protection, expanded benefits for the elderly, other social service
programs and equal rights for women. He was a leading conservationist and a
strong supporter of statehood for Alaska and Hawaii.

Active in Foreign Affairs


But it was primarily in foreign affairs that he made his mark, both before and
after his chairmanship of the Foreign Relations Committee. He strongly supported
the 1963 nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union. In 1966, concerned over
increasing American involvement in Vietnam, he broke with the Johnson
Administration by urging a halt in bombing.

''No nation,'' he said that year, ''not even our own, possesses an arsenal so
large or a treasury so rich as to damp down the fires of smoldering revolution
throughout the whole awakening world.''

As the war in Southeast Asia continued to widen, he stepped up his opposition.
In 1970, he co-sponsored a Senate measure to prohibit continued deployment of
United States ground troops in Cambodia, touching off a six-month Senate debate.
Two years later, he and Senator Clifford P. Case, Republican of New Jersey,
sought to end all American military activities in Southeast Asia.

But it was in the field of trying to curb ''criminal activity'' by United States
intelligence agencies that he made perhaps his most important contribution,
praised by some, criticized by others. The vehicle for examining activities of
the Central Intelligence Agency and the Federal Bureau of Investigation was the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, established in 1975 under Mr. Church's
chairmanship.

Panel Made Many Proposals


In its final report, the committee made nearly 100 recommmendations for curbing
such abuses as illegal wiretaps, break-ins, surveillance, harassment of
political dissidents, assassination plots against foreign leaders and campaigns
to smear civil rights activists.

While the inquiry resulted in only a limited amount of legislation, it was clear
as time passed that the disclosures of illegal activities by the agencies led to
curbs of such abuses.

Senator Church had just completed work on the intelligence investigation when he
traveled to the little mountain community of Idaho City to announce his
candidacy for the Democratic Presidential nomination. It was something of a
nostalgic choice of sites; it was in Idaho City that his grandfather settled in
a gold rush after the Civil War.

But home to Frank Forrester Church was not Idaho City. He was born July 25,
1924, in Boise, the son of a sporting goods dealer. The family was strongly
Republican. It was years later that Mr. Church became a Democrat.

As a student in Boise High School, he developed a love for oratory, winning
first prize in the American Legion's national Americanism oratorical contest. A
year later, after graduating from high school, he entered Stanford University.

His stay at Stanford was brief, for he enlisted in the Army in late 1942 and was
sent to Officers' Candidate School at Fort Benning, Ga. On his 20th birthday, he
was commissioned a second lieutenant and served as a military intelligence
officer in China, Burma and India in World War II.

Graduation and Marriage in '47


Returning to Stanford after the war, he won a Phi Beta Kappa key and was
graduated in 1947. He was married that summer to Jean Bethine Clark, whose
father had once been a Democratic Governor of Idaho.

That fall, he entered Harvard Law School but switched to Stanford after
suffering severe back pains; he thought a warmer climate might ease his back.
However, doctors discovered that he had cancer and told him he had six months to
live. After undergoing surgery to have a testicle removed, and radiation
treatments, he returned to Stanford Law School, winning his degree in 1950.

Moving back to Boise, he began practicing law and teaching public speaking in
the Boise Junior College. A Democrat by that time, he ran for a seat in the
Idaho Legislature, but lost.

He set his sights higher, this time on the United States Senate. In 1956, at 32,
he won the election, defeating an incumbent Republican, Herman Welker.

In 1960, Senator Church gained national prominence when he delivered the keynote
address at the Democratic National Convention. His speech was appraised by
commentators as long on rhetorical flourishes but short on substance. Years
later, admitting he had been something less than a smashing success with the
speech, he said: ''All I can say in my defense is, I didn't know any better.''

When he entered the race for the Presidential nomination in the spring of 1976,
he conceded that he was a ''long shot'' but that ''it's never too late to try.''


A Meeting With Castro


After his unsuccessful effort, he resumed his role as an important voice on the
Senate Foreign Relations Committee. In the summer of 1977, he met in Cuba with
Fidel Castro, which led to the Cuban leader agreeing to allow 84 American
citizens and their families to leave that country. Senator Church also served as
floor leader for ratification of the Panama Canal treaties in 1978.

But in the final years of the Carter Administration, he found himself at odds
with the President as his own time for Senate re-election approached. In 1979,
he demanded immediate withdrawal of Soviet combat troops from Cuba before
allowing a Senate vote on ratification of the second treaty with the Soviet
Union on limitation of strategic arms.

Years later, Jimmy Carter wrote in his book, ''Keeping Faith,'' that Senator
Church had been ''absolutely irresponsible'' in disclosing ''confidential
information'' about the Soviet presence in Cuba, ascribing the move as an effort
by the Senator to fend off conservative opposition to his re-election. Senator
Church later denied the Carter allegations.  There were clear indications,
however, that Senator Church had sought to mute his liberal image in other ways
as the 1980 election neared. He was one of six Democratic Senators selected for
defeat by conservative political organizations. The campaign was both bitter and
expensive. It cost Mr. Church's organization $4 million and was the most
expensive political campaign in Idaho's history.

After his defeat by Mr. Symms, Mr. Church practiced international law as a
Washington-based partner in the New York law firm of Whitman & Ransom. He wrote
occasional articles, including one published in The New York Times Magazine,
criticizing the the Reagan Administration for anti-Soviet ideology.

In addition to his wife and son F. Forrest, he is survived by another son, Chase
Clark of Bethesda, and two grandchildren.

After Tuesday's memorial service, a family spokesman said, the body will be
flown to Idaho on Wednesday. The body will lie in state in the Capitol rotunda
in Boise until the funeral at 2 P.M. Thursday at the Cathedral of the Rockies.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Frank Church fishing in Idaho in 1970

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SENATOR IS PRAISED AS AN ELOQUENT LEADER IN FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 44, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 7


Frank Church's efforts in such diverse areas as foreign policy, social justice
and conservation were praised today by President Reagan and members of the
Senate.

In a statement issued by the White House, President Reagan said: ''Nancy and I
were saddened today to learn of the death of former Senator Frank Church of
Idaho. Senator Church served his nation with distinction and dedication.

''His abiding interest in foreign policy made an important intellectual
contribution to our country. We send our sympathy to his family and friends.''

Seantor Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, called Mr. Church ''one of
the great leaders of our generation,'' adding: ''He was a courageous leader
against the war in Vietnam, for the cause of peace and social justice. He had a
lifelong commitment to the rights of the elderly. He was one of the truly
eloquent Senators of our time.''

Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode Island, recalled Mr. Church's speech
at the 1976 Democratic National Convention as the best made there, at a time
when Mr. Church had been disappointed in his own quest for the Presidential
nomination.

'Immensely Highly Principled'

''Frank Church was an immensely highly principled, compassionate and intelligent
man,'' Senator Pell said.

Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the Democratic minority leader, said:
''Frank Church served the people of Idaho, the Congress and his country with
wisdom and clarity of purpose.''

The Democratic minority whip, Senator Alan Cranston of California, declared:
''Frank Church was a great leader and strong advocate of arms control. Even in
civilian life after leaving the Senate, he continued to contribute mightily to
the cause of peace.''

Senator Gary Hart, Democrat of Colorado, said Mr. Church ''constantly strove for
the application of democratic values to American foreign policy during very
dangerous times.''

Senator James A. McClure, Republican of Idaho, whose Senate tenure overlapped
with Mr. Church's for eight years, said: ''Frank and I didn't see eye to eye on
many issues. Nevertheless, his perseverance and dedication to his principles was
unwavering. That to me is one of the highest standards of any elected
representative. And I have always held him in high regard for this.''

Mr. McClure added, ''He fought his battle against cancer with the same tenacity
that he fought for his principles in the Senate.''

The other Senator from Idaho, Steven D. Symms, the Republican who defeated Mr.
Church, said Mr. Church and his wife, Bethine, ''never wavered from their
sincere interest in the people of Idaho.''

Gov. John V. Evans of Idaho said: ''We have never had a more prominent citizen.
He will be sorely missed here in Idaho. He was a statesman of the highest
standards.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WASHINGTON PRIORITIES OF A PHILADEPHIA PRAGMATIST

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 867 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Senate caucus room was filled with several hundred unemployed Pennsylvanians
wearing yellow buttons that proclaimed ''Jobs or Income.'' Rodney Bradley, age
10, walked solemnly to the front of the room and asked, ''Can you give my mother
a decent job?'' Senator Arlen Specter replied calmly, ''That's something we're
trying to do.'' The youngster was not placated. ''All we ever hear is
promises,'' he said, and the audience cheered.

''This illustrates the problem of being a Republican who represents the state of
Pennsylvania,'' Mr. Specter later told a visitor. Mr. Specter has spent much of
his three years in the Senate seeking to balance the demands of his
constituents, in an older industrialized state with low per-capita income and
high unemployment, against the demands of a conservative Republican President
and the Senate's conservative-dominated Republican majority. ''If Arlen were a
circus performer, he'd be a juggler,'' said Paul Michel, a Senate aide who
served as Mr. Specter's deputy when the future senator was Philadelphia's
District Attorney.

The Senator seems to have a stake in almost everything these days, from El
Salvador to school prayer. As a member of the Judiciary Committee he has taken a
leading role in the panel's review of the nomination of Edwin Meese 3d to be
Attorney General. Mr. Specter refuses to say if Mr. Meese should be confirmed as
Attorney General. ''He has a career on the line,'' he said. ''The current state
of the record is incomplete.''

Unlike some senators who from the start try to specialize in certain areas, Mr.
Specter has cast a wide net. ''The unifying thread is the legal issues,'' the
senator said. ''I have a deep interest in constitutional issues and law
enforcement.'' Mr. Specter is among the Senate Republicans who disagree most
with the President, voting against the Administration more than 40 percent of
the time. But he sees no reason to publicly tangle with the White House. ''I'm
as supportive as I can be,'' Mr. Specter said, ''but I vote the way I have to.''
He voted for the President's proposed cuts in domestic spending and the
Kemp-Roth reduction in tax rates, because, he said, ''Those were the best
judgments of the time. There had to be a fundamental change in spending.'' But
he later fought cuts in Social Security and unemployment benefits, in child
health programs, education, food stamps and other programs for the poor. He also
opposes the Administration on the social issues: school prayer, busing and
abortion.  The Senator plays a pivotal role on the Judiciary panel, where
Republicans hold a slim majority. His opposition to President Reagan's attempt
to disband the Civil Rights Commission, and his proposal to create a new
commission appointed by Congress instead of the President, led to a compromise
in which Congress and the President each appoint half the members.  Mr. Specter,
known as a tough prosecutor back in Philadelphia, also was the sponsor of a
package of anticrime legislation adopted by the Senate, including a ''career
criminal'' bill that would give Federal courts jurisdiction over criminal cases
involving repeat state offenders and mandate a minimum prison term of 15 years.
Last year he sponsored a proposal - ultimately adopted - to withhold 30 percent
of military aid to El Salvador until the murderers of four American churchwomen
were brought to justice, but last week the Senate refused to attach a similar
restriction to an emergency spending bill. The Senator opposed covert aid to the
Nicaraguan insurgents, saying, ''I don't believe we should have covert
activities to overthrow another government''; played a leading role in debates
on the War Powers Resolution, because ''We learned in Vietnam that you cannot
fight a war not supported by the American people,'' and opposed a school prayer
amendment, because he feared religious coercion of children on the part of local
government. Mr. Specter also is one of the few Republican senators to oppose
legislation that would impose sharp restrictions on federally financed abortions
and busing.

Mr. Specter began political life as a Democrat, but found his path blocked by
Philadelphia's Democratic machine. He nevertheless remained a Democrat, even as
he accepted a Republican invitation to run for district attorney. He later
changed parties and lost in campaigns for mayor of Philadelphia and re-election
as district attorney. Nor was he able to win the Republican nomination for the
Senate in 1976 or, two years later, for governor. Finally, in 1980, he won his
Senate seat after outspending his Democratic opponent by a 2-1 margin.

Some colleagues describe Mr. Specter as ''relentless.'' They admire his ability
to stand up to committee chairmen in floor debates. Senator William L.
Armstrong, a conservative Republican from Colorado, recalled a debate in which
Mark Hatfield, Oregon Republican and chairman of the Appropriations Committee,
''jumped on him with both feet, and he didn't budge an inch. He didn't get
excited, but calmly made his point.'' Mr. Specter has engaged in similar
exchanges with Senator John Tower, Texas Republican and chairman of the Armed
Services Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Senator Arien Specter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN ATTACK ON POLICY CRITICS PUTS NEW EDGE ON CAMPAIGN

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1215 words


WASHINGTON

 E VER since the New Hampshire primary turned a relatively genteel race for the
Democratic Presidential nomination into a street brawl, President Reagan has
been doing as little as possible to divert attention from the Democratic
candidates' slashes at each other. His campaigning for re-election has centered
largely on the traditional appeals to business, ethnic and women's groups that
marked his visit to New York City last week.

But last week also brought an abrupt change in Mr. Reagan's broader strategy.
Swinging at critics of his policies toward the Middle East, the Soviet Union and
Central America, the President was on the offensive. White House officials
billed it as an attempt to take a high institutional road, asserting that
Congressional criticism of foreign policy was undermining American interests
abroad. But its effect was to rupture what little civility was left in the
foreign policy discourse and to raise questions about how much cooperation there
can be in the months ahead.

A Cry From the Heart

In a major foreign policy speech in a nonpartisan setting, and in a news
conference, Mr. Reagan said that the public debate over Lebanon earlier this
year had set back American attempts to broker a political solution in Lebanon.
Worse, he said, the calls for the withdrawal of American marines had ''hindered
the ability of our diplomats to negotiate, encouraged more intransigence from
the Syrians and prolonged the violence.'' By constantly ''second- guessing'' his
policies, Congress, he suggested, was somehow not living up to its
responsibilities in sharing power.

By all accounts, Mr. Reagan's comments were a cry from the heart. In recent
weeks, Secretary of State George P. Shultz had joined with top White House
officials in growing frustration over having to fight for legislative approval
for key elements of policy.  Though the White House won a crucial victory in the
Senate last week on aid to El Salvador and to rebels in Nicaragua, it is still
smarting from having to abandon the sale of Stinger antiaircraft missiles to
Jordan, not to mention withdrawing the marines from Beirut. Still ahead are
uphill battles in the House for the Central America package. Mr. Reagan's
legislative headaches are compounded by new strains with Britain and France.
Both last week protested the mining of Nicaragua's harbors as interference with
international shipping; the French said they might help the Nicaraguan
Government remove them. Administration sources' confirmation that the mines were
deployed with Central Intelligence Agency help in turn fanned protest in
Congress.

A Backfire ReactionMr. Reagan's frustration with Congress may be understandable
in human terms. He can hardly take solace in the fact that he had himself been a
thorn in the side of two Presidents, Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter, on foreign
policy matters. Now, like his predecessors, Mr. Reagan feels hamstrung by
Congressional intrusion on his prerogatives. Yet the question remains whether it
was productive to attack Congress.

The Democratic reaction suggested that the attack had backfired. Indeed, the
President's comments aggravated old wounds and created a new climate of
recrimination. House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. charged that Mr. Reagan no
longer had ''personal credibility'' because of his behavior during the Lebanon
crisis. He was referring to the President's accusation in February that Mr.
O'Neill favored ''surrender'' in wanting American troops withdrawn from Beirut,
and to the subsequent revelation that Mr. Reagan had himself decided to bring
the troops out when he made the charge. With unusual bitterness, the Speaker
said that the deaths of 260 American servicemen in Lebanon ''lie on him and the
defeat in Lebanon lies on him and him alone.''

Mr. Reagan's newly aggressive statements had major implications for the
Presidential contest as well. They signaled the White House's willingness to
blame the Democrats in Congress for Mr. Reagan's foreign policy difficulties.

The President has long been a master of the art of culpability. He routinely
credits his policies for economic expansion while blaming the Democrats for the
Federal deficit. He seeks re-election with the handicap of few major diplomatic
achievements beyond having carried out the greatest buildup and projection of
American military power since the Vietnam War. In his speech last week, he said
that where the United States had ''foundered'' in the Middle East and Central
America, ''it has been because the Congress failed to provide'' full support. In
arms control, he suggested that Moscow was refraining from bargaining because of
a hope that concessions could be forced by Congress - a pointed criticism in
light of the stalemate on nuclear arms that many Administration officials fear
will last at least until next year. (East-West stagnation, page 5.)

By implication, Mr. Reagan also had his sights on Vice President Walter F.
Mondale, Senator Gary Hart and the Rev. Jesse Jackson with attacks on
protectionism, the nuclear ''freeze'' movement and skittishness over using
military power. ''We will not return to the days of hand-wringing, defeatism,
decline and despair,'' he declared.

A senior White House official said in an interview that Mr.  Reagan would not
likely make the outright blame of Congress on foreign policy a major theme of
his campaign - unless some disaster were to occur. ''If Central America goes
down the tubes, we'll make damn sure people know why,'' he said. ''Politically,
the American peole agree with us. You can't run foreign policy with 535 voices
hollering in the background. You can't.  The American people need to know that
if the Congress is going to assert itself, then they have a responsibility that
goes along with it.'' There are great risks in Mr. Reagan's new strategy of
blame.  White House officials hope to build Mr. Reagan's reputation as a world
leader this year with his trips to China and the economic summit in London. The
image could be undercut if he seems petty in accusing others of causing his
problems.

The President's sensitivity to the issue of war and peace was underscored by his
appeal for support among women in New York City last week; campaign aides say
the so-called gender gap is in part a function of fears among women that his
policies could lead to war. In general, the events last week, which included
politicking among Catholic voters in New York, showed that Mr. Reagan remains
concerned about shoring up his base in all respects.

But White House aides said they were confident the risks flowing from the
President's aggressive tone were even greater for the Democrats. ''It will be
unwise for the Democratic Party to turn down this offer from the President,''
one said. ''If I were them, I wouldn't want to take him on.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE EXPANDING EMPIRE OF DONALD TRUMP

BYLINE: By William E. Geist

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 7076 words


'DONALD! HEY, DONALD! DONALD!' THE men were yelling, eager to call him by name.
A storm front of cigar smoke was gathering above the hotel ballroom, packed
elbow-to-elbow for a breakfast-hour sports forum with a crowd that included some
of New York's most wealthy, powerful and famous men.

Mayor Koch was there, former Mayors Lindsay and Beame, two United States
Senators, the five borough presidents, judges, labor leaders, busines stycoons
and sports celebrities, as well as team owners and executives such as George
Steinbrenner, Sonny Werblin of the Knicks and Rangers, Fred Wilpon, president of
the Mets, and several hundred men who make it their business to rub shoulders at
such functions.

Yet, somehow, everyonme at this sports function was drawn to Donald Trump, the
37-year-old owner of the New Jersey Generals, a franchise in the upstart United
States Football League. As Mr. Trump inched his way toward the exit, dragging a
dozen reporters, emn int he crowd stood on their tiptoes to wave and call to him
- like so many bejowled rock-star fans. There was a desperation about them as
they reached throught he reporters to pat him on the back, to grasp his hand or
just to stuff a business card into his coat pocket. If only he could cut them
in.

Donald J. Trump is the man of the hour. Turnon the television or open a
newspaper almost any day of the week and there he is, snatching some star form
the National Football League, announcing some preposterously lavish project he
wants to build. Public-relations firms call him, offering to handle his account
for nothing, so that they might take credit for the torrential hoopla.

He has no public-relations agent. His competitors wonder how this can be, but
watching him at the sports forum provided an explanation. While executives of
the other teams told the audience about problems of negotiation and arbitration,
about dirty restrooms inside their arenas and street crime outside and about
'attempting to move the Mets in the right direction,' Donald Trump was
electrifying the room the rat-a-tat-tat revelations, dropping names of star
N.F.L. players and coaches he would sign in a matter of hours. He said further
that he would 'continue to create chaos' for the N.F.L. and, by the way, that he
planned to build a domed stadium in New York.

IT IS NOT YET 9 AM SPENDING A DAY WITH Donald Trump is like driving a Ferrari
without the windshield. It's exhilarating; he gets a few bugs in his teeth.

His next appointment is with Philip Johnson and John Burgee, the eminent
architects. 'These guys are hot,' Mr. Trump declares as he breezes into their
office. Models are brought in of Mr. Trump's next - can it be! - proposed
building, a 60-story castle, Trump Castle, six cylinders of varying heights with
gold-leafed, coned and crenelated tops to be built at 60th Street and Madison
Avenue. There is to be a moat and a drawbridge. 'My idea,' says Mr.  Johnson
with a mischievous grin. 'Very Trumpish.'

'Trump is mad and wonderful,' says Mr. Johnson. The 77-year-old architect
proclaimed the castle his 'most exciting project' ever. 'Other developers come
in with sober faces, carrying their market-research studies on what the public
will like.'

The combination of Mr. Johnson, who is leading the architectural charge out of
the era of glassbox moderism with such unusual buildings as the
'Chippendale'-topped A.T.&T. building, and Donald Trump, who is excited about
putting up the most distinctive buildings imaginable, seems positively
dangerous. One can almost imagine this: 'Phil, I'd like to build a 135-story
cheeseburger on Park Avenue.' 'Lettuce and tomato on that, Don?'

With castles on the drawing boards, the first tenants are moving into Mr.
Trump's $125 million Trump Plaza luxury cooperative apartment building at Third
Avenue and 61st. Street. His Generals are off to a winning start in their first
season under his ownership. He is hovering attentively over his newly operned
Xanadu of conspicuous consumption, the $200 million Trump Tower
condominium-office-retail complex on Fifth Avenue, also supervising the final
touches on Harrah's at Trump Plaza, a mammoth $220 million casino-hotel in
Atlantic City set to open next month.

Just as the name Donald Trump is well-known to most New Yorkers, the name is now
becoming recognized throughout the country. He is fast becoming one of the
nation's wealthiest entrepreneurs, able to buy practically anthing he wants. He
controls a company with assets estimated - some say conservatively estimated -
$1 billion, and casino-industry analysts say his half interest in Harrah's may
provide him with $40 million to $50 million more in annual income.

Although he is still interested in such ideas as putting up the world's tallest
building on the East River, his mind wanders from the business of New York real
estate. The Generals were an impulse buy. He made a bid on The New York Daily
News in 1982, when the paper's fate was in doubt; he expressed interest in
buying the Cleveland Indians. He has told people in the communications industry
that he is 'very interested in communications,' which is like a 2,000-pound
gorilla mentioning that he is very interested in becoming carnivorous. Until
recently, he was purchasing large amounts of RCA stock, with an eye toward
securing a controlling interest, but he gave up on that when the price of the
stock more than doubled. He sold the stock, profiting handsomely from the failed
takeover.

NEXT ON MR. TRUMP'S SCHEDULE IS A visit Trump Plaza on Third Avenue. The heads
of several Fortune 500 companies have already bought co-ops here, along with
Gov. John Y. Brown of Kentucky and his wife, Phyllis George; Martina Navratilova
and Dick Clark.

While critics charge that Mr. Trump is a raving egomaniac, bent on putting his
name on every inanimate boject in the city, he claims that putting on the Trump
name is value added.

'These units are selling,' says Blanche Sprague, who is in charge of sales at
Trump Plaza, 'because of the Trump name.' A man holding a trowel says he is
proud to be working on a Trump building and always tells his friends.

'I don't think you understand,' Mrs. Sprague adds. 'When I walk down the street
with Donald, people come up and just touch him, hoping that his good fortune
will rub off.'

The Trump touch. It has set some people in New York to outright Trump worship;
they call him 'a real-estate genius' who has helped lead the city out of the
darkness of the mid-1970's into a new era of glamour and excitement. Mr.  Trump
does not take exception to that.

To others, the notion that Mr. Trump seems to be able to do just about anything
he sets his mind to is terrifying. They see him as a rogue billionaire, loose in
the city like some sort of movie monster, unrestrained by the bounds of good
taste or by city officials to whom he makes campaign contributions, ready to
transform Midtown into another glass-and-glitz downtown Houston, with Central
park for parking.

This faction believes that the Donald Trumps of this world are tending to have
their way with our cities nationwide, receiving enormous tax abatements and
whatever zoning variations they request - all in the name of revitalization.
That government is helping rich developers to become richer does not sit well
with them, not when small shopkeepers, who do not share in such government
largesse, are forced out of business by rising rents, not when poor people are
sleeping in the streets. That Mr. Trump builds shops and apartments for the
world's wealthiest people makes him that much more prone to attack.

Yet many urban-affairs experts view the developers as saviors of our
postindustrial cities. 'With manufacturing leaving,' says George Sternlieb,
director of the Center for Urban Policy Research at Rutgers University, 'anmd
with Federal and state aid diminishing, our cities desperately need the rich.
Cities are tending to fall into two categories: cities of consumption and cities
with no economic base.'

The rich of the world can live anywhere they want, explain the experts; Mr.
Trump leads them to New York. Sales taxes, user taxes, jobs and resulting
payroll taxes are generated.

'The wheelers and dealers must be successful if New York is to be successful,'
says Mr. Sternlieb. 'That doesn't make them lovable.' Mayor Koch says that,
indeed, what is good for Donald Trump is often good for New York.

Of course, Midtown is perhaps the strongest real-estate market in the world.
'It is, therefore, appropriate in this case,' says Bernard Frieden, professor of
city planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 'for residents to
ask if developers are being subsidized excessively.'

Mr. Trump and other developers respond that they are far from having their way
with our cities. Mr. Trump notes that he was denied a tax abatement worth $15
million to $20 million on Trump Tower. Other de3velopers claim that it has never
been more difficult to build in New York, what with planning boards, community
boards, restrictive codes and regulations.

TALE OT FRANK!  SHOUTS A WOMAN, wrapping her arms around one of the Trump Tower
doormen.  C'mon and take it, honey, take it!  Finally, Frank does take it, a
snapshot of his wife Melody, with a man who says he was hired to open doors -
albeit revolving doors - at Trump Tower but who has shown up for work dressed to
guard Buckingham Palace: red military coat, gold braid, black bearskin hat, the
works.

Alighting from his limousine - license plates DJT - Mr. Trump admits there are
those who consider his doormen ostentatious. But he probably suspects Trump
Tower has never been walked past unnoticed.

Having just opened last year, Trump Tower is already becoming something of a New
York landmark. The shimmering glass skyscraper rises above its understated
neighbors on Fifth Avenue, upstaging even Tiffany, next door.

It is home to shops so exclusive Melody said she couldn't even brag about seeing
them because nobody back home had ever heard of the likes of Mondi, Fila,
Amazoni, Botticellino, Buccellati. It all sounded like last night's dinner at
Mamma Leone's to her. Johnny Carson, Sophia Loren and Steven Spielberg are among
the notables who have purchased Trump Tower condominiums, which, with prices
ranging from $550,000 to $10 million, are among the most expensive in New York.

All that is Donald Trump would seem to be embodied in this building. It is
showy, even pretentious. Above the door are bronze letters two feet high that
spell 'Trump Tower.' Just inside, past the palace guards, are two three-foot
bronze T's. Then comes the piano player and violinist, dressed in tuxedos.
That's entertainment.

'I told Donald I hate all that stuff,' says Philip Johnson, 'but people like the
show. It is undeniably one of the most popular buildings in New York.' And these
adornments would seem to be just the fuzzy pair of dice on the rear-view mirror
of the Rolls-Royce. Architecture critics have hailed Trump Tower, Ada Louise
Huxtable calling it 'a dramatically handsome structure' and Paul Goldberger
describing its interior as 'warm, luxurious and even exhilarating.'

That Mr. Trump was able to obtain the location, when every real-estate developer
in the world would have done just about anything to get it, is testimony to
Donald Trump's persistence and to his skills as a negotiator. That he was able
to put up a building of this dimension on this site demonstrates his finesse
with the zoning code.

When he first proposed buying the site, occupied by Bonwit Teller and owned by
the Equitable Life Assurance Company, he found that there are 29 more years on
the lease. He called Genesco Inc., owner of Bonwit's, for eight years, asking to
buy the lease. 'They literally laughed at me,' Mr. Trump recalls.  Learning
through a major stockholder that the conglomerate was cash-hungry, Mr.  Trump
called again and was sold the lease.

'He has the uncanny ability to smell blood in the water,' a competitor says.  He
obtained the air rights over Tiffany, which allowed him to build a much higher
building, and went to Equitable, which sold him the land for a 50 percent
interest in the project. Typically, Mr. Trump did not syndicate the deal but
took in one major partner, in this case Equitable.

As is his custom, Mr. Trump shoudl reap millions of dollars from the project
through sale of the condominiums and rent from the stores and 13 floors of
offices.

Several New York merchants question how stores in Trump Tower can survive paying
the high rents they are charged - the Charles Jourdan shoe store, for example,
pays $1 million a year - and a few of the 48 stores have said they are in
trouble. Several other merchants are expanding, and Mr. Trump claims that 100
stores are waiting to get in.

Trump Tower represents his guiding principle: Spend whatever it takes to buid
the est. Them, let people know about it. In New York, there is no limit to how
much money people will spend for the very best, not second best, the very best.

Mr. Trump sums up Trump Tower this way: The finest apartments in the top
building in the best location in the hottest city in the world. This is
Trump-speak. Mr. Trump has said that Trump Tower is for the 'world's best
people,' and one who doubts his modesty commented that by way of proving it, Mr.
Trump was moving in himself. The Trups recently had their third child, and the
growing family will soon settle in a $10 million triplex penthouse.

The real-estate market is Mr. Trump's thermometer for gauing just how 'hot' a
city is. 'New York is, right now, perhaps the hottest city ever,' he says.
Recalling recent years when Paris, London, Los Angeles and Chicago had been hot,
'at some point, real estate here will have to go down, but that point is not in
sight. One element that makes the market stronger here than in other U.S. cities
is the Europeans, South Americans and others.'

Arriving in his office on the 26th floor of Trump Tower, Donald Trump is handed
a sprial notebook by his secretary, Norma I. Foerderer, that lists about 50
telephone calsshe has received this morning that she deems worth mentioning.
'It's carzy,' he remarks. 'People are coming to me now because I have
credibility.' He says he senses it is ephemeral. He is seizing the moment.

Mrs. Foerderer and a few others guard the ramparts, beating back dozens,
sometime hundreds, of callers each day who would like to throw in with Mr.
Trump n a variety of deals. Visitors are treaed to a slide show on Trump Tower
while they wait - with superlatives by The Trump Organization and vocal
accompaniment by Frank Sinatra. In their efforts to get through to Mr. Trump,
some of the visitors tell Mrs. Foerderer they are old buddies of his, others
bring candy and flowers. They want to propose marriage to Mr. Trump or to put a
tank of dolphins in the lobby or have him back a Hollywood film or do a
television series about rich people living in Trump Tower or sell him some oil
wells in Oklahoma or some land in Ankara or ask if he would be interested in a
plan to bulldoze Ellis Island to build a nice golf course and clubhouse out
there. Some people try to make it simple for him and just ask for cash. The day
before he has sent $3,000 to an unfortunate family he has red about in the
newspaper, something he does frequently, according to Mrs. Foerderer.

For a billion-dollar corporation, there aren't too mny people around. Mr.  Trump
runs The Trump Organization, which includes several companies that buy, sell and
develop land, own land and buildings, and a company, now inactive, that bought
and sold gold, which, Mr. Trump confirmed, reaped him a $32 million profit. Mr.
Trump owns all of these. He is a 50-50 partner in companies that own the Gran
Hyatt hotel, Trump Tower and Harrah's at Trump Plaza. He owns 90 percent of the
Trump Plaza cooperative building partnership. The Trump family owns 25,000
apartment units primarily in Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island - the empire
that Fred C. Trump, Donald Trump's father, built. The elder Mr.  Trump looks
after these apartments from an office at the rear of an apartment building at
600 Avenue Z in Brooklyn.

Fred Trump's empire, which he built from scratch, had an estimated value of $40
million when Donal joined the business 16 years ago. Donald's brother, Robert,
is an executive vice president of the organization. (An older brother, Fred Jr.,
died several years ago.) His two sisters are Maryanne Trump Barry, a Federal
Distict Court judge in Trenton, and Elizabeth J. Trump, a secretary at the Chase
Manhattan Bank. They were raised in a 23-room house in Jamaica Estates. The
family is of Swedish descent.

Donald Trump makes or approves practically all decisions. Although there is a
board room, there is no board. At the moment, he is telling a doorman on the
other end of the telephone not to put that tacky runner down on the eautiful
marble floor when it rains. He does not seem to write anything down, keeping
volumes of company files as mental notes.

Mr. Trump's wife, Ivana, is also an executive vice president of the company and
has an office next door to her husband's. She is a former fashion model - 'a top
model,' in Mr. Trump's words - who was married to Donald Trump seven years ago
by the family's minister, the Rev. Norman Vincent Peale.

Ivana Trump, mother of three, retains her model's figure and glamour at age 35.
Designers and manufacturers of perfume, jewelry, dresses nad panty hose have
proposed naming product lis after her and using her in advertisements. She says
she is not interested. She works 10 hour days at the office, handles a heavy
social calendar and does most of the cooking for the family. Without trying to
arouse undue sentiment against her, it shoud also be added that she is a
top-flight skier, an alternate on the 1972 Czechoslovak Olympic team.

She speaks with a thick accent that only seems to add to her allure.  'Cowboys?'
she says, her eyes brightening and her voice rising, as it does when she talks
about most anything. 'We don't want Cowboys! Where can we go with Cowboys?' She
was explaining why her husband bought the New Jersey Generals instead of the
Dallas Cowboys. Says Louise M. Sunshine, another executive vice president: 'If
it is not the impossible, Donald is simply not interested. There has to be
creativity. Money ceased to be the object a long time ago.' Mr. Trump agrees
with this assessment.

Mrs. Trump acts as interior designer for his projects, in concert with other
designers. she and Mr. Trump make thousands of decisins, from picking all the
wallpapers, curtain backings and braid for the doormen's uniforms to menus and
doorknobs. Their selections seem based on galvanic skin response. They want the
bathmats for Harrah's to add a measure of excitement.

Mrs. Trump spent a week at a quarry in Italy matching slabs of the distinctive,
peach rose and pink Breccia Perniche marble for the atrium of Trump Tower. Some
people criticize 'that pink marble' and Mrs. Trump responds: 'And what do they
prefer? The cheap white travertine that is used in baks and all the other
buildings? It is too cold, too common. Donald and I are more daring than that.'
When people criticize the Trump Tower doormen's uniforms, she ansers: 'They are
fun. Why must everyone be so serious?'

The couple's attention to detail is exceptional. Workmen at the Trump Plaza say
that ona recent visit, Mr. Trump spotted a hairline crack that others could
barely detect in a bathroom of one of the 140 cooperative apartments. He not
only complained but stood there until a work crew came and replaced the marble.

Another worker at the site recalled that Mrs. Trump had an entire elevator cab
replaced rather than have a small gap filled where the trim failed to meet the
elevator wall. The construction manager of the Atlantic City project, Tom
Pippett, said, when Mrs. Trump gave birth to the couple's third child, 'We hoped
to get her off our backs for a least a month or so.' But she delivered the baby
on a Friday and returned to work the next Tuesday.

Irving R Fischer, chairman of the board of HRH Construction Corporation, one of
New York City's largest, and construction manager of Trump Tower, recalls mrs.
Trump's decision that the handrails ont he balconies at Trump Plaza were the
wrong color. 'He saw a gold Cadillac down the block,' he says, 'and yelled,
'That's the color!' We had to go out and buy goddamned Cadillac paint for the
railings. These are things no other developer in the city ever thnks about.
They leave it to architects and decorators.'

After lunch in the Trump Tower atrium restaurant - 'have a roll, these are the
best rolls in the city' - Mr. Trump walks up to the Sherry-Netherland Hotel for
talks, through an interpreter, with a group of Argentines. They are principal
owners of 76 acres on the West Side, the largest single piece of undeveloped
private property remaining in Manhattan, site of the proposed Lincoln West
development. Although partners in the development say Mr. Trump is considering
joining them in the project, a knowledgeable source says Mr. Trump left the
meeting with an option to buy thm out entirely.

'He is an almost unbelievable negotiator,' says Irving Fischer of HRH
Construction. 'I don't worship at the shrine of Donald Trump,' he says, 'but our
company has given up trying to negotiate costs with him. We just say: 'Tell us
what you want, you're going to get it anyway.''

Mr. Trump refuses to dicuss his deals publicly, but his negotiating bilities
were there for all to see recently when he decided to sign the Giant's all-pro
linebacker, Lawrence Taylor. Before the negotiating was over, Mr. Taylor's agent
foundhimself paying Mr. Trump $750,000 in cash to get his player released from a
contract he signed with the Fenerals so that he could re-sign with the Giants,
and Mr. Trump had reaped millins of dollars of free publicity for having gone
after one of the best players in football.

Three years ago, Mr. Trump went into a room with the owners of the Barbizon
Plaza Hotel and an adjacent apartment buiding, purchased the property for about
$13 million, according to records, and less than two months later took out a
mortgage on it for $65 million. Sources in the industry say the value of hat
parcel on Central Park South may now be as much as $125 million.

'Trump can sense whn people might want to get ot of a project,' says a
developer, 'and he moves in, very quickly and very quietly so others will not
get into the biddig and drive the price up. He trusts his instincts and has
theguts to act on them.'

Roy M. Cohn, Mr. Trump's friend and attorney, adds: 'He has an uncanny sense of
knowing that something is a good deal when it looks dismal to everyone else.'

Such was his first deal in Manhattan, his purchase of the Commodore Hotel on
East 42nd Street in the mdid-1970's, when even the Chrysler Building across the
street was in foreclosure. Fred Trump described his son's efforts to buy the
hotel as 'fighting for a seat on the Titanic.' But, Donald Trump says, 'I saw
all those people coming out of Grand Central Terminal, and I said to myself,
'How bad can this be?'' He completely renovated the hotel, reopening it as the
chrome-and-glass Grand Hyatt Hotel.

In Atlantic City, he invested $1 million in land and other costs before the
referendum on gambling was passed in 1976. By the early 1980's, his investment
was $22 million. 'Everyone said stay away from Atlantic City,' Mr. Trump says.
'Everybody but about four guys. I wa one of the four.'

According to sources in Atlantic City familiar with the deal, Harrah's paid Mr.
Trup $50 million in the casino hotel, which Mr. Trump already had under
construction. Harrah's put up an additional $170 million in fiancing, agreed to
charge Mr. Trump no managing fee and has guaranteed him no financial losses in
any year.

He had moved in quietly, sending 14 different people to purchase 15 parcels of
land and keeping his name out of it. 'If the seller was Italian,' says Mr.
Trump, 'we sent an Italian' - something he probably did not learn at the
University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Finance, where he received a B.A.
in economics in 1968. He bought and sold a few pieces of real estate in
Philadelphia when he was bored with classes.

'It's in his genes,' says Fred Trump, explaining his son's success in real
estate and recalling his three sons growing up on construction sites and in
rental offices.

'Donald Trump is the Michael Jackson of real estate,' says Mr. Fischer.  'We've
been dealing with him since he was 16. He was an old trouper at age 25.'

His success also derives from his marketing skills. 'I want to bring a little
showmanship to real estate,' Mr. Trumps says. He is often compared to the late
William Zeckendorf, the renowned New York builder, who was said to owe much of
his success to his personal flair. Other New York developers - including the
Lefraks, the Rudins, te Tishmans, the Fishers, the Roses - go quietly about
building more buildings than does Donal Trump, making their millions and keeping
their names out of things.

Some developers find Mr. Trump's high-profile approach disagreeable, but most
concede that it has worked for him.

Preston Robert Tisch, a developer and chief operating officer of the Loews
Corporation, who lost out to Mr. Trump in the battle over whose site would be
chosen for the city's convention cneter, concludes: 'He captured the imagination
of people to a greater degree than I could.'

The condominiums in Trump Tower are selling rapdily at what many believe are
exorbitant prices, while less costly units in Museum Tower, for example, another
'superluxury' building a few blocks away, are not. According to a marketing
study of four such buildings made by the rudential Insurance Company of America,
Donald Trump seems to be the only person in New York who knows how to market
superluxury apartments. How do you sell a one-bedroom apartment costin as much
as a line item in the Department of Defense budget? 'You sell them a fantasy,'
Mr. Trump explains. 'He deserves full credit for his success,' says another
builder. 'He spent $1 million on the waterfall in Trump Tower. No one else would
have done that. If the building fails everyone will say: 'Well sure, what
jackass spends a million bucks on a waterfall?''

'What sets Trump apart,' says Ben V. Lambert, a real-estate investment banker,
'is his ability to pierce through the canvas and get things don.He gets
projectsliterally off the ground while others are having meetins and doing
feasibility studies. But his real skill is putting together complex pieces of
the puzzles: fiancing, zoning, parcels of land and such. This ethereal part of
building is perhaps more important than the brick and mortar.'

Some have said that his father's money and political contacts with the Brooklyn
Democratic organization, which produced former Mayor Abraham D. Beame and former
Gov. Hugh L. Carey, are an important part of Donald Trump's success formula. To
be sure, they played a part in his gaining a foothold in Manhattan real estate a
decade ago. 'It's good to know people,' Fred Trump told his son.  Henry J.
Stern, the Parks Commissioner who wa then a City ouncil memer, sharply criticzed
the tax abatement Mr. Trump received - the first ever for a commercial developer
- on the Grand Hyatt Hotel project. 'Donald Trump runs with the same clique that
continues to manipulate things behind the scenes in this city,' Mr. Stern then
charged.

In retrospect, Mr. Stern now says: 'The tax abatement was a good thing. It made
it possible for Donald Trump to take a risk an build a hotel that started a
turnarond of that entire area.' Mayor Koch agrees with that assessment, as does
Mr. Tisch, who, at the time, vociferously opposed the abatement as unfair to
other developers and hotel operators.

'Donald Trump, Mr. Stern concludes, 'is a transplanted 19th-century
swashbuckling entrepreneur, and it is up to public officials to rein him in. I
don't so much fault him for asking the city for thigs as I do public officials
who gave him his way.

'It is not a crime to contribute to politicians,' says Mr. Stern. 'For a New
York real-estate developer not to contribute would probably make him look
overtly hostile.'

Charges of political influence were also made when Mr. Trump hired Louise
Sunshine to lobby for his site for the convention center. Mrs. Sunshine had been
the chief fund-raiser for Governor Carey's re-election campaign and was
collecting a state salary at the time. Concern was voiced over the intermingling
of roles.

Some people still worry about Mr. Trump's political connections. Ruth W.
Messinger is a City Council member who, despite her continued opposition to the
project, has worked for four years to try to insure that a development at
Lincoln West will be reasonably compatible with the neighborhood. Reports that
Mr. Trump may buy into the project, she says, 'scare me to death.'

'He seems to get his way in this city,' she says. Mr. Trup is rather astonished
that people feel this way after the city denied him a tax abatement on Trump
Tower worth abot $15 million to $20 million.

Although it has yet to become an issue, some eyebrows were raised when Mr.
Trump was named to a panel studying the feasibility and site selection of a
domed sports complex in New York even though he has expressed a strong desire to
build it.

Mrs. Messinger does not much care for Mr. Trump's 'contentiousness' in pressing
a lawsuit against the city over refusal of his tax abatement on Trump Tower or
for his filing suit against the official who refused it, Anthony Gliedman, the
city's Housing Commissioner. Says Roy Cohn: 'You don't use the term 'settlement'
with Donald.'

Mr. Trump's critics charge that this is typical of his bullying ways.  Tenants
of an apartment building at Central Park South and Avenue of the Americas owned
by Mr. Trump charge thathe is trying to force them out. He has expressed a
desire to build a lavish new hotel on the site of that building and the
adjacent. Barbizon-Plaza Hotel. Mr. Trump has filed suits against several of the
tenants and Housing Court judges have thrown several of the suits out f court on
grounds that they were brought in bad faith to harass and annoy the tenants and
were a blatant attempt to force the tenants out throug spurious and unnecessary
litigation.

For his part, Mr. Trump claims that millionaires are paying $400 for large
apartments with park views in the rent-controlled building. He has had tin
placed over windows of vacant apartments, giving the building the look of a
tenement. He has offered to house homeless peole in the empty apartments, an
offer Mayor Koch declined because he viewed it as as an obvious attempt to make
remaining tenants want to leave.

Mr. Trump first became a target for many of his critics when, in 1980, he
jackhammered two Art Deco has-relief sculptures that had adorned the Bonwit
building, which he was razing to make way for Trump Tower. He destroyed them
rather than donating them to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which had expressed
interest in the pieces. Critics never fail to mention the episode.  Now, Mr.
Trump says he is sorry he did it, but insists that little interest was shown in
preserving the statues until after they were demolished.

Mr. Trump does not place patience on his list of virtues. Workmen confirm a
story that he paid $75,000 to truck several 40-foot trees from Florida to Trump
Tower, where a tunnel was built into the building so the trees would not be
damaged by frost. The 3,000-pound trees were then installed in the lower plaza
of the atrium. Mr. Trump did not like the look. He ordered the trees removed,
and, when workmen balked for 24 hours, Mr. Trump had the trees cut down with a
chainsaw.

It is often pointed out that Mr. Trump is prone to exageration in describing his
projects.  Oh, he lies a great deal, says Philip Johnson with a laugh.  But it's
sheer exuberance, exaggeration. It's never about anything important.  He's
straight as an arrow in his business dealings.

Sometimes exaggeration just seems to swirl around him. A recent television show,
'Lifestyles of the Rich and Famous, reported that his Greenwich, Conn.,
waterfront home is a $10 million estate.  Mr. Trump will admit that, yes he paid
less than one-third of that and says: I didn't tell them that.

Various figures, ranging from $6 million to $10 million have been reported as
the amount he paid for the Generals, but, as one who was involved in the
negotiations says, the figure is closer to $1 million.  Mr. Trump answers: I
never told them those other figures.

And just about every profile ever written about Mr. Trump states that he
graduated first in his class at Wharton in 1968. Although the school refused
comment, the commencement program from 1968 does not list him as graduating with
honors of any kind. He says he never told them that either.

Some of mr. Trump's critics are worried that the man who may change New York's
skyline before he's through may simply have no taste. The worry abot
palace-guard doormen and talk of high-rise castles.

If the charge is that Donald is unsophisticated, says Roy Cohn, they are in some
ways right. If you go with Donald to see an art collection, he's not that
interested. He'd rather look out the windows at building.

His taste is all right, says Philip Johnson, but it is sometimes overwhelmed by
his sense of publicity. He will become less and less glitzy.  He'll listen to
me.

Oddly enough, for all of those who criticize his buildings as not in the best of
taste, architecture critics have generally hailed them. In her review of the
glass-and-chrome Grand Hyatt, for example, Ada Louise Huxtable spoke of the
building's ingenuity and elegance and called it urbane and elegant New York.
After an afternoon of negotiating with the Argentines, Mr. Trump returns to his
office and momentarily takes a seat behind a desk big enough for F-14 landings.
The office is not, however, what is known in the decorating profession as a
power office, the kind common among top executives that is designed to induce
groveling. It is of casual, modern decor with models of buildings and
blue-prints scattered about.

Mr. Trump has abandoned the flashy haberdashery he favored some years ago - a
wardrobe that included a burgundy suit and matching shoes - and he now dresses
conservatively if casually, often wearing dark suits, white shirts, subdued ties
and loafers. He speaks slowly and softly and in the same casual manner to
eminent architects an business moguls as to the cofee and sandwich vendor
outside his casino-hotel. He is said, by acquaintances, to be generally even
tempered and rarely seems ruffled. He is not given to unkind remarks and is
nearly always in a positive frame of mind.  I never think of the negative, he
says.  All obstacles can be overcome.

He talks boastfully about his projects, but is uncomfortable talking about
himself. He does not smoke and does not drink alcohol. He plays golf and tennis
regularly. His wife describes him as an all-American boy who likes country music
best and prefers a steak and aked potato to anything called cuisine.

Although he is 6 feet 2 inches, he does not particularly stand out in a crowd.
His sandy hair is probably a bit long by standards of the corporate world, with
the sides slicked back just a bit. More often than not, published profiles
describe him as handsome. His smile is an impudent-looking curl of the lip that
makes his protrait appear less like the head of a billion-dollar corporation in
his office than Elvis Presley in Viva Las Vegas.

He has boyish looks that are accentuated by the company he keeps. His equals in
the business world are all much older than he and these are the people he most
often socializes with. He has dificulty now figuring out who his real friends
are, as billionaires will.

He has not yet indulged in planes, race cars, polo ponies, art work, yachts, and
the like. He says he doesn't have time for all of that now and prefers putting
his money back into his deals. Of course there is the estate in Greenwich, and,
Mrs. Trump says, We have a speedboat up there, and I like to go out and go a
hundred miles an hour in it and come back. We don't want to sit on a yacht all
day.  His father pulled Donald Trump out of a prep school because he didn't want
his son growing up with spoiled kids with $40 ball gloves, sending him instead
to military school. His father bragged at the sports forum that he had taken the
subway and saved $15 car fare.

Mrs. Trump says that, though they both work long hours, they try to spend two or
three nights a week at home with the children, aged 6 years, 2 years and three
months, buut the social obligations do pile up. In addition to dinner parties,
Mrs. Trump says they like to attend Broadway openings an that they frequent the
ballet and opera. Mrs. Trump is active in support of the United Cerebral Palsy
Fund and other charities, as well as the New York City Opera.  She is also an
active supporter of Ronald Reagan.

Mr. Trump seems to have maintained a detached view of his flood of fortune and
publicity. He frequently mentions that all of the attention and success may well
be fleeting.

His friends say that he is not yet fully cognizant of his station.  He loves to
got to '21' for lunch and be impressed with all the wealthy, powerful, famous
people, says an acquaintance.  He doesn't quite realize that he's one of them.

That may be changing. He recently make a secret offer to buy the place.

After dusk, he rides throught the city on his way to the last appointment of the
day, enjoying the lights that make the whole city sparkle like the inside of
Trump Tower. He talked about his plans for the future, as much as anyone who
operates on spontaneous combustion can.

Mr. Trump says whatever else he gets into he will undoubtedly stay in real
estate. He hints everal times at a deal in the works, a big deal, very Trumpish,
regarding television.  but he will not divulge details.

The football thing is cute, Trump Tower and the piano and all of that, it's all
cute, but what does it mean?  he says, sounding what borders on a note of
uncharacteristic despair.

Asked to explain, he adds: What does it all mean when some wacko over in Syria
can end the world with nuclear weapons?

He says that his concern for nuclear holocaust is not one that popped into his
mind during any recent made-of-television movie. He says that it has been
troubling him since his uncle, a nuclear physicist, began talking to him about
it 15 years ago.

His greatest dream is to personally do something about the problem and,
characteristially, Donald Trump thinks he has an answer to nuclear armament: Let
him engotiate arms agreements - he who can talk people into selling $100 million
properties to him for $13 million.  Negotiations is an art, he says and I have a
gift for it.

The idea thathe would ever be allowed to got into a room alone and negotiate for
the United States, let alone be successful in disarming the world, seems the
naive musing of an optimistic, deluded young man who has never lost at anything
he has tried. But he believes that through years of making his views known and
through supporting candidaes who share his views, it could someday happen.

He is constantly asked about his interest in running for elective office.
Absolutely not, he answers.  All of the false smiles and the red tape. It is too
difficult to really do anthing.

He dislikes meetings and paperwork and is in the enviable position of being able
to avoid both.

His last appointment of the day is a committee meeting of the New York Vietnam
Veterans Memorial Commission. He walks in late to a conference room at Price
Waterhouse & Company, the accounting firm, where a group of about 10 men, most
of whom look to be corporate junior executives about his age, tired looking
young men with their ties lossened after a long day at the office, gathered
around a conference table.

Mr. Trump is the co-chairman, but he has not been to many of the meetings and,
although they don't show it, some of the committee members are peeved. The
meeting has already begun when he strolls in. There are written reports on the
table about design contests and a fund-raising campaign for a memorial. A good
deal of hand-wringing is going on over how in the world to raise even a small
portion of the $1.4 million needed. The men are stating the need to energize
that component of the campaign, to plug into that secor, to interface.  Mr.
Trump does not take off his coat and slouches in a chair. When he finally speaks
up, he says hat he is on the commission because the young men who went to
Vietnam got a bad deal - which, about the worst thing that can happen to anyone.

He then throws out the names of some people, friends of mine, whom they could
probably tap for substantial contributions.  Then, we're going to have the
fund-raiser at Trump Tower, he says, punching through the canvas.  I've called
the White House. The President is coming, so we can raise the price of the 800
tickets from $500 to $1,000. That will just about put you where you want to be.

I hae to be going, he says. All of the men stare silently at him as he stands
and picks up a copy of the afternoon newspaper on the conference table, looking
for a moment at his photograph on both the front and back pages, photographs
taken at the sports forum where the men called out his name. That was 10 hours,
several projects and milions of dollars ago. He shakes his head and smiles at
the photographs as the men continue to stare at him intently.

Mr. Trump, one of the men about his age asks sheepishly.  What's Herschel Walker
really like?

He's nice guy, really, Donald Trump says softly of his halfback.  He's the
nicest guy in the world.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Donald Trump

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT MADE HUMANS HUMAN?

BYLINE: By Boyce Rensberger

SECTION: Section 6; Page 80, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4555 words


NEW THEORIES HOLD THAT COOPERATION, NOT COMPETITION, DIVIDED MAN FROM APE.

THAT THE HUMAN race sprang, Venuslike, fully formed on the face of the earth is
a conceit that once seemed as immutable as the sun rising and setting.  Human
beings, alone among the animals, are capable of speech, of intricate imaginings
and elaborate creations.  For as long as there has been recorded memory, they
have appeared as creatures apart--with dominion not only over the rest of the
animal kingdom but over their environment.

That the human species, far from being a little lower than the angels, actually
evolved from a lower order of animals not too different from the chimpanzees and
gorillas of today ceased for the most part to be a point of contention even
before Charles Darwin died in 1882. (In the United States, while those insisting
that man is made in the image of God have periodically sought to reopen the
issue of ''creationism,'' evolution is is what is taught in the schools.)

Ever since the identification in 1864 of a skull belonging to an extinct human
ancestor--Homo neanderthalensis, who lived between 35,000 and 100,000 years
ago--scientists have pondered a question that probes to the very heart of what
it means to be human: What led a population of apelike animals to diverge from
an apelike way of life and set off on an evolutionary course that would
establish human beings as the most extraordinary of animals?

Was it the use of weapons, as Darwin and his contemporaries believed, that
brought about the change from ape to man?  Did the human brain evolve in the
skulls of blood-thirsty killer apes, as the writer Robert Ardrey suggested in
''African Genesis,'' his still-influential book of a generation ago?  Or, as
some of the more recent scenarios recount it, were the first humanlike
creatures--members of human-style social units--clever gatherers of plants and
scavengers of carrion?  Is male dominance an inescapable human trait rooted in
the prowess of men bringing home the bacon?  Or was ''woman the gatherer'' the
real foundation of human progress?

This week, nearly all of the world's most influential paleoanthropologists--the
small band of scientists who search for and study the bones of the human race's
evolutionary ancestors--are gathered at the American Museum of Natural History
in New York.  Many of them have brought to the conference the very fossils that
provoke these questions about human origins.  Some 50 specimens, representing
most of the important discoveries of the last 120 years, have been removed from
their vaults in museums around the world and, for the first time, brought under
one roof.

After eight days of study and discussion, the specimens will be put on display
at the museum from April 13 through Sept. 9.

FOR YEARS, THE LARGE brain reigned as the supreme hallmark of human status, and
paleoanthropologists assiduously measured the cranial capacities of each new
fossil skull.  If the brain was smaller than that of the smallest of known
living humans, the specimen was summarily judged nonhuman.  Now it is clear that
the big brain was the last of the distinctively human anatomical traits to
evolve.  Over the last decade, fossil finds have known that the earliest human
ancestors were walking on two legs nearly four million years ago, and that their
brains did not begin their slow growth beyond ape size until half that period
had elapsed.

The term ''human,'' of course, has no generally accepted scientific definition.
Some say that the use of the genus name ''Homo'' (Latin for ''man'') implies
that the specimen in question represents a human ancestor.  Others say that, in
paleoanthropology, defining what is philosophically ''human'' is irrelevant and
not very helpful when all that the bones offer are anatomical clues to the past.

Most scientists prefer to make the distinction between the superfamily
Hominoidea, which includes humans and the apes, and the family Hominidae, which
includes only humans and their extinct relatives closer than the apes.  Among
the hominids, the almost modern Homo sapiens appeared at least 300,000 years
ago, and the anatomically modern Homo sapiens sapiens, 40,000 years ago.

What forces propelled apelike creatures to become hominids?

In much the same way that science fiction seems to be a reflection of the
present while it projects into the distant future, scenarios for the origins of
the human species appear to be no less a mirror of contemporary perceptions of
human nature.

''Whatever such stories single out as important factors in our origins become
important parts of our self-image,'' wrote Matt Cartmill, a Duke University
paleonanthropologist, in a recent issue of Natural History.  ''Conversely, such
stories won't be listened to unless they account for the human peculiarities
that we think are crucial markers of humanity.  They will be listened to most
carefully when they echo other themes from the culture of their time.''

One of the earliest modern conceptions of human evolution originated with
Raymond A. Dart.  An Australian-born anatomist, Dart had started a revolution in
paleoanthropology in the 1920's when, as a professor at a Johannesburg medical
school, he discovered the first evidence that human beings might have originated
in Africa, not Asia.  (Up until that time, the earliest fossils of hominids had
been found in Asia.) The skull Dart found appeared to be intermediate in form
between ape and human.  He named it Australopithecus africanus.  Although the
name means ''southern ape of Africa,'' Dart considered his specimen a ''missing
link'' between apes and humans.  The shape of the skull and the small brain were
rather apelike, but the teeth were startlingly human.

For one thing, the canines--the sharp-pointed teeth on either side of the upper
and lower jaws--were small, as in humans, and not the protruding daggers of
apes.  Anthropologists had long thought that canine reduction was a sign that
tools and weapons had replaced the functions of the long teeth.  Also, the skull
clearly rested on top of a vertical spinal column--its owner had walked on two
legs.  The bipedal Australopithecus was later estimated to have lived about two
million years ago.

More specimens of these hominids subsequently came to light in South African
caves.  With the hominid bones were the remains of animals, especially baboon
skulls that looked to Dart as if they had been bashed with a club.  More
significantly, similar damage could be found on some australopithecine skulls.
The message seemed clear: The creature that evolved into a human was a predatory
killer.

Dart published a paper in 1953, arguing that the australopithecines had departed
from the herbivorous habits of their predecessors and acquired a taste for meat.
As Dart saw it, the upright posture freed the forepaws to become hands, which
made possible the fashioning and use of weapons, which allowed the more
efficient killing of prey.  Humans emerged from apedom because they were
hunters, Dart said, and the demands of hunting allowed only the more intelligent
creatures to prosper.  In other words, our brains began to enlarge under
pressure of the need to improve killing skills.  The killer-ape scenario became
one of the most compelling and chilling interpretations of human origins ever
devised.

The idea that early hominids were hunters was widely held.  But Dart went beyond
the conventional view.  He argued that it was only a short step from killing for
food to murdering one's own kind.

''The blood-spattered, slaughter-gutted archives of human history,'' Dart
fulminated in Miami's International Anthropological and Linguistic Review,
''FROM THE EARLIEST Egyptian and Sumerian records down to the most recent
unspeakable atrocities of World War I and II accord with universal
cannibalism... in proclaiming this common bloodlust differentiator, this mark of
Cain, that separates man dietetically from his anthropoid relatives...''

Robert Ardrey, a skilled writer and dramatist, read Dart's paper while visiting
Kenya in the 1950's to cover the bloody Mau Mau uprising for The Reporter
magazine.  Ardrey's first exposure to Dart's fossil evidence was mixed with
tales from white settler terrified by rumors of Mau Mau murders.  The Kenyan
freedom fighters had rejected the colonialists' cloak of civilization, so went
these tales, and had reverted to animals crazed by the taste of blood.  History
would judge the rumors to be wild exaggerations, but at the time, Mau Mau
tactics had the intended psychological effect.

''I sampled in the terrorbrightened streets of Nairobi the primal dreads of a
primal continent,'' Ardrey wrote in ''African Genesis.'' Africa scared me.  If
this continent had indeed been the cradle of humankind, and had I been the first
man, then I should have been born in fear.''

The hard evidence for Ardrey's killer-ape hypothesis, all from Dart, is slim.
First there were the dented baboon skulls in the same caves that held the
Australopithecus bones.  ''The use of weapons,'' Ardrey concluded, ''had
proceded man.''

Still, hunting is not murder.  The clincher for Ardrey was the broken jawbone of
a 12-year-old australopithecine.  ''What if a weapon had done this deed?''
Ardrey wrote.  ''What if I held in my hands the evidence of antique murder
committed with a deadly weapon a quarter of a million years before the time of
man?''

Ardrey also cited seven other hominid skulls that had been fractured, but even
he cautioned: ''Not all the specimens demonstrate conclusively death by
purposeful violence.'' He singled out only three--one that had been damaged like
the baboon skulls, one in which a rock had been rammed into the braincase, and
another with two small punctures that could have been inflicted with a sharp
stick.

''One needed nothing but the lay common sense of a juryman,'' Ardrey wrote, ''to
return a verdict that at some terrible moment in more ancient times, murder had
been done... Man is a predator whose natural instict is to kill with a weapon.''

Ardrey published in 1961, and the killer-ape story found a ready following in
that decade of the Cold War, the Cuban missile crisis, assassinations, urban
riots and the Vietnam War.  Here, at last, was what looked like a scientific
basis for the old observation about ''man's inhumanity to man.'' We may
attribute our humanness, Ardrey claimed, to a renegade evolutionary momentum
that propelled us to a lonely position of alienation from a benign natural
order.

''African Genesis'' was a best seller, and Ardrey became an international
celebrity.  Perhaps the most memorable version of the killer-ape hypothesis
appeared in the opening scene of Stanley Kubrick's 1969 movie, ''2001: A Space
Odyssey.'' A placid band of apes learns to kill other animals with a bone club
and then turns the weapon on a rival band of apes, murdering one of their own
kind.  The killer exuberantly flings his weapon into the air and it is
transformed into a space station.  The impulse to violence has separated
humanity not just from nature but from Earth itself.

Although some paleoanthropologists supported the killer-ape scenario, others
opposed it.  Among its notable detractors was the British-born anthropologist
Louis Leakey.  In his lecture tours of England and the United States during the
1960's, Leakey was fond of saying that studies of the evolutionary past offered
lessons for the future.  Arguing against Ardrey's view, he stressed the
closeness of humans to the natural order and their obligation to protect the
natural environment that nurtured their evolutionary rise.

It was, in a sense, a verse of a new Genesis rejecting the Biblical injunction
to exercise dominion over nature.  On the matter of the fossils themselves,
Leakey pointed out that the bones in question--the evidence of ''antique
murder''--were found in caves where roof falls could easily have produced the
incriminating demage long after death.

Probably the best refutation of Ardrey came in the early 1970's from C.K.  Brain
and his colleague Elizabeth S. Vrba, both palentologists from southern Africa,
who said that the predators were not hominids but leapords.  Brain noted that
the caves once opened in crevasses where enough rainwater accumulated to sustain
trees.  Leapords, he noted, commonly drag their kills up into trees to eat.
Baboons are a favored prey of leopards and, as the leopards ate, the skulls
could have dropped into the cave mouths, hitting the rocks below.

Brain speculated that hominids, too, were among the leopards' prey and that
their bones fell into the caves.  The damage produced would be indistinguishable
from that caused by a rock hitting a head.  Brain's leopard theory was
strengthened by his explanation of the skull with the two holes that Ardrey
thought were made by a sharp stick.  The holes happen to be exactly as far apart
as the lower canine teeth of an adult leopard, and they are of the right size.
When leopards drag their prey into trees, they usually bite the head and pull
the corpse between their legs.

Brain neatly disposed of Ardrey's South African evidence, and Leakey, who had
found in East Africa most of the fossils of the other known hominids, reported
that he saw no evidence of deliberate violence.  (Most of the East African
fossils were buried gently in lake or river sediments.) Still, the killer-ape
hypothesis remained in vogue among the public long after most
paleoanthropologists had forgotten about it.

Not until the late 1970's however, did a cogent alternative emerge: an assertion
that the forces shaping the human species were not violence and competition but
peaceableness and cooperation.  It was a view singularly suited to the times.

The once-radical advocacy of peace and love seemed to have been embraced by
mainstream society.  Competition for dominance, be it within families, offices
or continents, had come to be seen as an aberration needing correction, not an
integral component of humanness.

Within paleoanthropology, an early proponent of this viewpoint was Glynn Isaac,
a British archeologist working with Louis Leakey's son Richard in Kenya.  He
found the remains of two-million-year-old campsites or, as he called them, home
bases.  The evidence was mainly a collection of animal bones, some with cut
marks from stone knives, and the waste flakes of toolmaking in stone.  The
number of bones and stones suggested repeated or sustained occupation by
hominids rather like the australopithecines that Dart had discovered.  These
sites were thought to be places to which the roving members of a hominid band
would return each night to share the food obtained during the day.

The home base might have been little more than a shady spot by a stream, but the
implications were enormous.  However primitive the hominids seemed from their
skeltons, they had already developed a stable social organization and an
advanced degree of cooperation.  No other primate shares food on a regular
basis.  Apes forage for themselves.

A home base would permit older or infirm members of the group to stay behind and
wait for the others to come back with food.  ''It is the home base,'' wrote
Sherwood L. Washburn, a physical anthropologist at the University of California
at Berkeley, ''that changes sprained ankles and fevers from fatal diseases to
minor ailments.'' It also changes the image of murderous killer-apes into
law-abiding members of society.

By the early 1980's, paleoanthropology had not only abandoned the Dart-Ardrey
story, it had developed formal alternatives.  The two most prominent differ in
many respects, but they share the view that the events making animals human have
more to do with cooperation than with conflict.

In 1981, C. Owen Lovejoy, an anatomist and anthropologist at Kent State
University, published his scenario in the journal Science.  His hypothesis
gained further attention in Donald C. Johanson's and Maitland A. Edey's popular
1981 book, ''Lucy.'' Lovejoy contends that human beings emerged from apedom
because of the simultaneous appearance of bipedalism, regular food sharing and
the more or less continuous sexual availability of males and females in a
monogamous pair bond.

Although earlier scenarios had stressed tool use and brain growth as key
elements in the emergency of the human ancestor, fossil finds of the last decade
have established that they were not among the early factors.  In 1974,
Johanson's discovery in Ethiopia of the skeleton of ''Lucy'' and other specimens
of Australopithecus afarensis showed that a bipedal hominid was on the scene by
about 3.5 million years ago, some 1.5 million years before Dart's
australopithecines lived.  Its body was much like ours, if smaller, but its
skull was hardly changed from that of an ape.

The archeologist Mary Leakey, widow of Louis Leakey, confirmed that such a
creature could walk as we do when she discovered in Tanzania not only bones of
the ''Lucy'' species but also footprints that look like those of modern humans.
The bones and prints, however, date to about 3.7 million years ago.  The oldest
evidence of toolmaking is only about two million years ago, as is the first sign
of any growth in brain size beyond that of an ape.  Tools suited to big-game
hunting do not appear until less than a million years ago, after the
australopithecine brain had more than doubled.

To Lovejoy at Kent State, this meant bipedalism--one of the hallmarks of being
human--had to have arisen for some other reason than to free the hands for
making tools or weapons.  Bipedalism, according to Lovejoy, served to free the
hands for carrying food back to a home base, especially so that males could
provide supplemental food for females who, encumbered with children, could not
get enough for themselves and their offspring.  To keep her mate coming home
with food, the early hominid female became continuously sexually attractive and
receptive.  Apes, by contrast, are interested in sex only when the female is in
heat, and do not form pair bonds.

Basing his hypothesis on the home base idea and on his study of reproductive
rates among chimpanzees, Lovejoy maintains that the bipedal pair bond--which
would enable hominid females to have more than one dependent child at a
time--must have evolved quickly since behavior patterns that lead to increased
reproduction tend to be fastest-evolving.  Bonding would also assure a male that
his mate's children were his, too, making it worthwhile for him to share food.

Chimpanzee mothers, on the other hand, must spend several years raising a
dependant infant, with no help from a male.  Not until the infant is waned do
they come into heat again, so chimps have babies only once every five or six
years.  This slow reproductive rate is one reason apes have been declining in
numbers for the last several million years, outcompeted by monkeys and humans,
both with faster reproductive rates.

Since humans have longer periods of childhood dependency than do apes, early
hominids would have fared worse than chimps, since mothers would have to wait
longer before mating again.  Hominids would have died out if evolution had not
provided some way of speeding up the reproductive rate.  The solution, Lovejoy
claims, was the transformation of sex from a mere instrument of reproduction to
a means of maintaining a stable pair bond.  Making babies, in other words,
became making love.

Males and females developed a variety of permanent, noncyclical sex attractants.
Human females, for example, are the only primates with breasts that remain
prominent when not lactating.  Human males have, by far, the most conspicuous
penises of any primate.  Humans are the only species with genital scent
organs--specialized sweat glands situated among pubic hairs.

Why should a hominid male remain faithful to his mate?  Why wouldn't other
females be just as attractive?  Lovejoy says his hypothesis does not demand
perfect fidelity or permanent monogamy, but he does suspect that it offers an
explanation for another peculiarly human phenomenon: the highly individual
physique, especially the face.  ''I suspect we have evolved such a variable
appearance precisely so that people can form an attachment to a certain mate,''
Lovejoy says.  ''I keep thinking of that song, 'Though your face is charming,
it's the wrong face.  It's not her face...' ''

Lovejoy's scenario has met much criticism, ranging from mathematical quarrels
with his calculations of reproductive rates among chimps to protests from
feminists who object to the relatively passive role it assigns to females.
Actually, Lovejoy envisions the early hominid female to have been very much
involved not only in rearing the young but in getting food.  It is just that,
with two or more tots in tow, she could not travel as far or gather as much as
was needed.

At about the same time Lovejoy put forth his ideas, a markedly different
scenario--one putting females squarely in the middle of the story--was proposed
by Nancy Makepeace Tanner, an anthropologist at the University of California at
Santa Cruz.

Citing the ''Western cultural tendency'' to focus on males, Tanner wrote in her
book, ''On Becoming Human'': ''There has, in fact, been very little direct
exploration or reconstruction of women's activities during the course of human
evolution.  Although this is understandable in view of the cultural background
of many Western scholars, it is poor science.  There is a great deal of data
that cannot be adequately analyzed if scientists fail to examine the activities
of one-half of the human species.''

Also utilizing the idea of the home base, as well as her own studies of
chimpanzee behavior, Tanner suggested that the chief forces propelling human
origin were the challenges faced by hominid mothers coping with the rigors of
the semiarid savanna.  (It is now believed that human evolution began when the
African forest thinned out to savanna).

Wheras apes could luxuriate in the abundance of humid forests, Tanner noted,
life on the savanna would have demanded more skill and ingenuity.  The patchy
and obscure distribution of food put a premium on intellect and led to the
invention of the first tools: digging sticks, to get at the savanna's roots and
tubers, and baskets or bags for carrying a day's haul back to a home base.

The basic social unit, Tanner said, recalling the chimpanzee model, was a mother
and her dependent children and, perhaps, a grandmother.  In contrast to Lovejoy,
Tanner believes monogamous pair bonding came much later, after a long period in
which female australopithecines, in effect, tamed aggressive and socially
disruptive males.  They did this by preferring to mate only with ''those who
were socially cooperative, willing to share and be protective.'' Since the
bearers of cooperative genes were given preference in reproduction, later
generations of males were eventually domesticated and allowed into the social
group as permanent members.

When Lovejoy's model requires a male to help females, Tanner's calls for a more
resourceful female.  Lovejoy's hominids need the pair bond because they have no
tools, an inference based on the fact that the first stone tools occur some 1.7
million years after the first hominids appear.  Tanner's hominids need no pair
bond because the mothers use tools, but tools made only of perishable wood or
hide, of which there would be no evidence in the fossil record.

Although the two models differ markedly--each had been criticized for minimizing
the role of one sex--there is room for agreement.  It is not difficult to
imagine, for example, Tanner's mother-dominated social unit leading to a
progressively stronger pair-bonded nuclear family that combined the
resourcefulness of mothers and fathers.  Moreover, both scientists agree that
bipedalism arose as a means of carrying things, chiefly food, back to a home
base.

Tanner and Lovejoy also reject the killer-ape hypothesis and insist that early
hominids didn't even hunt animals.  On this point, modern paleoanthropologists
have become nearly unanimous.

Lovejoy rejects hunting among early hominids because he thinks human beings
lacking advanced stone weapons simply could not compete with lions, hyenas and
leopards.  Bipedalism without effective weapons would be a disavantage to a
hunter of big game.  ''No form of primate locomotion could be less suited to the
tracking and capture of large prey,'' Lovejoy contends.  ''It makes you slow and
unstable.'' If bipedalism evolved to enhance mobility, he reasons, humans would
have legs shaped more like those of ostriches, which are the fastest bipeds.

Tanner rejects hunting for much the same reason, and cites the fact that even
present-day hunter-gatherers, using steel-tipped poison arrows, get less than
one-third of their calories and protein from hunting.  During the hominids' 1.7
million years without even a stone weapon, hunting could only have been less
significant.  One alternative source of meat suggested by many anthropologists
is scavenged carrion, chiefly the remains of animals killed by carnivores.

Louis Leakey and others have demonstrated that it is fairly easy (by yelling and
waving arms and generally creating a ruckus) to frighten lions from a kill and
make off with a leg of antelope.  Pat Shipmen, an anthropologist at Johns
Hopkins University, has even found fossil evidence for scavenging.  Examining
fossil animal bones from Tanzania's Olduvai Gorge under a microscope, she found
that where carnivore tooth marks intersected with cut marks from stone knives,
it was more common for the knife mark to overlay the tooth mark.  This can only
have been the case if hominids were butchering carcasses after carnivores had
fed.

There is one last line of evidence that figures prominently in the new Genesis.
It even shares an etymological link with the word ''genesis.'' The evidence is
in our genes, the information-bearing molecules that dictate the shape of our
bones, the way we walk, even the size and abilities of our brains.

In the mid-1970's, molecular biologists analyzed human genes and found that they
are about 99 percent identical to those of either of the living African
apes--mainely, the chimps and gorillas.  That is, only 1 percent of the words in
the total human genetic message need be altered to change a human into a chimp.
Or if a different 1 percent of the words are changed, a human becomes a gorilla.
We are as closely related to chimps or to gorillas as either of these apes is to
the other.  All the uniqueness that we perceive in our humanness is determined
by that small genetic difference.

If, like the theologians of old, we wish to see our humanness as being slightly
lower than the angels, the evidence of the genes is profoundly humbling.  But if
the scenario of the new Genesis is even close to the truth, we may take heart in
the evidence that we are not, after all, so barbarously alienated from nature.

''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of skull

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition


;
Private Life vs. Public

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 790 words


To the Editor:


The central criticism of James C. Thomson Jr.'s thoughtful review of our book
''Right in Her Soul: The Life of Anna Louise Strong'' (March 11) is that we do
not adequately explain how someone could have seen what she saw about Stalin,
the Cultural Revolution, etc., and yet confine this knowledge to her ''private
life'' while continuing to appear in public as the publicist and defender of
''barbaric excesses.'' We take this criticism not to be the same as the
assertion, made in another review, that we have an ''obligation'' to ''condemn''
her.

We think we do deal with the problem Mr. Thomson raises in our book, though
perhaps not in a way that Mr. Thomson would accept. We would like to try here to
set out the differences between us; in doing so we are fully conscious that to
the best of our knowledge Mr. Thomson holds the distinction of being the
highest-ranked person to resign in public protest from the Government over
policy in the Vietnam War.

Mr. Thomson's position seems to us to reflect an understanding we would call
liberal. It holds that discrepancies between the private and public should be
resolved, and normally resolved in favor of the private. (We don't know what
reaction Mr. Thomson would have to Mikhail Borodin's pronouncement that his
''inner life consisted solely of the dictates of the Central Committee.'') What
Mr. Thomson seems to us unwilling to accept is that there is another
long-standing American tradition (not liberal) that

expected

 a discrepancy between the private and public and thought it the human lot to
hold on to both. In theological terms, the experience of sin in oneself and
others was not a reason for doubting God's grace.

It is clear what Anna Louise thought the ways of God to be. She thought that the
future of civilization required the construction of a social form other than
capitalism and that this form, at least in embryo, had to be embodied in a
powerful state as rapidly as possible. She thought that

lessons

 about this future might be found first in the Soviet Union and then in China,
and that it was her task to bring back to America the lessons from which
Americans might learn something of the hope of this new experiment. Admittedly,
even if this be sound theology it is a difficult and often dangerous political
position. It tends to produce an impossible tension in the soul which, in turn,
is dealt with by accepting the mysteriousness of world history. When Anna Louise
Strong found the tension between her inner life and the external world in which
she was living so great as to make relations between the two impossible, she
began to move, as our book clearly indicates, away from the intensity of her
previous involvement with the Soviet Union. This process starts when one might
expect, about 1936. (If Mr. Thomson holds that there was nothing but murder,
terror and killing in Soviet life between 1927 and 1936 then we simply
disagree.)

Where could she go? The easiest choice for many was to turn to anti-Communist
social democratic liberalism. If she had moved as did Granville Hicks, for
instance, Mr. Thomson would not be asking us to account for how she could have
abandoned her beliefs. She would merely be seen as having come to her senses.

We do not think that Mr. Thomson accepts the central premise of the book - that
the path Anna Louise Strong took was quite naturally available to Americans and
that her life was lived in terms that were natural in pre- World War II America.
We think that a clue to Mr. Thomson's perplexity comes from his query toward the
end of his review about the fate of her ''individualism.'' It should be clear
that she was not, in the liberal sense that seems intended, ever an
''individualist.'' From her adolescent worries about the apparent ''distance of
the millenium,'' to her proclamation to Roger Baldwin that ''liberty means . . .
freedom to respond to the great laws,'' to her enthusiastic acceptance of
Alexandra Kollontai's claim that ''we shall not come back to the human soul for
another 50 years,'' she was never an ''individualist.''

It is a mistake, we think, to interpret American history and the American soul
only as ''individualist'' in the sense that seems intended. There is another
tradition, with an unbroken lineage from the 17th century. This is not to say
that it is without costs, even, in the modern world, costs that are perhaps
unacceptable. To accept seriously the old Puritan imperative that we work to
''entertain each other in brotherly affection'' is a terrible and often
dangerous thing. But that it needs to be

explained

 is only a consequence of the world in which we live.  HELENE KEYSSARTRACY B.
STRONGLa Jolla, Calif.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Anna Louise Strong

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS;
April 8, 1984115

T


SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 754 words

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.

282

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  329

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  4423

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.

554

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about the
nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  675

LORD OF THE DANCE, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) In
seeking her long-lost cousin, a teen-ager probes the mysteries of life and
death.  7332

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?  created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  869

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  9932

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.

10152

ONE MORE SUNDAY, by John D. MacDonald. (Knopf, $15.95.) Behind the scenes with a
charismatic television preacher.  111042

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.

12134

UNTO THIS HOUR, by Tom Wicker. (Viking, $19.95.) Three days in August, 1862,
when a battle was fought at Manassas, Va.

13 1

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  13118

NIGHT SKY, by Clare Francis. (Morrow, $16.95.) Three intertwined lives in
occupied France during World War II.  15139

THE JOURNEYER, by Gary Jennings. (Atheneum, $17.95.) Marco Polo's journey to the
Orient in the 13th century.


 Nonfiction 118

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.

224

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W. Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  3329

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  447

LINES AND SHADOWS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $15.95.) Adventures of
the San Diego police force that stalks bandits along the Mexican border.

575

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty. (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  6523

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a California preacher.  7632

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  81365

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  9814


THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  1098

TOUGH-MINDED FAITH FOR TENDERHEARTED PEOPLE, by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $14.95.) More inspiration from a California preacher.

111230

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Selections from the writings
of the Yorkshire veterinarian.  12119

PEOPLE OF THE LIE, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
psychiatrist's prescription for ''healing human evil.'' 131014

APPROACHING HOOFBEATS: HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE, by Billy Graham. (Word Books,
$11.95.) The evangelist's interpretation of the Book of Revelation.

14 81

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.

15142

MAFIA PRINCESS, by Antoinette Giancana and Thomas C. Renner.  (Morrow, $15.95.)
Growing up in the family of the mobster Sam Giancana.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CRIME

BYLINE: By Newgate CallendaR

SECTION: Section 7; Page 18, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 677 words


In Chapter 13 of ''Death at Charity's Point'' by William G. Tapply, a young man
telephones the lawyer who is looking into a murder (or is it suicide?). He must
see the lawyer; he has some important information to convey. They make a date
for the following day. In Chapter 9 of

 THE SUICIDE MURDERS by Howard Engel (St. Martin's, $11.95), a psychiatrist
telephones a private eye. He must see him; he has some important information to
convey. They make a date for later that day.

Of course, you know what happens. Both informants are polished off before lawyer
and private eye have their rendezvous. It is a time-honored procedure in the
mystery novel. It is also a formula as rigid as ''add two tsps., sear on both
sides, put in pot.''

In any case, Mr. Engel handles it with some flair. He is a Canadian writer, and
his private eye is Benny Cooperman, a very Jewish young man (''Come in
already,'' he tells a client) who has dinner every Friday night with his parents
and who substitutes brains for brawn. Mr. Engel has the tough, cynical
private-eye novel, as developed by Chandler and Hammett, down pat. The lingo
should raise an appreciative grin. Cooperman takes a look at his client: ''She
had what you could call a tailored look. Everything was so understated it
screamed. I could hear the echo bouncing off the bank across the street.'' That
is on page 1, and the book is full of flip remarks of this sort, sometimes
showing real wit. Mr. Engel can write.

Benny is hired to snoop on a woman's husband. She thinks he is playing around.
He follows him, and what the suspect does is visit his psychiatrist. End of
case, except that the same night the suspect puts a bullet through his head. The
police call it suicide. Benny knows differently, and so do you and I. This is a
smoothly written, well-plotted book much superior to most of its genre. Let's
hope Benny comes back soon.





DEATH AT CHARITY POINT (Scribners, $12.95) is the winner of the Scribner Crime
Novel Award and is William G. Tapply's first book. The central character is a
Boston lawyer with rich clients. One - the woman who started him in business -
hires him to find out what happened to her son, an officer reported missing in
Vietnam. He does the best he can, and it does seem that the young man was killed
in battle. Not much later the other son of the woman is reported a suicide.
Again the lawyer must find out what really happened. And again there is a
problem. All the evidence points to suicide. But the lawyer perseveres, finds a
link to a student neo-Nazi group and at the end barely escapes with his life.

Mr. Tapply does not handle construction or dialogue with complete ease. He still
lacks finesse, and some of the wordplay between lawyer and his girlfriend is
much too arch. The main trouble is that the author himself appears to have a
conventional mind, and as a result his people are just not very interesting.



Joseph Hansen does have an interesting mind, and

NIGHTWORK (Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $12.95) is every bit as good as its
predecessors. This is the seventh Dave Brandstetter novel, he being the
investigator for an insurance company and a homosexual. Brandstetter's
homosexuality is presented as a way of life. From the beginning of the series,
Mr. Hansen has avoided prurience, giving us the portrait of a smart, resourceful
investigator whose private life is his own. In ''Nightwork'' Brandstetter still
is with the handsome young black man who became his lover in a previous book and
was shot up for his pains. He wants very much to help Brandstetter and does.

The case has to do with truck drivers who may or may not have been carrying
contraband. People are frightened and will not talk. Brandstetter's
investigation takes him to a desolate town controlled by warring youth gangs. He
encounters a weird figure - an old, rich homosexual living as a recluse. The
showdown takes place in the desert. All this is handled with sophistication and
verbal elegance. Mr. Hansen is one of the best we have.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of someone reading

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ADVENTURES OF THE VERY GOOD-LOOKING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1438 words


KNOCK WOOD

By Candice Bergen.  Illustrated. 354 pp. New York: Linden Press/Simon &
Schuster. $15.95.  HAUNTED IDOL The Story of the Real Cary Grant.  By Geoffrey
Wansell.  Illustrated. 336 pp. New York: William Morrow & Co. $15.95.


By Gina Mallet

THE first note of ''Knock Wood,'' Candice Bergen's engaging, intelligent and
wittily self- deprecating autobiography, stuns. Here is a woman who actually
acknowledges that she wished to grow up to be Daddy's favorite dummy. Daddy was
the renowned ventriloquist Edgar Bergen, and his alter ego was the carrot-topped
Charlie McCarthy. On Sunday mornings, Miss Bergen recalls, Dad would sit Charlie
''on one knee and me on the other and he'd put a hand on both our necks, and
when he squeezed my neck, I'd move my mouth, and when he squeezed Charlie's
neck, he'd move his . . . my Dad, happily speaking for both of us.'' Charlie was
more than just a dummy, Candice was to learn. He became Bergen's master.
Ventriloquism suggests a multiple personality on the rampage, but Bergen, a
moody Swedish-American, had only two people in him. He was never able to create
another character to displace Charlie, whose customary threat was ''I'll mow you
down, Bergen, so help me.'' No wonder Candice, straight lady to a wood chip,
couldn't replace him.

If Candice's dream was to sit alone on Daddy's knee and let him speak for her,
the circumstances were perfect for fantasy. Candice was born to the Hollywood
purple and nurtured by Walt Disney's magic kingdom. Liza Minnelli got a whole
circus for her birthday one year. Christmas was the ultimate spectacular;
plastic snow fell on the annual Christmas parade down Hollywood Boulevard. Santa
was a soigne David Niven or a Charlton Heston so godlike, Miss Bergen remembers,
that when he asked whether you'd been good all year, ''it caused a real crisis
of conscience.''

Miss Bergen describes the opulent vulgarity of her childhood with a mixture of
wonder and irony. This must be one of the most self-aware books about Hollywood
since Evelyn Keyes wrote ''Scarlett O'Hara's Younger Sister.'' Like Miss Keyes,
Miss Bergen was, is, a beautiful blonde, and had to learn the blessing was
mixed. Blondes have traditionally been Hollwood's top commodity, dolls to be
bartered and battered at will. Even Candice's status as a star's child could not
save her. Snow White was her role model, but that didn't stop a movie idol
(discreetly unnamed by Miss Bergen) from trying to seduce the 13-year-old
Candice in the back seat of his car. At 19, after striking out quite
spectacularly at the University of Pennsylvania, she herself became a starlet.

Her first role was Lakey the lesbian in ''The Group.'' It wasn't exactly the
kind of part Candice's parents had in mind for their daughter. Despite the
surreal Hollywood environment, the Bergens seem to have been models of normalcy
as parents. The Alabama-born Frances Bergen gave up her career as a top model to
marry Edgar, a man twice her age. From the distance of Edgar's generation, they
deplored everything the adolescent Candice did, at least the things they knew
about. But by then, Candice was getting beyond them. ''The Group'' had at once
made her famous and confused.

.

Miss Bergen is unflinching in her revelations about herself. Her conflicts took
her first to Europe where she almost acquired a husband from the Almanach de
Gotha. Then she boomeranged home to

Gina Mallet, drama critic of The Toronto Star, writes often about show business.
Terry Melcher, Doris Day's son, and affluent hippiedom. They raised their
consciousnesses in the house where, shortly afterward, Sharon Tate would be
murdered by Charles Manson's family. Candice invested in a nonviolent leather
company (the cows died of natural causes). The day Martin Luther King Jr. was
shot, her crowd pondered a protest. They drove around Beverly Hills in their
Mercedes with the lights on.

In the meantime, Candice's movie image had gone from bad to worse. ''When I
wasn't cast as the cool, rich dilettante I so resembled, I was the Snow Queen, a
natural for rape scenes; the woman men loved to defile,'' she wryly recalls. But
all that was to stop when her education was taken over by the pseudonymous
''Robin'' (as in Hood). She is careful not to identify this young, hip movie
producer who, she explains, pursued the spiritual path in a Porsche. Their life
together was like outtakes from ''Carnal Knowledge,'' the Mike Nichols movie
that provided Candice with one of her few good roles and which observed
tellingly the way women lend themselves to male manipulation. Soon Candice was a
celebrity photographer and activist ex-starlet. She was part of a celebrity
lie-down in the Senate corridors against the Vietnam War. George Plimpton, she
notes deadpan, read the antiwar petition outside the Senate doors after
''sheepishly explaining that he couldn't stay for the arrest because he had to
be back in New York to accept a Good Citizenship Award.'' Dated by Henry
Kissinger, she asks him to define his stand on Southeast Asia. Finally,
''Robin'' says he can't really be happy without sexual nonexclusivity. Whoops!
The earth seemed awful hard.

On her way back up, an important milestone is her father's death. Arranging his
funeral, she slips and calls it the Edgar Bergen Show. This little piece of
irreverence springs the release catch. Freed from his spell and the torment of
his affectionate detachment, which always seemed to withhold approval, she is
finally able take herself seriously. She accepts she is showbiz, not Duse or
Emma Goldman. Her fate is to be funny, which she is triumphantly in ''Starting
Over'' and ''Rich And Famous,'' and never more so than in this book. The dwarves
of doubt are vanquished. The prince arrives in the form of the French movie
director Louis Malle, whom she married in 1980 when she was 34. Fadeout to a
chipmunk chorus.



Like Candice Bergen, Cary Grant did not find married happiness (with his fifth
wife, Barbara Harris) until his dominant parent, his mother, was dead. She lived
to 96, which means that his biographer Geoffrey Wansell has a great deal of
unhappy ground to cover in ''Haunted Idol.'' Mr. Wansell, an English journalist,
did not exactly have Mr. Grant's O.K. to write this book, but then, he did not
have Mr. Grant's veto either, the movie star behaving toward the project in the
mysterious fashion of a Howard Hughes courtship.

''Haunted Idol'' is an attempt to break up Cary Grant's impenetrably suave
surface and reveal the real Archie Leach, the kid from Bristol, England, who at
10 lost his mum to a mental home and went into vaudeville at 14. But it took
years of painstaking care for Cary Grant to appear exactly the same - utterly
delectable - in all those movies, and who would want him any different? It
almost seems unsporting to try.

Cary Grant began like any upwardly mobile immigrant. At 16, he arrived in the
United States with little more than a leotard. For the next 12 years, he went
from acrobat to second banana to modest movie success. It was Mae West who
finally spotted his potential - for comedy - and made him a star in ''She Done
Him Wrong.'' Even then, Grant went on defining, then refining, the style of a
perfect mid-Atlantic gent: life as a sexy chuckle. His achievement was
deceptive. ''He isn't carefree, debonair and relaxed at all,'' says his
colleague Stewart Granger, ''in fact he's the opposite.''

Catnip to any number of ladies, he married disastrously and in succession
Virginia Cherrill, Barbara Hutton, Betsy Drake and Dyan Cannon, who gave him his
only child, Jennifer. Mr. Wansell reckons that it was his mother's involuntary
desertion of him that made Grant fearful of women. In the divorce court, Dyan
Cannon revealed a Grant that nobody who loved Cary in ''North by Northwest''
wants to hear about. She charged that Grant beat her in front of the servants
for wearing a miniskirt.

The reclusive Grant prefers to dine off a tray in front of the television set,
but he has his moments of extravagance. Staying at the Plaza Hotel, he once
ordered coffee and English muffins to be sent up to his room. Only three half
slices of muffin arrived. A furious Grant could get no answer from the staff, so
he placed a telephone call to the hotel's owner, then Conrad Hilton, who was in
Istanbul. An efficiency expert had discovered that guests always left the fourth
half. ''It cost me several hundred dollars in phone calls,'' Grant said, ''but
ever since then, I've always gotten four slices of muffin at the Plaza.'' B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Cary Grant/Archie Leach as a child in Bristol; photo of
Candice Bergen with ventriloquist father & dummy

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA CLAIMS 23 VIETNAMESE CASUALTIES

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 476 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 8


China reported today that its frontier guards killed or wounded 23 Vietnamese
soldiers who fired into Chinese territory and crossed the border to plant mines.

The New China News Agency said the firefight took place Friday afternoon in
Yunnan Province, which borders on Vietnam. It was the latest report from Peking
on the border violence that erupted between the two former allies early last
week.

China made no mention of Vietnam's charges Saturday that several battalions of
Chinese infantrymen had crossed into Vietnam from the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous
Region, east of Yunnan, and assaulted two strategic hills inside Vietnam. The
Chinese Foreign Ministry said the report was fabricated by Vietnam.

The Voice of Vietnam radio, in a report monitored from Bangkok, Thailand, said
today that the Chinese troops were pushed off the high ground with heavy losses
Saturday by local armed forces, implying that the fighting there was over. It
provided no other details.

'Very Serious Acts of War'

The Vietnamese radio quoted Hanoi's Communist Party newspaper, Nhan Dan, as
saying the Chinese were guilty of ''very serious acts of war.''

Detailing the reported Friday incident, the New China News Agency said a Chinese
frontier patrol equipped with a ''small artillery piece'' saw six Vietnamese
soldiers cross the frontier to lay mines at 1:15 P.M. local time. The patrol
opened fire, killing three Vietnamese. ''The other three took to their heels and
fled,'' the agency said.

When the Vietnamese returned fire from their side of the border, the agency
said, the frontier guards, reinforced by another platoon, shot back and
destroyed four Vietnamese dugouts.

By 5 P.M., it said, ''20 dead and wounded Vietnamese were seen to be carried
away from the positions.''

The allegations traded by Peking and Hanoi are impossible to verify without a
visit to the border region, which is normally closed to foreign journalists.
Reports a year ago of border clashes in the same area turned out to have been
exaggerated.

New Vietnamese Offensive

The latest reports follow a new Vietnamese offensive against Chinese-supported
Cambodian guerrillas near the Thai-Cambodian border. Vietnam has charged that
China deliberately increases border tensions to help the Cambodian resistance
fighters by tying down Vietnamese units.

China has denied this and blamed Vietnam for stirring up new border clashes to
divert attention from Hanoi's military activity in Cambodia.

The latest tensions became known here after Chinese artillery units began
shelling the Vietnamese along a 200- mile stretch of the border last Monday,
reportedly in response to Vietnamese armed ''provocations.'' A Chinese Foreign
Ministry spokesman said last Wednesday that China's border troops were fighting
back ''for the sole purpose of self-defense.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MILITARY SCHOOLS BENEFIT FROM RISE IN POPULARITY

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 873 words

DATELINE: FORK UNION, Va., April 4


There is excited talk about the Military Ball later this month, when cadets and
their dates will parade through an arch of sabers. A new drama club has been
formed on campus. The track and tennis teams are undefeated after two meets.

It is spring in the greening hills of central Virginia, where the battleship-
gray barracks of the Fork Union Military Academy are as full these days as they
have been at any time since World War II. Enrollment is at capacity, and the
school is turning away one applicant for every new cadet it takes.

''We are seeing as strong an interest in our school as we have ever seen,'' says
Lieut. Col. Evan H. Lacy Jr., the director of admissions at Fork Union, which
admits boys 10 to 18 years old and, with 652 students, is one of the nation's
largest military preparatory schools. ''I think it has a lot to do with a desire
among parents who now want to see a more structured, more disciplined education
for their children.''

Only 50 Military Schools


There are about 50 military boarding schools in the United states, fewer than a
third the number operating during the 1960's. Over the past 15 years, about 100
schools either closed their doors or dropped their military status amid
declining enrollments resulting largely from growing public disenchantment with
the military following the Vietnam War.

But the fortunes of schools that survived are clearly on the rebound. Maj. Gen.
Willis D. Crittenberger, executive director of the Association of Military
Colleges and Schools of the United States, in McLean, Va., says enrollment is up
over the past three years and some schools now keep waiting lists of new
applicants.

General Crittenberger attributes the surge in demand for military education to a
variety of factors, not the least of them President Reagan's determination to
strengthen the military. ''We have a President who is trying to recapture the
sense of the contribution the military has made to the country,'' he said.

23 Percent More Inquiries


At the New York Military Academy in Cornwall on the Hudson, which enrolls about
500 students, inquiries about enrollment have increased 23 percent since 1981,
to nearly 2,200 a year, according to Col. Alvan C. Hadley Jr., the school's
superintendent.

At Riverside Military Academy in Gainesville, Ga., enrollment has been at the
school's full capacity of about 500 since 1980, nearly double the enrollment in
1976, when the school had to beg for students.

''There seems to be a change in the attitude of the body politic toward a more
conservative approach,'' said Col. Jack Hall, the principal at Riverside. ''As a
result, the military is held in much higher regard than a few years ago, after
Vietnam.''

The number of applicants to the nation's service academies is also evidence of
increased interest in the military among high school students. The Air Force
Academy in Colorado Springs, the Naval Academy at Annapolis and the Military
Academy at West Point all received a record number of applications in 1983. At
each of the schools about 13,000 applicants competed for about 1,500 openings.

More Interest at Colleges


At the same, enrollments in Reserve Officer Training Corps on other college
campuses are also on the increase.

The growing interest in military prep schools seems to parallel an increasing
public insistence across the nation on stricter educational standards.

''There is no question that some dissatisfaction with public education has
helped us grow,'' said Colonel Lacy. ''Parents are clearly looking for something
else these days, including beefing up diploma requirements in public schools.''

Another factor has been the changing nature of the American family, including
the growing number of one-parent families, or families in which both parents
work.

'Schools of the Future'


Col. Trevor Turner, superintendent of the Randolph-Macon Academy in Front Royal,
Va., said that current trends in marriage and family life make residential
schools ''the schools of the future.''

The schools are not cheap. Tuition and room and board at Fork Union, on a
500-acre campus in Virgina's Fluvanna County, is $6,200. New York Military
Academy charges $7,200 a year.

To help make ends meet, most schools engage in ambitious fund-raising programs.
At Fork Union, groups of cadets travel about 50 miles east to Richmond to work
telephone banks pleading for donations from alumni. School administrators say
they hope to raise $20,000 this year from the telephone appeal.  Some
administrators say privately it was a failure to mount those kinds of
fund-raising activities that led to the demise earlier this year of Augusta
Military Academy, in Fort Defiance, Va. When it closed, it had only 81 cadets
and mortgage and utility bills it could not pay.

But what happened to Augusta seems to be the exception. This year, for example,
Colonel Lacy said the number of inquiries about enrollment at Fork Union will
top 4,000 for the first time in the school's history.

At the same time, he said, his school and others like it have become more
selective in their admissions. ''The days when we used to take a disciplinary
problem are over,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of cadets at Fork Union Military Academy in Virginia

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SENIOR YEAR IN GREAT NECK: A JUBILANT RITE OF PASSAGE

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2087 words

DATELINE: GREAT NECK, L.I., April 8


The road from ninth grade to senior year would be much more pleasant if it did
not pass through life's first Bermuda Triangle, adolescence.

The one thing ninth graders at Great Neck South High School have in common is
that they are little. As a ninth grader, Scott Currie felt too small to offer
opinions. If he had a wild urge, he would go to the school library, put on his
headphones and quietly listen to punk rock. His hero was an upperclassman named
Lyle who slept in school by day and by night played drums for a punk band in
Greenwich Village.

Tenth grade is no picnic either. Eric Gordon was completely isolated his
sophomore year. ''I felt inadequate socially, I just didn't fit in,'' he said.
''I had a bleak outlook.'' He took contentious stands - announcing, for
instance, that poetry was stupid. When his class studied ''The Catcher in the
Rye,'' he was shocked to find he was exactly like Holden Caulfield. It happens
to 10th graders all the time, his English teacher, Marcia Weinberg, says.
Without fail, several 10th graders will tell her privately that they are
cracking up, just like Holden. This year, after lecturing on Dostoyevsky and
Camus, Mrs. Weinberg also discovered she had a Raskolnikov and a Stranger in
class.

Junior year? ''Forget junior year,'' said Stephen Palumbo, a junior this year.
Junior year is the year of Regents and the college entrance exams - the
S.A.T.'s. Junior grades are the last marks that count for class rank. At Great
Neck South, where 1 of 10 is destined for the Ivy League, it is the year parents
form car pools to the Stanley H. Kaplan S.A.T. preparatory center. Junior year,
Stephen's father prohibited him from playing lacrosse. ''He said I could study
and make something of myself or I could be a bum,'' Stephen recalled.

But senior year is something different, unlike anything that comes before it.
Suddenly Michelle Micari, second baseman on the girls' softball team, is a star.
''It's not that I'm that great,'' she said. ''It's that all the big kids
graduated.''

''A senior owns the school,'' said Eddie Sheidlower, co-captain of the track
team. ''These ninth graders will bring their friends up to say hi to me - they
want to show off that they know a senior.''

Adele Feldman, a school librarian, was asked if there is anything that all
seniors have in common. ''Senioritis,'' she answered immediately. Officially,
this is unhealthy, like chicken pox. Seniors won't settle down. They don't
listen up. ''You drop seniors on the floor, they'll bounce,'' said Mrs.
Weinberg.

But privately, teachers admit senioritis has its poetic aspect. By now members
of the Class of 1984 are bouncing with joy, delirious with relief, ecstatic from
the realization that, as it turns out, they are going to be somebody. Eric
Gordon, who dismissed poetry in 10th grade, is, as a senior, editor of the
literary magazine. He has been accepted to Amherst College and has found that
there is, after all, someone in the world like him - Tricia Juhn, the girl he
has fallen in love with senior year.

At Sterling Bowl, the bowling alley where Scott Currie works weekends, they
thought he was just another punk rocker. ''One day my boss asked me where I was
ranked and I told him second in the class. He was stunned. He said, 'You?' '' As
a senior, Scott is a leader in the alternative school.

Few waltz through the hormonal storms of adolescence. But in an
upper-middle-class district such as Great Neck - long considered a leading
public school system - enough staff and money are available to keep most
children from falling through the cracks during their struggle to turn into
something adult.

At Great Neck South there is 1 staff member for every 10 students, twice as good
as most urban high schools. The favorable ratio means that English teachers at
Great Neck South teach four periods a day, instead of the five or six that are
the norm. They use the free fifth period to coach students on writing.

This year Alfred Ruesch, an English teacher, spent that period helping Neil
Platt with his Yale application and checking over Adam Schussheim's Westinghouse
science project entry. That extra period, too, means Mrs. Weinberg is available
when a student discovers he is Holden Caulfield.

For students who find traditional classes boring or intimidating, Great Neck
South has an alternative school, where students create courses. For those
uncomfortable in both a traditional and ''alternative'' atmosphere, there is an
English and social studies tutorial known as the prep program.

For seniors who have failed, there is summer tutoring and the chance to get a
diploma in August. For the 150 students who could not find the class they wanted
this year, there are independent studies.

More Success Stories Than Failures

''You can say, 'It is unfair that children in a well-to-do district like Great
Neck have more opportunities than children elsewhere,' '' says the
superintendent, Dr. William A. Shine. ''Or, you can see Great Neck as an example
of what public education ought to be, given enough money, the right staff and a
supportive community.''

Teachers at Great Neck South do not seem beaten down by the immensity of their
task. All the societal problems that have made teaching a tougher job than it
was 25 years ago - broken homes, drug use, the influence of television and video
games on reading habits - exist in Great Neck, but on a level that hinders,
rather than cripples, teachers.

To look at the Class of '84 at Great Neck South High is to see far more stories
of success than failure. There is a general feeling here among teachers that
what they are doing has purpose and worth. Dr. Philip Mogul, a chemistry
teacher, spends hours of his own time helping ninth and 10th graders develop
projects they will submit in the prestigious Westinghouse competition when they
are seniors.

It is not simply altruism that feeds Dr. Mogul's energy. The students'
sophisticated research breaks ground and complements his own research. His
relationship with these seniors is much the same as between a college professor
and the graduate students who work in his lab.

Acting Like a 'Jerk'


Because teachers are not overwhelmed, they are not as threatened when teen-agers
act peculiarly. And they do, often. Ricky Kushay, a senior, admits he was ''a
jerk'' in 10th grade. ''I'd lie to teachers, I'd swear, I'd stand up and walk
out,'' he said. ''I don't know how they can bear to look at me. Mr. Szarejko - I
treated him like dirt and this year he invited me to his house to eat.''

''They're only kids,'' said Chester Szarejko, a social studies teacher.

It is true, even among the brightest. In the midst of a recent animated senior
honors class discussion of Caesar's motives for wanting to pardon rather than
execute Pompey, Tara McGann dropped cookie crumbs down Dan Goldberger's back -
and thought it hilarious.

Ricky Kushay is still young enough to have the same dreamy ambition he had when
he was 5 - to be an astronaut. Kenny Moss, who won early admission to Princeton,
believes that he may grow up to be President.

And yet Ricky Kushay is old enough to have joined the Marines. And Kenny Moss is
old enough to know the pressure of growing up in the shadow of a popular older
brother, who, as a senior, was accepted to Yale and died of cancer.

Preoccupied With Sex


They are brimming with contradictions, says Mrs. Weinberg, the English teacher.
''Sex is their major preoccupation, but they don't see it in books. We'll read
''Othello,'' ''The Stranger,'' ''Crime and Punishment,'' and they don't see it.
I'll say, 'Don't you see the sex?' and they say, 'Mrs. Weinberg, you're a sex
fiend, you see sex everywhere.' ''

When they do find out they are somebody their senior year, it is not always
precisely the person their parents had been planning for, and that causes
problems. Shoney Stephenson says her mother would like her to go to an
integrated college, but Shoney, president of the school's small Black Student
Union, prefers Howard University, a predominantly black school in Washington.
''I'm not prejudiced,'' she says. ''My best friend is white.'' She is simply
tired of traveling from Great Neck to black communities in Hempstead and Jamaica
for her social life.

Break Dancing And Nights at the Diner

Like every senior class, this one has its cliques, its ins and outs. For popular
students from well-to-do families, senior year is renting a limousine for the
prom. It is a private membership at the Sports Connection Health Spa. It is
using your free period to drive to the Seven Seas Diner for a Tab with lemon. It
is putting on your Ralph Laurens and going to the Scobie Diner to be seen Friday
nights.

Because Great Neck is a stable community where many of the 213 seniors have been
together since kindergarten, it is a hard place for outsiders. Don Choo, a top
senior in physics, moved here from Korea last year. ''I am the heterogenous,''
he says, ''I don't fit.'' He wore a headband one day to physics - his ''cool
band,'' he called it - to attract attention, hoping to make his classmates laugh
and like him. ''I found I had just a moment of attention,'' he said. ''But I
couldn't make a friend.''

The competition to succeed in Great Neck can be breakneck. For every Raelle
Koota - who two weeks ago was cast as Bonnie, second lead in the class musical,
''Anything Goes'' - there is a Marisa Pelsuo, a senior who wanted to be Bonnie,
but will not be. At tryouts, Marisa sat in back of the auditorium, and as it
became obvious that she would not get the role, her sobs grew louder.

Some Can't Be Saved


Nor are the special programs enough to save some students. A month ago Janet
Finucan, a senior, described Robert Howell's tutorial as the glue that held her
in school. ''He has this knack of finding books I like,'' said Janet, who works
40 hours a week as a hostess at Cooky's Steak Pub.

Last week, two months shy of graduation, Janet dropped out. Because of work, Mr.
Howell said, she was missing school and falling asleep in class.

The Class of 1984 will be remembered as the class when Gear handbags were hot,
when the Police and Michael Jackson were the music of the mainstream, the Jam,
the Clash and Sex Pistols the music of the fringe.

This was the first class to have break dancing at a spring pep rally.

School spirit, generally considered a ridiculous concept during the 1970's, made
a comeback with this class. At a prom committee meeting not long ago, Jane Bai,
a senior, said: ''I've heard a lot of people say our class is the most spirited
ever.''

Dress-Up Days


This year's seniors held the first dress-up days since before the years of the
Vietnam War, wearing their pajamas to school for Pajama Day and Hawaiian outfits
for Waikiki Wednesday.

Yet in going back to the old there is always new. Someone suggested another
dress-up day for spring, Transvestite Tuesday. It was rejected for practical,
not moral, reasons. ''Girls like getting dressed up in men's clothes,''
explained Dana Gottlieb, a senior girl, ''but it's hard for a boy to have fun in
a dress.''

Drug users do not make up a clique among the seniors as they did not too many
years back. Instead, students say, there are drug users in almost every clique.

But the wild tales of students making big money dealing drugs have been replaced
by wild tales of students making tens of thousands of dollars designing computer
games. Kenny Moss made $7,650 in one night last year by creating 17 games for a
New York City businessman.

Electronic gadgetry and the computer have also presented new variations on the
same old disciplinary problems.

Guarding Car With Beeper


Mrs. Feldman, the librarian, broke up a fight last year and while she was
lecturing one of the boys, his beeper went off. He said he had to go; it meant
someone was breaking into his car. She said beeper or no, he had to wait until
she reported him to the dean.

There is not much student activism among these seniors, even in a liberal
community such as Great Neck. Frank Batemarco, an alternative school teacher,
said these seniors are so different from Great Neck seniors who formed the
alternative school a decade ago that he is giving them a course on what
alternative education is.

When not long ago they read ''Summerhill,'' the story of one of the early
progressive schools, several seniors commented that the teachers in the book
treated students too much like adults and gave them too much freedom.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Class of '84: First article of a series appearing periodically about
the senior year at Great Neck South High School on Long Island

CORRECTION-DATE: April 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A picture caption in Metropolitan Report yesterday with an article about Great
Neck South High School misidentified two students working with computers. They
were Jordan Orange and Jessica Spero.

GRAPHIC: photos of students

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

'LESSONS OF VIETNAM' DIVIDE 2 RIVALS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1297 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, April 8


In the past three weeks, the Vietnam War and its lessons have shadowed the
debate between Walter F. Mondale and Senator Gary Hart in the race for the
Democratic Presidential nomination.

Aides to both candidates make it plain that the highly charged issue of Vietnam,
first raised in Chicago by Mr. Hart, not only underlines the contrasts in the
two rivals' foreign policy approaches but, in some ways, touches the root of
their conflict.

Mr. Hart says the ''lesson of Vietnam'' marked a dividing point between himself
and Mr. Mondale and underscored generational differences.

Mr. Hart notes that Mr. Mondale, who is 56 years old, supported the war until
October 1969, when most liberal Democrats had already joined the dissent. Mr.
Hart, 47, who was George McGovern's campaign manager in the 1972 Presidential
election, says his views on the limits of American military power abroad were
''formed in the fires of discontent of the Vietnam years.''

Dispute on Lessons of War


''A generation of leaders that gave us Vietnam has now given us Lebanon and
Central America,'' Mr. Hart said.

It is Mr. Hart's contention that Mr. Mondale ''has not learned the lesson of
Vietnam.'' Mr. Hart cited Mr. Mondale's support for keeping American advisers in
Honduras, which Mr. Hart opposes, and the former Vice President's ''caution'' in
waiting more than a year, ''until consensus formed and public opinion turned,''
to call for the removal of American troops from Lebanon.

Mr. Mondale angrily responded that Mr. Hart learned the ''wrong lesson'' from
Vietnam, and that the Coloradan offered ''a strange new vision of our role in
the world that threatens to weaken our crucial alliances, and either ignores or
underestimates what history teaches us.''

In one sense the clash over the war's lessons and how they should be applied to
such regions as Central America and the Persian Gulf reflects a debate that has
gripped the Democratic Party for nearly 40 years: a debate over the scale of
American involvement abroad, a debate over when and how to face possible
Communist expansion and conflicts in third world nations.

Hart and Mondale Differ


What Vietnam taught him, said Mr. Hart, was that ''there simply isn't an
American answer to every problem in the world.'' He has urged an immediate
withdrawal of all American troops from Central America, said he would be
unwilling to commit American ground troops to keep the Persian Gulf oil flowing
once the United States attains ''energy independence,'' and proposes an
adjustment in Atlantic Alliance policy so that there are fewer American ground
troops in Europe.

''In the third world,'' said Mr. Hart, ''the real enemy is hunger, poverty and
disease, not Communism.'' Although the Rev. Jesse Jackson, the third candidate,
has also sought the withdrawal of forces from Central America, the Vietnam
debate that has dominated the rivalry between Mondale and Hart has gone on
without Jesse Jackson's participation.

Mr. Mondale said Mr. Hart's foreign policy views were ''naive,'' and ''could
breed a dangerous defeatism that could undermine and weaken our NATO alliance.''
He implied that Mr. Hart sought to ''ignore the excesses of the extreme left''
abroad, and that the Coloradan fails to understand ''the world is a tough,
dangerous place.''

What is evident in the debate is that some of the foreign policy views of both
candidates were shaped in different historical periods.

Experiences Shaped Mondale


According to Mr. Mondale's aides, the candidate's views were largely set by the
impact of the Depression, World War II, the cold war and, on a personal level,
his involvement with Hubert H. Humphrey, Orville Freeman and other Minnesotans
in the late 1940's who sought to banish extremists and Communists from the
state's Democratic- Farmer-Labor Party.

David Aaron, a key foreign policy adviser to Mr. Mondale who was an official
with the National Security Council in the Carter Administration, said: ''Mondale
is deeply anti-Communist, and he had no delusions that the North Vietnamese were
land reformers or wanted to bring about a golden society. He had no illusions
that they were human rights advocates.''

Although Mr. Hart is only nine years younger than Mr. Mondale, the Coloradan
makes it plain that his formative experience was the Vietnam War, not World War
II and the cold war. Mr. Hart says repeatedly that Vietnam ''is the greatest
foreign issue of our time,'' and uses the Vietnam experience and the views on
the war expressed by political figures, like Mr. Mondale, as a litmus test on
foreign policy issues.

'Politics of Caution'


''Central America is one of the key dividing points between us and a symptom of
the politics of caution and the failure to learn the lessons of Vietnam,'' Mr.
Hart said in a recent interview. ''That pattern starts in 1969, when Mondale was
one of the last to come out against the war, and extends through this whole
record that he's created for himself in the Carter White House. The dual
Mondale. The Mondale publicly supporting the President and in anguish over
almost every key issue. It must have been a terrible four years for him.''

Mr. Mondale, interviewed aboard his campaign plane Saturday, reiterated that his
lateness in opposing the war ''was my biggest mistake.''

''I was young.'' he said. ''It's my own responsibility. I basically applied the
European analogy to Vietnam - that this was like restraining the forces of Nazi
Germany. It was an entirely different issue, and I did not see that soon
enough.''

''What I say is Reagan hasn't learned any lesson, and Hart has learned the wrong
lesson from Vietnam,'' Mr. Mondale said. ''Vietnam teaches us first that you
must understand the society that you're dealing with, and policy was based on
the theory that we were saving that country from Communism. But the people there
saw us as one in a long line of colonial interferers, and thus we collided with
the most powerful force on earth, nationalist sentiment, the desire of people to
run their own country. That is the fundamental lesson.''

On the Limits of Power


Mr. Mondale said what he also learned from Vietnam was an ''understanding of the
limits'' of American military power. He added: ''But it does not teach us that
there's no role for the United States. That's where I disagree with Gary Hart.
He has said if the Persian Gulf explodes the allies cannot count on us. Those
were essentially his words. He wants to withdraw forces from NATO. It's exactly
the wrong thing to do at this time.''

Mr. Mondale's aides apply such words as ''isolationist'' and ''neoisolationist''
to Mr. Hart's foreign policy views. Larry K. Smith, a Hart foreign policy
adviser, called such labels ''nonsense.''

David E. Landau, Mr. Hart's deputy campaign manager, said Vietnam was ''a symbol
of the generational differences - Mondale being of the generation that got us
into Vietnam and couldn't get us out, and Hart being of a generation that said,
'You can't get us out, we will take power ourselves and get us out.''

Under pressure from Mr. Hart, Mr. Mondale has appeared to alter his position on
American forces. The former Vice President now says that Honduras ''does face a
real threat and has legitimate concerns and noncombat assistance is
appropriate.'' Mr. Mondale said two weeks ago that before he would reduce the
number of American soldiers in Honduras, now estimated at 700 to 800, he would
attempt to negotiate the withdrawal of the Cuban forces in Nicaragua.

Mr. Mondale now says he would leave ''a very modest number'' of ''nonmilitary
soldiers'' in Honduras but would not use those forces as a bargaining point to
press for Cuban withdrawal from Nicaragua.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LIEU. GEN. WILLIAM R. PEERS, 69, LED INQUIRY INTO MY LAIMASSACRE

BYLINE: By

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 884 words


WOLFGANG SAXON

Lieut. Gen. William R. Peers, who headed the inquiry into the Army's handling of
the 1968 My Lai massacre in Vietnam, died Friday evening at Letterman Army
Medical Center at the Presidio in San Francisco. General Peers, who had suffered
a heart attack last month, was 69 years old and lived in Kentfield, Calif.

The genral, a tough and respected combat commander, was chosen by top Pentagon
officials in late 1969 to look into the massacre and name those responsible. It
was a year and a half after the assault on My Lai 4, and public revulsion at the
delayed revelations was at its height.

News of the case fueled antiwar sentiment on American campuses. It also
embittered American servicemen and veterans who saw themselves and the Army as
being besmirched by one company of men who had lost comrades in battle, some of
whom might have gone berserk under the stress of combat with an invisible foe.

My Lai 4 was a hamlet in the coastal village of Song My in north-central South
Vietnam. How many people died the morning of March 16, 1969, remains uncertain,
but estimates range far upward from 100.

'Tragedy of Major Proportions'


Units of the Americal Division were ordered to clear the area of enemy soldiers
who had it booby-trapped and may or may not have been sniping at American
troops. What slowly became known later was that the dead included villagers who
had been raped, maimed and killed by soldiers acting singly and in groups amid
the burning ruins.

The welling outcry caused the Army to throw considerable resources and energy
into the study of just how its command chain had dealt with the situation at the
time and whether there had been an official cover-up. General Peers assembled a
staff of 90 in December 1969 and in three months heard 398 witnesses, took
20,000 pages of testimony and inspected what was left of My Lai.

He concluded that a ''tragedy of major proportions'' occurred at My Lai but that
reports of its enormity and the number of victims had been shrunk at each rung
of the ladder as the field reports went up the chain of command. His courage and
thoroughness earned the Army much praise.

The ''Peers Report'' prompted action against 14 officers, including the
commanding officer of the Americal Division, Maj. Gen. Samuel W. Koster, by then
Superintendent at West Point. The officers were accused of dereliction of duty,
suppression of evidence and other offenses.

Within months, charges against 13 of those accused were dismissed on the ground
of insufficient evidence. The 14th, a brigade commander, Col. Oran K. Henderson,
was court-martialed and acquitted in 1971.

Calley Found Guilty of Murder


Eleven officers and enlisted men actually present at My Lai were charged
separately after the Army's original investigation. A platoon commander, Lieut.
William L. Calley, was found guilty of murder. The others were acquitted or
never tried.

Lieutenant Calley drew a life term, which was reduced to 20 and then to 10
years. He was freed in 1974 after three years of confinement to quarters at Fort
Benning, Ga., and left the Army.

Most of the classified 260-page Peers Report had been disclosed and appeared in
print long before Mr. Calley's release cleared the way for its formal
disclosure.

Howard H. Callaway, then the Secretary of the Army, said at the time: ''The
release of this report concludes a dark chapter in the Army's history. This is a
story which is not a happy one.''

Four months later, the Army released 33 bound books containing 20,000 censored
pages of raw data and testimony on which the report was based. Names not
previously mentioned were deleted because they might have been implicated by
hearsay and innuendo.

By then General Peers had quietly left the service after 35 years in uniform. He
was deputy commander of the Eighth Army in South Korea in 1973 when the Army
announced he was retiring a year early.

Action in World War II


William Raymond Peers was born June 14, 1914, in Stuart, Iowa. He attended high
school in California and graduated in 1937 from the University of California,
Los Angeles, where he was on the varsity football and wrestling teams.

He was commissioned a second lieutenant in 1938 and saw action in World War II
with the Office of Strategic Services in northern Burma. His experiences went
into a book he wrote with Dean Brelis, ''Behind the Burma Road.''

A big, cigar-chomping man, he also served with the O.S.S. in China, sent
American spy teams to Japanese prison camps in China and Korea and led a Chinese
parachute assault on Nanjing to occupy that city.

General Peers commanded the Fourth Division in heavy battles in Vietnam's
Central Highlands in 1967. When heading the special My Lai inquiry, he was
posted in Washington as chief of the Army reserve. His decorations included a
Distinguished Service Medal with two oak leaf clusters, a Silver Star and the
Distinguished Flying Cross.

General Peers is survived by his wife, the former Rose Mary Rau; two daughters,
Barbara Peers Hicks of Fredericksburg, Va., and Christina Peers Neely of Newark,
Ohio; a brother, Delbert Peers of Hemet, Calif.; and two grandchildren.

A funeral service was to be held Wednesday at the Cathedral Chapel, Presidio of
San Francisco.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lieu. Gen. William R. Peers

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
MR. REAGAN'S WEEK

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 814 words


Here's a small sampling of what we learned from the press last week about the
domestic and foreign policies of the President of the United States:

Monday: The New York Times quoted Alice Rivlin, the distinguished former
director of the Congressional Budget Office, as follows on the Reagan budget and
economic policies: ''The outlook for a high-growth economy in the United States
is very good, unless we blow it. And it looks as though we are about to blow it,
by having opted for a very peculiar mix of fiscal and monetary policy . . . a
dumb choice.''

Tuesday: Mr. Reagan had informed Congress that a treaty banning anti-satellite
weapons in space would not be ''in the overall interest of the United States''
because, he said, it could not be adequately verified - a statement directly
contradicted by an authoritative report from the nongovernmental Union of
Concerned Scientists.

A three-judge panel, it was reported, had named a special prosecutor to
investigate the financial entanglements of Edwin Meese, Mr. Reagan's nominee to
be Attorney General, the nation's highest law enforcement officer. The
prosecutor will also investigate how and why some who lent money to Mr. Meese
later obtained Federal appointments, as well as Mr.  Meese's alleged links to
the 1980 Reagan campaign's use of confidential Carter campaign documents.

Wednesday: Reports on a Congressional Budget Office study of the cumulative
effect of budget and tax changes enacted during Mr. Reagan's first three years
in office disclosed that low-income families really had lost the most money and
high-income families really had gained the most.

Secretary of State Shultz was quoted as telling the Trilateral Commission that
the U.S. had to fight back against ''state-supported terrorism,'' which he
called ''a form of warfare'' directed ''at America's interests, America's values
and America's allies.'' Mr. Shultz did not mention United States- supported
terrorism - guerrilla warfare, mining harbors, blowing up oil storage
facilities, interdiction of travel, etc. - in Nicaragua.

Thursday: The text of Mr. Reagan's news conference confirmed that he could only
deny that the C.B.O. study proved the unfairness of his tax and budget cuts. He
did not even attempt to refute findings that families with incomes under $10,000
had lost an average of $390 a year, while those with incomes over $80,000 had
gained an average of $8,270 annually. He only said it was ''political
demagoguery'' to charge that his programs were unfair to the poor.  That same
text showed Mr. Reagan attempting to blame Congress for any loss of U.S.
''credibility'' in Lebanon, where he had sent troops against the advice of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff; insisting that U.S.-supported terrorism against Nicaragua
was intended only to ''inconvenience'' that country until it stopped supporting
terrorism in El Salvador; and reflecting that the U.S. should have declared war
on North Vietnam and allowed General MacArthur ''to lead us to a victory in
Korea'' - whether over North Korea or Communist China or both he did not say.
Friday: Following Mr. Reagan's charges against Congress, the press quoted
Speaker Tip O'Neill in one of the strongest attacks yet made on the President:
''The deaths lie on him and the defeat in Lebanon lies on him and him alone. . .
. the trouble with this fellow is that he tries to be tough rather than smart.''
Mr. O'Neill's House Democratic colleagues, aided by 55 Republicans, were
reported to have defeated a deficit-reduction proposal backed by the President
and to have approved their own plan, 250 to 168. They aim to cut $95.7 billion
from military spending plans, rather than the $40.2 billion Mr. Reagan had
approved.  Saturday: Lead stories cited Mr. Reagan's renewed attack on Congress.
He charged that its reluctance to support military force had undermined his
efforts in Lebanon and encouraged ''enemies of democracy'' in Central America.
His national security adviser, Robert McFarlane, said that after a foreign
policy decision had been made by the President, members of Congress should
criticize it only in private letters to and meetings with him.  But the British
Government, the nation's closest ally and usually Mr. Reagan's ideological
supporter, hadn't got the word. A London spokesman said the President had been
informed that Britain disapproved of the mining of Nicaraguan harbors and wanted
it stopped.  Sunday: The New York Times quoted Reagan Administration officials
who said that Americans working for the C.I.A. had been supervising the mining
of Nicaraguan harbors. ''Senior officials'' also said contingency plans were
being laid for the use of U.S. troops in Central America, if more limited
efforts failed to achieve the Administration's goals.  Moral: Don't look back.
Something may be gaining on us.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JUNE 6TH '84: NORMANDY AWAITS ARMY OF AGELESS G.I.'S

BYLINE: By JON NORDHEIMER

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words

DATELINE: LONDON, April 9


A New York City homicide detective who worked on the Son of Sam case will be
there. So will an Episcopal minister from Alabama.

A woman who never knew her father, who died there, will make the trip. Another,
whose husband was killed on the first day, will be there. Their son will not be
there.  He died in Vietnam.

They are among the thousands of Americans who will be with President Reagan,
Queen Elizabeth II, President Francois Mitterrand and Canadian officials when
old allies gather on the French beaches at Normandy on June 6 to mark the 40th
anniversary of the D-Day landings.

World War II veterans, their families, military units and security personnel are
scheduled to descend on the Normandy coast that day for a sentimental and
reverent visit to the battlefield that opened the Second Front and led 11 months
later to the capitulation of Germany.

Last Farewell for Many

Thousands of other American veterans are expected over the course of the summer
to retrace their steps through other battlefields in France, the Netherlands and
Belgium.  It will be a chance to get one more look at places that represented
the greatest personal tests of their lives. They had stormed ashore at Normandy
as young men, many still in their teens. And now they are returning to the
beaches and fields where it seemed that the fate of the world hung in the
balance in the summer of 1944.

''Everyone who was there the first time wants to make this trip if they can,''
said Don Lassen of Atlanta, editor of Static Line, a monthly publication
circulated to about 15,000 United States paratroop veterans.

Plans Still Not Settled

The number of American veterans planning to visit Normandy is placed at 10,000
or more. No central office is coodinating their travel plans, so the numbers
that will actually materialize on June 6 or later in the year is largely a
matter of guesswork.

Reports on the number of visitors expected at Normandy on D-Day have ranged up
to 30,000 on 1,000 buses. Plans for the official ceremonies at the landing
beaches on the anniversary day are still unsettled. The enormous security
problems posed by the appearance of Mr. Reagan, the Queen and Mr. Mitterrand at
separate and joint ceremonies on beaches and at military cemeteries connected by
50 miles of narrow provincial roads are causing confusion and dismay in some
quarters.

''Plans have been changed 40 times over the past month,'' said Charles Barbier,
an official in Normandy whose department is faced with handling the influx of
visitors.

Local accommodations for the first 10 days in June have long been booked and
local officials are advising anyone wishing to visit Normandy this year to avoid
this period.

Overbooking Called Terrible ''The situation now is that there's terrible
overbooking and the Channel ferries from England are all filled up,'' said
Valmai Holt, who with her husband, a former British Army officer, operate Major
and Mrs. Holt's Battlefield Tours.

''There seems to be very little coordination and events are being timed so that
they clash,'' she said. ''Secret Service men will be lurking behind every bush.
The poor veterans are going to be very lucky to get a look in at the ceremonies
by the time the V.I.P.'s and the troops get in.''

She said that traffic was so bad at the last major D-Day anniversary, in 1969,
that visitors who started out from their hotels at 9 A.M. to reach scheduled
events later in the morning at Utah Beach did not reach the beach until the late
afternoon.

For many American veterans the D-Day observances will begin in English cities
and towns where they were billeted during training and the buildup for the
invasion. The ports of Southampton and Portsmouth and other seacoast towns from
where the invasion fleet sailed are planning special celebrations.

In Southampton, for instance, June 2 has been set aside as a British-American
reunion on the eve of the sailing, with jitterbug dancing and a concert by Vera
Lynn, the English singer closely identified with the war and its popular ballads
of heartbreak and separation.

Some to Stay in Private Homes

Strong ties still exist between the G.I.'s and the residents of English and
French towns who were brought together by the war.

A group of 150 World War II veterans of the 82d Airborne Division will spend
several days in private homes around Leicester, England, where the paratroopers
trained for several months before opening the invasion in the early hours of
June 6.

Bill Woodward, a Leicester resident who heads the United Kingdom Chapter of the
C-47 Club, a group formed by 82d Airborne veterans who had made one or more
combat jumps, said there were still ''strong feelings of esteem and affection''
among the older residents of the community for the 12,000 members of the
division stationed there during the war.

''I know all about these 'overpaid, oversexed and over here' attitudes about the
Americans at the time but it was mostly in jest,'' Mr. Woodward said. ''The
people who lived through those times know the debt that's owed to them.''

In Ste.-M ere-Eglise, Normandy, the first town liberated when 82d Airborne
paratroopers landed in the village square just after midnight on June 6, the
same warmth also exists.

'Very Emotional Experience'

''This is about the only town in France with a tight relationship with
Americans,'' said Philippe Jutras, an American World War II veteran who has
returned to Ste.-M ere-Eglise to live and run the local Airborne Museum there.

Andy Kilcullen, a retired Brooklyn homicide detective, will be one of the 150
C-47 Club veterans making this year's pilgrimage to Ste.-M ere-Eglise.

''It's a very emotional experience for anyone who was there,'' Mr. Kilcullen
said by telephone from Florida. He said two other former New York police
officers who were in the 82d and made the jump were going back with him.

He recalls the early hours of the invasion vividly and the jump into the
blackness of a Norman field. The wrong field, as it turned out.  He was captured
by the Germans 18 hours later, taken to Germany and imprisoned. He escaped
several months later and made his way through Poland and into the Ukraine and
eventual repatriation.

After that, he said, Brooklyn murder and mayhem seemed a breeze.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of soldiers storming Normandy beach

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Denounces U.S.-China 'Strategy'

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 121 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 9


Vietnam charged today that recent battles along the China-Vietnam and
Cambodia-Thailand borders were linked to a ''global strategy'' by Peking and
Washington to stem the spread of Communism.

''To prevent the newly independent countries from advancing toward socialism is
a crucial point in the global strategy of the U.S. imperialists in collusion
with the Chinese expansionists and hegemonists,'' the official Hanoi radio said
in a broadcast monitored in Bangkok.  ---

BANGKOK, April 9 (AP) - A Vietnam Veterans of America delegation seeking
information on United States servicemen missing in the Indochina war met today
in Hanoi with Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach, the Vietnamese press agency
reported.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

On the Record ;
Mayor Koch on Foreign Policy

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 440 words


From remarks by Mayor Koch yesterday at a hearing of the platform committee of
the Democratic National Committee at the Sheraton Center Hotel:

During the Democratic primaries, I have noticed that many of the statements made
by candidates contain a covert appeal to an old American weakness -
isolationism. We are being told that America has no legitimate reason to be
involved in Central America, the Caribbean, Lebanon or the Persian Gulf. The
specter of Vietnam is invoked to warn us that we are doomed to bloody failure if
we attempt to assert American influence beyond our own borders.

We Democrats have heard this message before. In the 1972 campaign, ''Come Home
America'' was one of our slogans. And none of us has forgotten the memory of the
overwhelming defeat we suffered that year.

I think Americans have learned - the hard way - that appeals to isolationist
sentiment are an invitation to disaster. In World War I, we went to France to
help our Allies repel an invasion. But when the war was over, America retreated
into itself, spurning membership in the League of Nations, watching with horror
as the world moved inexorably toward another war. In 1940, with the Nazis
sweeping across Europe, the United States Congress finally decided to send aid
to Britain. If that vote had gone the other way, and isolationist voices had
prevailed, Britain might well have fallen and America would have been Hitler's
next target.

Today the same debate continues between those who want to avoid the pain of
struggle by avoiding struggle itself, and those who want America to demonstrate
our awareness that freedom must be defended, at home and around the world. It
is, for example, absolutely vital to the security of America and our allies that
oil supplies from the Persian Gulf not be interrupted by acts of war.

I believe the overall foreign policy position of the Democratic Party should be
based on the following principle: strength without aggression, and without
tolerating aggression by others. A new Monroe Doctrine, for example, should
declare our intention not to intervene in the internal affairs of other nations
in the Western Hemisphere except to support democracy and assist our neighbors
in resisting external aggression. We must not allow the Soviet Union and Cuba to
subvert the very principles we seek to encourage.

A strong foreign policy is not the exclusive domain of Republicans. We must
never allow American voters to think that it is. With a strong foreign policy
plank in our campaign platform, we will be able to focus attention on the
President's domestic failures, and we will win in November.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mayor Koch

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DEMOCRATS START SHAPING PLATFORM

BYLINE: By WARREN WEAVER Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


Democrats, beginning work on what they hope will be a unifying platform for
1984, yesterday found that they may have trouble papering over policy divisions
among their candidates for the Presidential nomination.

As the Democratic National Committee's temporary platform panel opened regional
hearings in Manhattan, the chairman, Representative Geraldine Ferraro of Queens,
emphasized that the candidates, Walter F. Mondale, Senator Gary Hart and the
Rev. Jesse Jackson, would not be testifying on their personal positions, nor
would any of their representatives.

''The person who unites us all is Ronald Reagan,'' the chairman declared, with
what turned out to be some optimism.

For Mayor Koch, who was scheduled to open the hearing at the Sheraton Centre
Hotel with a welcome, instead delivered a biting attack on Democratic
''isolationists,'' whose opposition to United States involvement in Central
America, the Caribbean, Lebanon and the Persian Gulf constituted ''an invitation
to disaster'' for the country and the party.

Mr. Koch has endorsed former Vice President Mondale for the nomination. He did
not mention Mr. Hart by name, but there was no question, in light of debate in
the recent New York primary, that the Colorado Senator was his target.

Hart Supporter Responds


A few minutes later, a leading Hart supporter, Senator Christoper J. Dodd of
Connecticut, prefaced his formal testimony with an impromptu response to Mayor
Koch.

Mr. Dodd acknowledged there were differences within the Democratic Party on
foreign policy, but he declared:

''We are not isolationists. We are supporters of a creative, intelligent,
thoughtful foreign policy. To suggest that we are pursuing a policy of
isolationism is entirely missing the intention and purpose of those of us who
are trying to develop a foreign policy different from the Reagan
Administration.''

In the course of his remarks, Mayor Koch said he favored United States military
and economic support of El Salvador and opposed ''the isolationist spirit of the
antimissile demonstration in Europe.'' He called for an end to domination of
American foreign policy by the Vietnam issue.

He maintained that ''a foreign policy that calls for maintaining strength and
drawing a firm line against aggression'' is not ''conservative'' or ''right-
wing'' or ''Republican.''

''A strong foreign policy is not the exclusive domain of Republicans,'' Mayor
Koch said. ''We must never allow American voters to think that it is. With a
strong foreign policy plank in our campaign platform, we will be able to focus
attention on the President's domestic failures, and we will win in November.''

Conflicts Expected for Now


Mrs. Ferraro said later that she saw no way to eliminate entirely the conflict
among candidates from the early deliberations of the platform committee. The
panel is scheduled to hold a half-dozen more sessions around the country through
early June.

By that time, the chairman said, the primaries will be over and the relative
standing of the Presidential nomination candidates clarified, and drafting
sessions of the committee should have a simpler task before them.

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York made two major points at the daylong
hearings. In formal testimony, he called for a platform plank opposing
deployment of the MX missile, maintaining that its placement in silos already
known to the Soviet Union would reduce it largely to the role of ''a first
strike weapon.''

Secondly, in a luncheon speech to the committee, the Senator said that deficit
reduction was the most important domestic issue before the panel. He predicted
that paying the interest on the Federal debt would soon consume half of income
tax payments to the Government if steps were not taken to bring the budget
closer to balance.

Official Chides Republicans


In his remarks today, the Democratic national chairman, Charles T. Manatt,
charged that the Republicans had eliminated their platform hearings this year in
an effort ''to stifle dissent.'' By contrast, he said, the Democrats had
increased the number of their platform hearings this year.

The Republican National Committee, in canceling a hearing scheduled earlier this
year, said that a series of ''town meetings'' would be substituted. Mr. Manatt
predicted these would be ''dissent-free, stage-managed, politically
choreographed.''

Both the national and the platform chairmen expressed hope that the 1984
Democratic platform would be shorter than the 1980 document, which ran some
34,000 words. In their final deliberations, platform committees tend to take the
position that exclusion of a plank might offend some voters while inclusion
rarely does, and this does not tend to promote brevity.

As a result, some 100 groups and individuals lined up to testify at yesterday's
hearing, asking the Democrats to endorse their position on a wide range of
issues, including nuclear proliferation, Social Security reforms, environmental
protection and Turkish-Armenian relations.

Additional hearings are scheduled in Birmingham, Ala., April 24; Springfield,
Ill., April 27; Los Angeles, May 14; Cleveland, May 21; Houston, May 29, and in
Washington, Jun 11-12.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Representative Geraldine Ferraro and Senator Christopher Dodd
at platform panel meeting

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 10, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Mary McCarthy Wins Medal for Literature

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


Mary McCarthy, the novelist and critic, is the winner of the 1984 National Medal
for Literature, given to an American writer for a distinguished past and
continuing contribution to American letters. The award, for which Miss McCarthy
is the 16th recipient, consists of $15,000 and a bronze medal designed by
Leonard Baskin.

Miss McCarthy's novels include ''The Group,'' ''Cannibals and Missionaries,''
''The Groves of Academe,'' ''Birds of America'' and ''A Charmed Life.'' Her
story collections include ''The Company She Keeps'' and ''Cast a Cold Eye.'' She
is also the author of ''Memories of a Catholic Girlhood,'' ''The Stones of
Florence'' and ''Vietnam.''

The prize was endowed by the Guinzburg Fund in 1964 as a memorial to Harold K.
Guinzburg, founder of the Viking Press. It will be presented at the New York
Public Library on May 3.

The chairman of the nominating committee for the 1984 award is Robert Silvers,
co-editor of The New York Review of Books. Members are Renata Adler; Walter
Clemons of Newsweek; Robert Giroux of Farrar, Straus & Giroux; Robert Gottlieb
of Alfred A. Knopf; Elizabeth Hardwick; Irving Howe; Richard Poirier; Charles
Simmons of The New York Times Book Review; Susan Sontag and Helen Vendler.

Other recipients have included Thornton Wilder, Eudora Welty, John Cheever, W.
H. Auden, Marianne Moore, Robert Penn Warren, E. B. White, Vladimir Nabokov and
Edmund Wilson.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
LET THEM FIGHT

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 785 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 10


Foreign policy clearly is emerging as the main issue of the Presidential
election campaign. Both parties seem to want it that way, and a serious debate
on where we are and where we're going is inevitable and desirable.

It has started badly, not as a discussion of the principles underlying the
security of the nation but as a clash about the personalities and records of the
past.

Not since the days of Joe McCarthy has there been such a decline of political
civility here as now: The President accusing the Democrats of inviting surrender
and terrorism in Lebanon; Speaker Tip O'Neill replying that the President was
personally responsible for the deaths of the marines in Beirut; charges and
countercharges of bad faith, and even of lying about obvious facts.

As Harry Truman reminded us, elections are not beanbag or any other parlor game,
but what's going on now in both parties is ridiculous. For whoever wins in
November obviously will need the respect and help of both parties to govern the
country and try to maintain peace in the last years of the 80's.

The Democrats are not so eager now to make the economy the presiding issue of
the election, for it has turned around and the consequences of the deficits lie
in the future.  They will keep on asking the Reagan question: ''Are you better
off than you were four years ago?'' But mainly they will be pointing to the
menace of a divided world, and asking, ''Do you and your children feel more
secure?''

This is a fair question, worthy of an honest debate. About the obectives of U.S.
foreign policy there is now and for a long time has been a general agreement
between the parties and the Presidential candidates. They all want peace and
better relations with our allies and adversaries. But about the means to these
desirable ends there are fundamental differences.

The main facts are not really in dispute. Nobody denies here that Soviet policy
is a threat to the peaceful order of the world. Or that relations between
Washington and Moscow today are about as bad as, and maybe worse than, at any
time since they acquired a rough balance of nuclear power.

But communication between these two clumsy nuclear giants has virtually
collapsed, and U.S. relations elsewhere are not too good either.

The Reagan policies on Israel and the Arab states have been a disappointment if
not a disaster. In Central America the struggle goes on underground and
undersea, with the unacknowledged assistance of the C.I.A. - without success,
and with the rising opposition of our neighbors in Canada and Mexico, and our
allies in Europe.  The Democrats are pressing these issues, and the Republicans
are accepting the challenge. Both are pretending that the people, in their
infinite wisdom, will really know what to think about strategic and intermediate
nuclear weapons, or whether, as President Reagan suggests, we should have an
anti-ballistic missile defense in outer space. All of which is obviously crazy.
That's the way the debate has been going so far, and in such a debate the
President has obvious advantages. When in doubt, the people tend to side with
him because, as Lyndon Johnson used to say during the Vietnam War, ''I'm the
only President you have - get on the team.'' Mr. Reagan has other advantages. If
the new people in charge in Moscow - if anybody's in charge - refuse to talk to
him about control of nuclear weapons in the hope that he'll be defeated in
November, they'll drive the American voters to his side. But if they cooperate
with him on a nuclear compromise between now and the election, they will
demonstrate that his tough anti-Communist policy worked.  There's nothing wrong
with this but the facts. This is not a joke. The foreign policy of the United
States is in the control of a President whose knowledge of the history,
sufferings, poverty and religious conflicts of the world are not part of his
memory.  There are, I suppose, two questions: First, whether we will have a
Presidential election campaign that will make clear to the voters the issues
that are vital to them and their children in the last years of the century.  And
second, if this is asking too much, which it probably is, whether at least the
candidates will lower their voices and discuss the issues in a civil way.  All
these things should be debated in the campaign, beginning with the conduct of
foreign policy and Mr. Reagan's mysterious ways and buddy system of dealing with
it. We need a hard debate about what's going on here about the conduct or
misconduct of foreign policy and need answers not only from Mr. Reagan but from
the squabbling Democratic Presidential candidates who seek to replace him in the
White House.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SON OF FARMER WHO FAILED GOES ON TRIAL IN KILLING OF 2 BANKERS

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 967 words

DATELINE: IVANHOE, Minn., April 10


The trial of an 18-year-old farm boy, accused of the ambush slaying of two local
bankers who foreclosed on his father's farm, began today.

The case, which attracted nationwide attention as the authorities carried out a
cross-country manhunt for the boy and his father last fall, touches on an
emotional topic over much of rural America: a clash between financially pressed
farmers and their often- resented financiers, the local bankers. Distant
television stations even organized satellite coverage of events outside the
courtroom where the farmer's son, Steven Todd Jenkins, was being tried.

The first two days of proceedings before Judge Walter H. Mann in District Court
were expected to center on selection of a 14-member jury, including two
alternates, who had no family connections, no business dealings, no social
acquaintance and no firm opinion of the accused. That is no easy task in this
rural county of 8,081 people, many of whom saw themselves on page 1 of
newspapers around the country on Sept. 29.

Early that morning, Rudy H. Blythe Jr., president of the Buffalo Ridge State
Bank, and Deems Thulin, his chief loan officer, were killed on a farm once owned
by James L. Jenkins, a dairy farmer.

Campaign of Protests


His son, Steven Todd, is accused of shooting them to death in the most violent
outbreak yet in a mounting campaign of protests over farm foreclosures, forced
sales and bankruptcies.

The victims were lured to Mr. Jenkins's former farm near Ruthton, Minn., by a
phone caller who sought the meeting at the empty farmhouse. The caller said he
was interested in buying the property, which was repossessed by Mr. Blythe's
bank in 1980.

On their arrival at the farmhouse, the two bankers found a white pickup truck.
Mr. Blythe, suspecting trespassers, dispatched his wife, Susan, to summon the
sheriff. Minutes later a passerby saw the truck, with Texas license plates
registered to Mr. Jenkins, speed out of the driveway carrying two men.

Mr. Blythe was found dead in the ditch, shot three times by a .30 caliber rifle.
Mr. Thulin, a Vietnam veteran, was found in the yard, dead from the same weapon.

A short time later a deputy sheriff was fired on when he tried to pursue the
truck, which escaped. Three days later the young Mr. Jenkins walked into the
police dispatcher's office in Paducah, Tex., near the state's Panhandle region
and gave himself up. His father's body was found on a dirt road four miles north
of that small rural community. His death was ruled a suicide by shotgun. A small
arsenal was found in the truck.

Six Counts Against Him


Mr. Jenkins, who has been free on bail in the custody of his attorney, Allan
Swen Anderson, has been charged with six counts, ranging from the premeditated
murder of Mr. Blythe to participating in a felony robbery against both bankers
that resulted in death.

For a guilty verdict in four of the counts, the chief state prosecutor, Thomas
L. Fabel, must prove that Mr. Jenkins actually did the shooting. To obtain a
conviction in two counts, the state need only prove the teen-ager aided in a
crime that resulted in death.

From court documents and pretrial interviews, it appears the state will seek to
prove that Mr. Jenkins's father was in such poor physical condition, with such
poor eyesight and poor shooting abilities, that he could not have shot one of
the victims in the throat through a car window from a distance of 50 yards, then
chased the other for 100 yards before firing a flurry of three shots that hit
Mr. Blythe in the back.

The young Mr. Jenkins had a reputation both locally and in Texas for fashioning
himself a commando, always wearing military fatigues, a knife on his leg and
close-cropped hair. Witnesses will be called both locally and from Texas, where
both Jenkins men worked for several months, to testify to the youth's
fascination with guns, things military and his shooting abilities. A dummy
dressed as a man and used for target practice was found at the boy's
grandparents after the slayings.

Family Told Not to Talk


Mr. Anderson, the defense attorney, has refused to discuss the case and has
ordered all family members not to talk with anyone, citing an exclusivity clause
in a contract he says they had signed with a literary agent. He also vetoed a
proposal to televise the court proceedings, which in Minnesota requires only the
agreement of judge, defense and prosecution. Mr. Anderson has not identified an
author or publisher, but a man giving his name as Luigi DiFonzo and an address
near Boston has contacted others, seeking information for a book.

Teen-ager Told of Fear


However, from the youth's grand jury testimony last fall and from later court
affidavits, it appears that Mr. Jenkins will assert that although he was present
he did none of the shooting. He has testified that he and his father only
intended to scare and rob the bankers. The youth has said he participated in the
crimes for fear of his father's wrath.

For the defense of duress to be successful, however, Minnesota law requires that
an accused show he had a reasonable expectation of incurring immediate death
should he not have complied with another's orders to help with a crime. The
prosecution has also sought to quash as irrelevant the expected testimony on the
father's temperament and threats he is said to have made against others in past
years.

The trial, expected to last about three weeks, has aroused considerable interest
around this town of 761 people, where a one-day trial in Lincoln County's lone
courtroom is considered long and where the judge is more accustomed to hearing
farm disputes. According to the local authorities, it is the county's first
homicide trial in three- quarters of a century.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Steven Todd Jenkins

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE IS VICTOR IN PENNSYLVANIA; LABOR VOTE A KEY;
BIG DELEGATE LEAD

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1401 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, April 10


Walter F. Mondale won a big victory today in Pennsylvania's Democratic
Presidential primary, re-establishing a firm claim to the leadership in the race
for the nomination.

On the basis of strong support throughout the state, Mr. Mondale ran well ahead
of Senator Gary Hart, whose advisers acknowledged that after his defeat here he
had little chance of gaining enough delegates in the remaining contests to win
the nomination outright.

The Rev. Jesse Jackson was in third place, but he drew support from enough black
voters to carry this city.



The Vote Tally


With 76 percent of 9,560 precincts reporting, the vote was: Mondale 550,652
(46%)Hart 405,904 (34%)Jackson 227,433 (19%) Mr. Mondale achieved another very
strong showing among voters from union households, according to a survey by The
New York Times and CBS News of voters as they left polling places throughout the
state. (Page B8.)

The victory in Pennsylania propelled Mr. Mondale to a lopsided advantage in the
competition for national convention delegates, giving him well over 1,000 of the
1,967 delegates required for nomination.

''It's a major step forward,'' Mr. Mondale said at the Philadelphia airport
tonight. He said the voting results and the direction of the campaign debate
were ''helping me gain momentum toward the nomination and, I believe, toward the
election.''



Sweep of 3 Big States


Mr. Mondale's success here, coming after victories in New York last Tuesday and
in the Illinois primary March 20, also gave Mr. Mondale a sweep of the three
populous industrial states that voted in the last four weeks.

The Times/CBS News Poll also showed that Mr. Mondale's success in this state was
based on a strong outpouring of support from people concerned about
unemployment. This seemed to mark a continuation of the pattern in which voters
in economically troubled states have consistently chosen the former Vice
President's message of experience and compassionate leadership over Mr. Hart's
theme of new ideas.

The Pennsylvania outcome also marked a substantial setback for Mr. Hart, who
sought to play the result down by saying that no single state could mark a
''watershed'' in this year's up-and-down nomination struggle.

But his aides conceded that Mr. Hart now has almost no chance of attaining a
majority of delegates before the primary season ends June 5.

Because of Mr. Mondale's back-to- back victories in New York and Pennsylvania,
they said, the Hart campaign has now adopted a fallback strategy.

Hart aides said they hoped to finish the primary and caucus season with about
1,500 delegates and hold Mr. Mondale to a similar figure. This would leave the
nomination to be determined by the balance of the 3,933 voting delegates at the
convention.

Mr. Hart, who returned to his home state and spoke to supporters in Denver
tonight, alluded to the importance of the remaining caucuses and primaries as a
way of breaking Mr. Mondale's progress and deadlocking the delegate count.

He said voters in those states would ''understand that to win the Presidency
this party cannot just offer old leadership and old ideas.''

''Tonight we may not win in Pennsylvania,'' he said. ''But we are going to win
the nomination of this party and we are going to win the Presidency.''

In claiming victory tonight at the Bellevue Stratford Hotel here, Mr. Mondale
referred to the importance of the Pennsylvania result in giving impetus to his
candidacy.

''I believe I have a friend in Pennsylvania,'' he said. ''We came from behind
and today we won big, and I feel good about it. Something powerful is happening,
and I can feel it.''

Mr. Jackson, speaking in Philadelphia, where he was holding a 9,000-vote lead
over Mr. Mondale with 98 percent of the precincts counted, said his showing in
the city demonstrated the vitality of his candidacy.

''Without one television commercial, without one newspaper ad - a poor campaign
and a rich message - we're moving on up,'' he said.

In Pennsylvania, where the jobless rate is 8.9 percent, more than half the
voters cited unemployment as a key issue and about three-fifths of the Mondale
voters cited it as a reason for supporting him, according to the Times/ CBS News
Poll.

The poll also detected a degree of personal economic misfortune that appeared to
work in Mr. Mondale's favor. Only 16 percent of those surveyed said they were
better off than last year, and 35 percent said they were worse off. The figures
were similar to those in Illinois, where Mr. Mondale scored the victory that got
his candidacy back on track two weeks after his early defeats in New Hampshire
and other states.

About Half of Union Vote


The survey showed that Mr. Mondale got 49 percent of the vote from union
households, about the same as his previous highs of 48 percent in New York and
46 percent in Illinois.

For the first time in several weeks, Mr. Mondale also cut into Mr. Jackson's
support among urban blacks, the polling data showed. Mondale advisers credited
the endorsement of W. Wilson Goode, the first black to be Mayor of Philadelphia,
with enabling Mr. Mondale to get about a fifth of the black vote. Even so, Mr.
Jackson got about three quarters of that vote.

A total of 172 delegates were to be allocated on the basis of today's voting.
But the votes for delegates, which are cast separately from those in the
Presidential preference balloting, were not to be tabulated fully until
Wednesday.

Hart Weak in Rural Areas


Even so, the early popular vote indicated a Mondale trend likely to add 100 or
more to his current delegate total of 946, as counted by United Press
International. Mr. Hart had 551 delegates going into today's contest and Mr.
Jackson 151, while 329 were uncommitted.

Mr. Hart's strategy of trying to discredit Mr. Mondale's standing as a
vote-getter by emerging as the popular favorite of rank-and-file Democrats faces
serious problems, according to the Times/CBS News Poll.

For example, the polling indicated that Mr. Hart was failing to carry rural
areas and small towns of western Pennsylvania, a stronghold for Jimmy Carter in
1976 when he conducted an insurgency candidacy similar to Mr. Hart's.

Less Bitter Than New York


The polling results in western Pennsylvania also raised doubts about Mr. Hart's
chances in neighboring Ohio, which is holding one of the primaries May 8 in
which he needs to rebound to make his plans work.

The contest in Pennsylvania produced fewer bitter exchanges than did the
campaigning earlier this month in New York.

''We gave Hart more running room this time,'' said a Mondale campaign official.
''In New York we wanted to crowd him.''

After New York, Mr. Hart acknowledged that Mr. Mondale's personal attacks had
disrupted his campaigning there. However, when the struggle shifted to
Pennsylvania last week after the former Vice President's big success in New
York, Mondale aides felt they could afford a more relaxed approach that would
reduce the risks of Mr. Mondale's being perceived as a candidate who had to rely
on ''fighting, nasty stuff.''

Mondale Forsakes Attack


''We wanted to be able to continue discussing who Gary Hart is without being
seen as making a slashing, negative attack,'' the campaign official said.

Mondale advisers stressed that they believed that the rhythm of the contest is
now shifting from individual, high- stakes primaries to the broader task of
amassing a majority of the 3,933 delegates to the national convention.  Toward
that end, the Mondale campaign plans to concentrate on organizing states, such
as Texas and California, with high delegate counts and also on states that voted
earlier but have not completed their delegate selection processes.

Mr. Jackson began his day with get- out-the-vote rallies at a Philadelphia
church and at Temple University and LaSalle College. In speeches he continued to
criticize Mr. Mondale's ''hesitance'' to join him in calling for the abolition
of runoff primaries.

''If we can challenge Mondale, maybe somehow, some way, some day, he will
change,'' said Mr. Jackson. ''I have watched Mondale hesitate more and more and
more on whether to enforce the Voting Rights Act, and he is making an issue of
something that should have been settled 19 years ago. It's like he did on
Grenada, Vietnam and Lebanon.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of voters (page B9)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WORKING PROFILE: JEREMY RIFKIN;
AN ACTIVIST TAKES ON GENETIC ENGINEERING

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 10


Jeremy Rifkin, among the nation's most vociferous opponents of advances in
genetic engineering, says he will be back in court this week, seeking to halt an
experiment that he considers potentially dangerous.

It will not be the first time Mr. Rifkin has tried to slow the advance one of
the most glamorous and most rapidly developing fields of modern science. In the
last several years, the 39-year-old activist has used lawsuits, Congressional
testimony, television appearances and speeches and books to warn of what he
considers the perils in modern biotechnology.

In the process, he has outraged some of the nation's most eminent biologists.
One, David Baltimore of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, a Nobel
Laureate, will not even appear on the same platform with him.

''He doesn't understand what he's talking about,'' Dr. Baltimore says. ''He's
just interested in personal publicity.''

Knows How Washington Works


But Mr. Rifkin has also managed to persuade a wide range of officials in diverse
fields to fall in behind his banner. He is successful, admirers say, because he
has a sophisticated understanding of how Washington operates, a knack for
framing issues, a wide range of contacts stemming from years of activism and
speech making, a willingness to cross ideological boundaries to forge unlikely
coalitions and an ability to strike fast with press releases, testimony or
lawsuits when opportunity presents itself.

These were some of Mr. Rifkin's activities in the last year:


- He persuaded an unusually broad spectrum of some 60 religious leaders,
including Protestants, Roman Catholics, Jews, liberals and fundamentalists, from
the Rev. Jerry Falwell, founder of Moral Majority, to the chaplain of the United
States Senate, to sign a resolution urging Congress to ban genetic engineering
of human reproductive cells, a process that is still years away. Later, when
challenged by reporters, a few of the signers backed down a bit, contending that
they wanted only to stimulate discussion, but others stood their ground.


- He persuaded several environmental leaders to join him in legal action that
forced postponement of the nation's first outdoor experiments with genetically
modified microorganisms, thereby slowing efforts to apply the techniques of
genetic engineering to agricultural problems.


- He persuaded such top arms control experts as Paul C. Warnke, former director
of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and Dr. Herbert Scoville Jr.,
president of the Arms Control Association, to join him in an unsuccessful effort
to block a military medical experiment until its possible relationship with
chemical and biological warfare could be assessed.

Later, Mr. Warnke acknowledged in an interview that ''I don't know a damn
thing'' about the particular medical experiment. But he said he wanted an
assessment of its impact on arms control performed in accord with his and Mr.
Rifkin's understanding of the law.

Concerned With DNA Research


The chief targets of Mr. Rifkin's concern are the related fields of genetic
engineering, recombinant DNA research and the ''new biotechnology.'' Dramatic
advances in these fields are enabling scientists to modify the genes of plants
and organisms in an effort to produce better crops, medicines and industrial
products.

But Mr. Rifkin says he is concerned that, in a pell-mell rush to achieve these
benefits, scientists might unleash new organisms that could cause ecological or
health damage at least as serious as that already caused by toxic chemicals.

He says he also fears that tampering with human genes in an effort to cure
disease will ultimately lead to a ''new eugenics,'' a well-intentioned but
misguided effort to produce ''perfect'' human beings that will end up
fundamentally altering the human species.

No Formal Scientific Training


Mr. Rifkin, who has had no formal training in science, says he stumbled into
biotechnology almost by accident after a long career of activism. He helped
sponsor a major rally against the Vietnam War in New York in 1967, helped stage
a mock war-crimes trial against the United States in Washington in 1970 and then
spent several years organizing the Peoples Bicentennial Commission, a radical,
antibusiness alternative to the official bicentennial celebrations.

Today, Mr. Rifkin operates from modest offices in the Dupont Circle Building,
assisted by a secretary and occasional part-time help. He calls his operation,
somewhat grandly, the Foundation for Economic Trends. It grosses about $100,000
a year, mostly from book royalties and Mr. Rifkin's speeches and seminars at
college campuses, billed at $2,000 a day or $3,000 for two days. Out of these
proceeds, Mr. Rifkin says he plans to pay himself a salary of $30,000 this year.


Some Eminent Critics


Mr. Rifkin's books have received harsh reviews from some eminent critics,
including Niles Eldredge, an expert on evolution at the American Museum of
Natural History; Kenneth E. Boulding, an economist who is a former president of
the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and Alexander M.
Capron, former executive director of the Presidential commission that dealt with
the ethics of genetic engineering.

But others in the scholarly, religious and political fields praise him for a
willingness to ''think big,'' raise controversial issues and serve as a social
and ethical prophet.

Representative Albert Gore Jr., Democrat of Tennessee, perhaps the leading
Congressional authority on genetic engineering, called ''Algeny,'' Mr. Rifkin's
latest book on the subject, ''an insightful critique.''

And Senator Mark O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon, said the book ''may well be
one of the most important documents of the decade.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jeremy Rifkin

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING;
Keeping Secrets

BYLINE: William E. Farrell and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 822 words


In 1976, Congress limited service on

the Senate Select Committee on

Intelligence to eight years, on the theory that no one, not even a senator,
should be entrusted with too many secrets for too long.

But now the chairman and deputy chairman of the panel, Senators Barry Goldwater,
Republican of Arizona, and Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, and
several other members are bumping up against the limit, and they have discussed
asking Congress to eliminate or extend it to retain experience on the committee.
They all became members in 1977, so this would be their last year under the
rules.

Last week the Senate debated and ultimately approved $21 million for covert aid
to forces opposing the Sandinista Government in Nicaragua. At that time, most
senators were unaware that Nicaraguan harbors had been mined under the
supervision of the Central Intelligence Agency, information that might have
affected their votes on some amendments, including one to ban spending for
terrorist activities that was not adopted.

Whether the committee leaders knew about the mining operation at the time of the
floor debate is not entirely clear; Senator Goldwater says he had not been
briefed, and Senator Moynihan says he is not sure. Several of their colleagues,
however, resent not having been privately told about the operation, and their
irritation appears to have insured that the proposal to eliminate mandatory
committee retirement in 1985 is, as one senator said, ''dead in the water.''

And Justice for One

Regular as clockwork, every morning at 8 o'clock, Associate Justice Harry A.
Blackmun has breakfast in the Supreme Court cafeteria with his four law clerks.
One day recently a large group of schoolchildren was leaving as Justice Blackmun
arrived, and all the tables were dirty. The Justice asked a busboy to clear one
for him; the busboy, apparently not recognizing the Justice, said he was too
busy.

Justice Blackmun and his clerks have continued to appear every morning for
breakfast, but the busboy has not been seen since.

Civil Rights Landmark

Twenty years ago this week a

group of black religious and

civil rights leaders in Jackson, Miss., filed a petition with the Federal
Communications Commission challenging the renewal of a television station's
license on the ground that it demonstrably engaged in racial discrimination.
They lost with the F.C.C. but ultimately won in the Federal courts, establishing
the principle that a discriminatory broadcaster does not operate in ''the public
interest, convenience or necessity.''

Tonight, to celebrate the anniversary of that landmark, a group of legislators,
regulators, broadcasters and civil rights and religious leaders will hold a
dinner to honor Dr. Everett C. Parker. As an official of the United Church of
Christ, he helped file the original petition and is now being cited as ''founder
of the media reform movement.''

In addition to spoken tributes to Dr. Parker, the program will feature parody
songs on the communications industry, including ''Thirty Ways to Lose Your
License'' and a Gilbert- and-Sullivan ''If Parker Had Been Chairman of the
F.C.C.''

Awaiting an Ambassador

Sometime late this spring or early

this summer, a new West German Ambassador is expected to arrive in Washington
with his American-born wife. He is G"unther van Well, who is now serving at the
United Nations. His wife, Carolyn, is from Short Hills, N.J., The current
Ambassador to the United States from West Germany, Peter Hermes, is expected to
be posted to a new assignment at the Vatican.

The 60's as Board Game

If you are finding the politics of 1984

a little bland, take a spin at Sixtomania, the 1960's Nostalgia Game. A board
game in which players advance around and through a large peace symbol, it
requires a considerable knowledge of trivia of the era, such as the year in
which ''The Making of a Counter-Culture,'' ''The Greening of America,'' ''Love
Story'' and ''Jonathan Livingston Seagull'' were all best sellers.

Landing on certain spaces gives you a karma card, with instructions like these:
''Your 1962 draft notice arrives. Roll the die and play Deferment Roulette: 1 or
2, go to grad school; 3 or 4, get married; 5, become a minister; but if you get
a 6, nothing works, you're drafted and wake up in Saigon.''

Vietnam cards invoke penalties like these: ''October 1969: President Nixon
declares, 'I will say confidently that, looking ahead just three years, the war
will be over.' You believe him. Go back two spaces.''

Sixtomania is the brainchild of Chuck Fager, a 41-year-old Washington freelance
writer who dropped out of college in 1964 and took part in civil rights
demonstations and Vietnam protests. The extent to which he has come to terms
with the establishment can be judged by the fact that he now owns Kimo Press in
Falls Church, Va., from which the game can be purchased for $12.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Bill Is Passed for Aid To Vietnam Veterans

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 178 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, April 10


The war here over a bill to aid Vietnam War veterans is over. The bill was
passed today by the State Senate even though the name of a conscientious
objector remained on it as the chief Assembly sponsor.

The bill, which will offer tuition aid for veterans of the Vietnam War, had
already been passed by the Assembly, and Governor Cuomo has said he will sign
it.

Senator Frank Padavan, a Queens Republican, said he had blocked passage of the
bill last week to show that the Democrats were ''manipulating it for a political
purpose'' by putting the name of Assemblyman John F. Duane on it as the chief
sponsor. Mr. Duane, a freshman Queens Democrat, was granted
conscientiousobjector status in 1972 because of his religious beliefs as a Roman
Catholic.

Mr. Padavan said that after making his point, he believed the bill should be
approved for the benefit of veterans. Groups including the American Legion and
the Jewish War Veterans have criticized Mr. Duane. But the Vietnam Veterans of
America said it wanted the bill passed and had no problem with Mr. Duane.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 16, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article in Metropolitan Report on April 10 about a bill in the New York State
Legislature to provide tuition assistance to Vietnam veterans incorrectly
reported criticism of the bill's Assembly sponsor, John F. Duane, Democrat of
Queens. While individual members of the Jewish War Veterans of New York
criticized him, the state organization itself took no position.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 11, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Real Income And Elections

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 934 words


IS the economy so strong that President Reagan

has the election sewed up?

If one uses changes in real disposable income per capita - personal income after
taxes, adjusted for inflation - as the leading indicator of victories and
defeats of incumbent Presidents, Ronald Reagan would appear to be a winner.

Prof. Edward R. Tufte of Yale University, a political scientist who specializes
in the relation between the business cycle and the electoral cycle, estimates
that real disposable income will rise by 4.4 percent this year. That promises to
be the second-strongest economic advance in personal income since World War II
in any election year in which the incumbent President was seeking a second term.



The only President to face an election with stronger income growth going for him
was Lyndon B. Johnson. In 1964, with the help of the Kennedy- Johnson tax cut
shifting income from government to consumers and the low rate of inflation
before the Vietnam military buildup began, real disposable income rose by 5.6
percent - and Mr. Johnson won in a landslide over Senator Barry Goldwater.

Professor Tufte regards the common rise of personal income in years when
incumbent Presidents are seeking re-election as no coincidence whatsoever. In
the postwar years in which there was no election, either Presidential or midterm
Congressional, real disposable income rose on average by only 1.9 percent. In
years of midterm Congressional elections, the indicator rose by 2.8 percent. In
years when incumbent Presidents were not seeking re-election, it rose by only 2
percent. But in Presidential election years, when incumbents were seeking second
terms, the median rise in real disposable income was 3.7 percent, excluding the
Eisenhower years.

Strikingly, during the four Presidential and mid- term Congressional election
years of the Administration of Dwight D. Eisenhower, there was no year in which
the growth of real disposable income accelerated; rather, in all four election
years, it decelerated. In other postwar administrations, real disposable income
accelerated in 10 election years and decelerated in four years - the last two
being the decline of six-tenths of 1 percent in 1980, when President Jimmy
Carter lost, and the decline of four-tenths of 1 percent in 1982, when the
Republicans lost seats in Congress and governorships.

Professor Tufte suggests that, when President Eisenhower took office with a
different set of political-economic values, giving the control of inflation a
higher priority than the reduction of unemployment, he changed the nation's
political-economic cycle. But he may have been able to shift to a heavier stress
on curbing inflation and shrinking government rather than cutting unemployment
and raising income because of his own personal popularity. When Vice President
Richard M. Nixon ran for President in 1960, with real disposable income
declining, he lost his first bid for the White House - and blamed President
Eisenhower and his economic advisers for his defeat by John F. Kennedy.

There is strong circumstantial as well as documentary evidence that incumbent
Presidents have usually made policy intended to knock down both unemployment and
inflation in election years. In 40 percent of the 10 Presidential election years
since 1946, both unemployment and inflation declined - the ideal state of
affairs for the incumbent - compared with only 10 percent of the 29 other years.
In two of the Presidential election years, there was less unemployment but more
inflation - usually the second-best electoral condition. In three cases, there
was less inflation but more unemployment, and in one, more inflation and more
unemployment, the worst state.

Mr. Reagan's situation is likely to be a second- best case, with less
unemployment and more inflation. Unemployment, which held at 7.7 percent of the
labor force last month, seems likely to decline through the election period. But
the great majority of economists see inflation, as measured by the Consumer
Price Index, which rose by only 3.8 percent in 1983, as likely to rise by 5
percent or more this year, with some economists forecasting a rate of 7 percent
to 10 percent by Election Day.

Some economists see a correlation between the so-called misery index - the sum
of inflation and unemployment rates - and electoral outcomes, with anything
above a 10 percent total likely to damage the incumbent. If unemployment this
year averages 7.4 percent and inflation 6 percent, the 13.4 percent misery index
would be the third worst of the postwar period - better than the 20.6 percent
rate of 1980 on which President Carter lost but only a sliver below the 13.5
percent rate of 1976 on which President Gerald R. Ford lost.



The Democratic candidates, Walter F. Mondale, Gary Hart and Jesse Jackson,
differ in their stress on the economic issues but all are attacking Mr. Reagan
on unemployment, which is of prime concern to their labor, minority and youth
constituencies. They are also focusing on other economic problems that they
charge have resulted from Mr. Reagan's policies, including the buildup of
inflationary pressures, rising interest rates, budget deficits, the big trade
deficit, and, over all, the potential destabilizing of the economy.

But there is another economic issue shaping up as a major factor in the
campaign: the distribution of income, with the Democrats charging that
Reaganomics has shifted national income in favor of the rich and against the
interests of the poor and the lower middle class. We shall consider those issues
in another column.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SPRAYING ON COAST SPURS OPPOSITION

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 899 words

DATELINE: SACRAMENTO, Calif.


Over residents' opposition, the California Department of Food and Agriculture is
spraying suburban lawns in an effort to wipe out the Japanese beetle.

The state's first beetle outbreak in a decade was detected last summer in Fair
Oaks and Orangevale, suburbs of Sacramento. Thousands of lawns were sprayed
before a University of California biologist found that one of the chemicals
being used, the pesticide Oftanol, caused serious nervous system disorders in
chickens. Department officials said the state's fruit crops could suffer losses
of $95 million a year if the beetles multiplied.

The department stopped using Oftanol but more spraying started March 1, as
scheduled, using Diazinon. That day a Federal district judge here denied a
motion by the towns' residents, organized in a community group, to block the
spraying until Diazinon could be studied further. The residents' bid to stop the
second stage of spraying, involving another chemical, is to be heard April 24 in
Federal District Court here.

Issue in Other Places, Too


The California controversy is one of many that have sprung up around the state
and the nation as community groups have organized to press for better regulation
and licensing in the use of chemicals, chiefly pesticides, and greater limits on
their application.  On March 5 more than 200 residents filed a personal injury
suit in state Superior Court in Sacramento County asserting that they had
suffered serious health problems as a result of the spraying last summer.

When California state workers ''first began spraying here, my husband was out
there giving them iced tea,'' said Nancy Johnson, 28 years old, of Fair Oaks.
''I think we were a lot like most people who thought these chemicals were
harmless.''

Mrs. Johnson believes her 4-year-old son, Andrew, suffered severe allergic
reactions to the chemicals last summer. The child was hospitalized for 21 days
in July and August after their neighborhood was sprayed.

''I learned fast,'' Mrs. Johnson said. ''With all this evidence showing there
are so many problems with how these chemicals are used, why aren't they willing
to accept that something might be wrong out here?''

Groups Form to Bar Spraying


In the Northwest, the Humboldt Herbicide Task Force in California and the
Northwest Coalition For Alternatives to Pesticides in Oregon recently won
Federal court cases stopping large Government spraying projects.

In the Middle West, Kansans for Safe Pest Control are leading a battle to halt
roadside pesticide use by the state transportation department.

Last summer, the Pennsylvania Citizens Against Toxic Spraying scuttled a
utility's plans to defoliate hundreds of miles of powerline right of way.

Groups in five states in the Deep South have forced timber and utility companies
to reconsider their use of several Vietnam-era herbicides widely sprayed in the
forests.

Action in 20 States

Town councils, county boards and the legislatures of at least 20 states have
taken action in the last 18 months to ban or restrict the use of roughly a dozen
insecticides and herbicides.

In Washington this spring Congress is to consider the first major proposal to
alter existing Federal restrictions of pesticides since 1972.

In the California Legislature, a dozen bills urging major revisions in pesticide
regulation and use were introduced in February. The state Senate approved one
that would require the Department of Food and Agriculture to catalogue all
pesticides registered before advanced testing techniques were developed and
would compel chemical manufacturers to make new studies.

Gov. George Deukmejian and Clare Berryhill, Director of Food and Agriculture,
oppose the bill because, Mr. Berryhill said, they believe it is the Federal
Government's responsibility to require manufacturers to replace inadequate
tests.

A bill introduced in February by Assemblywoman Jean Moorhead, who represents
Fair Oaks and Orangevale, calls for transferring the responsibility for
licensing pesticides from the Director of Food and Agriculture to the Secretary
of Health and Welfare. She said this was needed ''to assure that the people who
want to regulate pesticides have to also answer to the people who are concerned
about health.''

Quick Responses Called Safe


Officials of the Department of Food and Agriculture, charged with protecting the
state's $14-billion-a-year agriculture industry, maintain that programs to
eradicate small infestations of agricultural pests such as the Japanese beetle
are safe. Quick responses to such threats, they contend, result in the use of
smaller quantities of pesticides.

But the primary concern among citizens, particularly those in urban and suburban
areas, is not agricultural ruin but health. In Los Angeles, where helicopters
have been spraying malathion against the Mediterranean fruit fly over a
57-square-mile section of the city since last November, some people have
complained of nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramps and diarrhea.

''Maybe I'm to blame somehow,'' said Mary Jensen, a 34-year-old mother of three
in Fair Oaks. ''I na"ively believed that we lived in a republic where reasonable
people could discuss their differences with government officials. But they just
don't seem to care about anything except protecting those chemicals and killing
bugs.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 12, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EXECUTIVE SUITE;
A MINI-MUSEUM AT THE WORLD BANK

BYLINE: By MARJORIE HUNTER

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 358 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 11


When Eugene H. Rothberg arrives for work at the World Bank each morning he steps
into a handsome mini-museum of his own making.

There are plaques and paintings, vases and chests, a dainty fan from Japan,
brass rubbings from India, an Indonesian tray and prehistoric stone sculptures
from Mexico. The collection of world art and skilled workmanship is so vast that
it overflows into the nearby offices of associates and clerical workers.

''One spends a good part of life in the office,'' Mr. Rothberg said. ''These are
the things I like to look at when I'm working. I guess I'm just an inveterate
collector.''

As vice president and treasurer of the World Bank, more formally known as the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, he must keep track of the
$10 billion to $11 billion that is borrowed by member countries each year and
the $15 billion worth of yearly investment loans to improve living standards in
emerging nations.

6 Weeks of Travel


This involves extensive foreign travel, six weeks or so each year, to both the
developed and underdeveloped countries around the globe.

His office is adorned with Indonesian puppets, French and Swedish vases, a
lacquer plaque from Vietnam, an inlaid chest from the Philippines, an ornate
necklace from Saudi Arabia, a brass bell from Upper Volta, a beaded purse from
Yemen, a silver knife from Iran, framed paintings from China and England and
Spain, exquisite etchings from Yugoslavia and stone rubbings from Malasia and
China.

A talented amateur photographer, his display also includes blowups of color
photographs he took in Japan and England and elsewhere in his nearly 15 years
with the World Bank.

For years, his office was dominated by a 9-foot-tall, multicolored statue of a
woman, a modernistic plaster and wood creation fashioned by Anna Thornhill
Nuchtern of Greenwich Village.

Now, what he calls his ''poor man's Dubuffet'' has been shifted to a spot within
the suite but some distance from his private office.

''It became overpowering to most of my banking friends,'' he said. ''They're not
too comfortable with overpowering women.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Eugene H. Rothberg

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Topics Revaluations

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 230 words


Model General Simple ideas like love of country and professional pride have come
to encounter so many conflicting values that few public servants can avoid
tarnish in their time. A rare exception was Lieut. Gen. William R. Peers, who
died last week in San Francisco. He combined physical bravery with unswerving
dedication to the U.S. Army.

As a colonel in World War II he commanded 750 Americans, a few Britons, an Irish
missionary priest and 10,000 Burmese to pin down superior Japanese forces and
clear the way for engineers to reopen a land route between India and China.

In Vietnam, General Peers distinguished himself as commanding general of the
Fourth Division, which fought the biggest battle of that war. Later he was
Deputy Commander of all Army forces in South Korea.

For many Americans, however, his most memorable accomplishment was as
investigator of the My Lai massacre in Vietnam. Attentive to the evidence, and
damning in its indictment of Army colleagues, the report recommended
court-martial for 14 officers, including the divisional commander. But only one
young lieutenant who commanded the guilty platoon was tried and convicted. And
shortly afterward General Peers retired, having failed to be promoted to the
Korean command, which his friends were sure had been promised. Sacrificing one's
career for the Army's reputation is truly heroic.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COMPUTER IS LEAVING A WIDE IMPRINT ON CONGRESS

BYLINE: By David Burnham

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 2174 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 12


The computer has become essential to the functioning of virtually every aspect
of Congress and appears to be contributing to subtle but far-reaching changes in
one of the oldest and most traditional of America's national institutions.

In the last decade, computer technology has assumed a major role in the daily
operation of both houses, assisting Congress in writing its legislation,
recording its votes, publishing its reports, paying its staff, conducting
research into social issues and communicating with the nation's voters.

Among the major institutional changes that the widespread adoption of computers
appears to have encouraged, according to interviews with members of Congress,
Congressional staff and other experts, were these:


- Modern computers and high-speed printers, in conjunction with their free
mailing privilege, have increased the considerable advantages that Congressional
incumbents always have enjoyed over challengers.


- Computer technology has enhanced the ability of Congressional committees to
collect and organize information about the performance of individual agencies or
the potential impact of proposed changes in social policy, possibly contributing
to an increase in the power of the legislative branch in relation to the
executive branch.


- The interplay of computer technology, in the hands of Congress and many
lobbying groups, appears to have increased the pressure on individual members of
Congress to provide quick responses to complex social issues, reducing time for
thoughtful reflection.


- The computerized voting system employed by the House has tended to increase
roll-call votes, making it considerably easier for constituents and organized
lobbying groups to keep track of the positions taken by individual members.

'Major Impact on Congress'


''The computer clearly has had a major impact on Congress, some of it good and
some of it bad,'' said Representative Morris K. Udall, Democrat of Arizona, who
is chairman of House commission dealing with the free mail privilege.

''On balance, I think that Congress today would be a harmless debating society
without the computers that enable it to keep track of the executive agencies,''
said Senator Charles McC. Mathias Jr., Republican of Maryland, who is chairman
of the Senate Committee of Rules and Administration.

The range of the computer applications available to the 535 House and Senate
members through the House Information Systems and the Senate Computer Center is
already extensive and is steadily growing.

The two organizations offer a variety of computer services, including one
designed to help individual members prepare and maintain their office budgets, a
second to conduct research on social and legal issues, another to keep track of
all bills and amendments pending in Congress and a fourth to organize and
conduct accurate opinion surveys.

The combined budget for the two computer centers in the current fiscal year
comes to $34 million.

But because the cost of many of the computer services is charged to the office
expense allowances of individual members and the budgets of the Library of
Congress and the General Accounting Office, the total computer-related
expenditures by the legislative branch are higher.

Move Toward Minicomputers


Both houses also are moving to provide the offices of individual members with
minicomputers. These systems will be quite elaborate.

In the Senate, the plans call for each small computer to be capable of
processing information from 25 to 45 terminals, depending upon the size of the
state.

But it is the maze of postal legislation, procedures and regulations established
by both houses to handle and control the Congressional mail system that members,
staff and outside experts agree is where the computer has had its major impact.

The growth in this mail has been explosive, especially in the 12-month period
before a national election.

In the last three months of 1983, for example, the 100 members of the Senate
dispatched 64.5 million letters and reports. This was almost as many such
mailings as the senators made in all 12 months of the fiscal year 1979.

Value of Franking Privilege


Since the earliest days of Congress, the public value of allowing members to
communicate freely with constituents has been widely recognized. It was because
of this principle that the Congress member's right to send mail without any
charge simply by putting his mark, or frank, on the letter was established.

But in the age of pen and ink or typewriters, Congressional letters were
severely limited, mostly to responding to specific constituent inquiries.
However, with the coming of the computer, the swift creation of sophisticated
mailing lists and laser devices capable of printing individualized letters at
the speed of 20,000 lines a minute, there is almost no limit to the letters that
members can now generate.

Mr. Udall said there was a genuine need for members to communicate with their
constituents. ''But the computerized way we currently are operating gives the
incumbents an advantage that hurts representative democracy,'' he said.
Challengers, of course, can purchase such equipment, but they would have to pay
for it as well as mailing costs out of their own pockets.

In the last few years Mr. Udall has sought persuade the House to police itself
by tightening mailing restrictions. He said this effort had generated a great
deal of hostility from members of Congress. ''I have thrown in the towel on this
question,'' he added.

Analysis of Senate Mail


Mr. Mathias, whose Rules and Administration Committee is responsible for
governing the use of Senate computers, also has questioned both the growing
quantity and changing characteristics of the Senate's mail.

In a recent interview, Mr. Mathias said that less than 5 percent of the mail
going out from the Senate was in response to constituent inquiries. He said
analysis had found that in 1982 11 million outgoing letters were ''responding to
constituents; 245 million we are casting out to the winds.''

While a small proportion of all Congressional mail is in response to constituent
inquiries, with the help of computers, a great deal of it is carefully directed
at specific voters.

Representative Les Aspin, a Wisconsin Democrat who was formerly a Pentagon
official, has received a good deal of attention in Congress and the press by his
attacks on wasteful procurement by the military.

Lists Purchased by Aspin


In the last year, Mr. Aspin used public funds drawn from his personal office
allowance to purchase computerized lists of the names and addresses of thousands
of Wisconsin voters outside his district. These included the registered voters
in Madison, the state capital, farmers whose names were contained on a list
compiled by Wisconsin Agriculture Department and people who subscribe to a state
publication called Aging in the News.

Mr. Aspin declined several requests for an interview about why he purchased the
mailing lists, the number and kinds of mailings he has made outside his
district. But political sources in Wisconsin believe his effort may be related
to the possibility that he may run for the Senate in 1986.

Aides to members of Congress on both sides of the Capitol said the existing
rules provided few real barriers to their mailing operations. While the House
has some restrictions on the periodic newsletters sent to all the ''postal
patrons'' in a member's district, there are almost no regulations concerning the
hundreds of thousands a letters a year that the computers and mass mailing lists
enable a member to aim at specific individuals.

Many staff members defend their continuously operated ''outreach programs'' to
add new names to their mailing lists. ''I don't keep track of the letters we
send out and I resent you asking the question,'' said the administrative
assistant to a Democratic Congressman from the West. ''We are trying to inform
our constituents about important issues. I can't understand talking about
limiting mail when the purpose is to inform. I want the constituents to know how
the Congressman is voting, what he's thinking about.''

Considerable Impact Seen


Most experts believe that the political impact of publicly financed computers
and computerized mailing lists, together with the privilege of being able to
mail material without charge, is considerable.

One of the most authoritative statements on the the frank's impact was contained
in the 1982 opinion of a special three-judge panel of the Federal District Court
here. The decision was the result of a lawsuit brought by Common Cause, which
describes itself as a citizens' lobby, arguing that abuse of the frank by
Congress violated the constitutional rights to free speech and due process.

While the court rejected Common Cause's constitutional arguments, it said the
evidence collected in pretrial proceedings showed that some members of Congress
have used direct mail experts ''to build mailing lists and help integrate
franked mailings into the overall campaign strategy.''

The court added that the evidence showed that senators and representatives
''have targeted frank mass mailings in ways that frequently have no relationship
to official business and which are closely connected to re-election plans and
strategy.''

Larry E. Smith, the sergeant-at- arms of the Senate, does not agree that the
targeted mass mail systems have significantly increased the power of the
incumbents.

'Obligation to Be Responsive'


''The senators have an obligation to be responsive,'' Mr. Smith said. ''There is
indeed a thin line between that point where a senator is fulfilling his or her
obligation to the voters and when he or she is going beyond that point. But the
Senate has developed restrictions so the computer cannot be abused, to make it
harder for such abuses to occur.''

But Mr. Smith said he was concerned about another impact of the computer. ''In
our computerized age there seems to be more pressure for instant response, more
pressure to have a quick answer and less time to reflect,'' he said.
''Sometimes, it seems that the senators don't have enough time to reflect.''

This comment was echoed by other experienced Congressional aides.

''The whole situation bothers me,'' said a House staff member who has been on
Capitol Hill for 20 years. ''Sometime in the mid-70's the letters stopped being
polite and became aggressive and absolutely demanding. I guess maybe we in
Washington earned this with Watergate and Vietnam. But I have a feeling the
machines are just allowing us to tread water faster and faster without any real
understanding about how people feel.''

A more positive contribution of the computer, according to many Congressional
members, staff members and others, is that it has increased the ability of the
legislative branch to understand the potential impact of proposals under
consideration by Congress.

'We Might Have Drowned'


''In some ways,'' Senator Mathias said, ''I don't think Congress could have
survived as a meaningful institution without the computer. Woodrow Wilson, in
his study of Congress, said the review of the operations of the Federal
Government was its most important function. Without the computer, I think we
might have drowned in a sea of information.'' When the President submits his
annual budget, in addition to the printed document, he now provides Congress
with a computerized budget tape.

The computerized budget increases the power of Congress in two ways. First, the
computerized budget contains far more specific detail than the first. Second,
because the budget can be swiftly analyzed on the computer of the Congressional
Budget Committee, it is far harder for any Administration to manipulate the
numbers.

The computer has increased Congress's power in relation to the executive branch
in a second way. Beginning in the early 60's, the Treasury Department developed
a computerized model of the economy that enabled it to understand the possible
consequences of a new tax proposal.

But in 1974, the professional staff of the House Ways and Means Committee became
concerned about evidence that the Nixon Administration had attempted to use the
Internal Revenue Service for political purposes. A decision was made that
Congress could no longer trust the Treasury Department and had to develop an
independent ability to examine tax proposals.

''Giving Congress the ability to use the analytical ability of the computer has
worked to equalize the power of the executive and legislative branches,'' said
Peter J. Davis Jr., a former staff member with the Joint Tax Committee who is a
vice president with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc.

A third aspect of how the computer is enhancing Congress's authority concerns
the increasing use by committees and individual members of computerized polling
techniques to collect data on social issues.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Senator Robert W. Kasten Jr. staff working on computer

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 14, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TV NOTES;
SOVIET HISTORY, POLITICS AND CULTURE TO BE FOCUS OF PBS SERIES

BYLINE: By PETER KERR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 50, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words


A major, new 10-hour public television series about the Soviet Union is being
developed by a television news agency in cooperation with the Public
Broadcasting Service and the W. Averell Harriman Institute for Advanced Study of
the Soviet Union.

The project, entitled ''Who Are the Russians?'' is expected to take two years to
produce and will be designed for public television stations and as part of
university courses, much like the 13-part series on Vietnam on public television
stations earlier this season.

''We felt there is a great need to inform the American people about our
superpower adversary,'' said Bert Patenaude, a fellow at the Harriman Institute
who is working as a development director of the project with Viscom, a New York
based television news agency. ''We want to give the public a context to help
them understand the mass of facts about the Soviet Union coming at them every
night on nightly news.''

The program will focus on the history, politics and culture of the Soviet Union
since the 1917 revolution, Mr. Patenaude said. PBS has given a tentative
commitment of $350,000 to the project, which will be co-produced by one of the
major public television stations in the United States. The name of the station
will be announced in the coming weeks, he added. Other funds are expected to
come from additional foundations and grants.

Among the 10 one-hour segments Mr. Patenaude said, will be ''Georgians, Uzbeks
and Latvians,'' about Soviet ethnic minorities; ''The Unfinished Revolution,''
on the political history of the country, and ''Mutual Perception,'' which will
look at the ways in which the two superpowers view one another and the history
of their mutual distrust.

The series may cause some controversy. Midge Decter, executive director of the
Committee for The Free World, a group of conservative intellectuals based in New
York, said the series would pay scant attention to what she contends has been
the tens of millions of political deaths that have taken place at the hands of
the Soviet Government. Miss Decter said she based her conclusions on a
description of the series written by its producers.

''The concept for the program is laughable,'' Miss Decter said. ''This purports
to be definitive and authoritative but the crimes of the Soviet Government will
be left out.''

Mr. Patenaude said, however, that the series would be historically accurate and
balanced. He said the company has asked the Soviet Government for permission to
do extensive filming inside the Soviet Union. But the project can be completed
even if the Russians refuse, he said, using film in Western archives. Viscom is
still seeking additional support from foundations, he said. Among other scholars
working on the project is Marshall Shulman, the director of the Harriman
Institute.

Presidential Campaign

After nearly two months of Democratic Presidential campaign coverage, with its
torrent of polls, voting tallies, upsets and instant analyses, the news
divisions of the three television networks now have some breathing space to
review their coverage so far and consider how they will report the next round of
primaries and caucuses.

Some of the major topics being discussed by network executives and television
journalists include how much time they should allocate to primary-night special
reports and how and when to broadcast the results of exit polls.

Spokesmen for all three networks said they would consider reducing their special
reports of the Democratic contest if, after Walter F. Mondale's victories over
Gary Hart in New York and Pennsylvania, the contest was no longer closely
fought. ABC News this week broadcast 19 minutes of Pennsylvania primary coverage
at 11:30 P.M., down from the half-hour that the networks have generally allowed
for late-night primary reports.

''Its not just a question of how much coverage the viewers want,'' said Joanna
Bistany, an ABC spokesman. ''It's how much news we have to give them.''

The three networks' late-night primary coverage has consisted for the most part
of vote counts, analysis of what groups voted for whom, interviews with the
candidates and discussions of how the results will influence coming primaries
and caucuses. The networks have devoted little time to examinations of
candidates' stands on the issues, leaving such coverage to the regular early
evening news programs.

''I think we still treat this thing too much like a horse race,'' said Peter
Jennings, the anchor of both ABC's ''World News Tonight'' and the network's
primary-night specials. ''I think our coverage has gotten better this year, but
there is still too much emphasis in the media on front runners and the numbers.
I think the electorate is not really happy with that.''

Mr. Jennings said that ABC News had attempted to include more analysis and
commentary in recent weeks, and he said he considered ''involving the public
more on primary nights,'' possibly by including interviews with private
individuals along with the comments of candidates and political experts.

Another area of concern at the networks is the criticism of their use of exit
polling data, information gathered from voters as they leave the polls. Voting
trends reported before the polls are closed, critics charge, may influence the
outcome of elections.

Tom Brokaw, the anchor of the ''The NBC Nightly News,'' suggested that in the
next few weeks the networks might be able to work out a common policy on the use
of exit polls.

''Obviously there are a lot of people unhappy about the exit polls,'' Mr. Brokaw
said. ''Maybe we can work out an industrywide agreement on how we should use
them in the coming weeks.'' A decision to do so, he added, would have to come
from NBC executives.

But Dan Rather, the anchor of ''The CBS Evening News,'' said he would be
reluctant to discuss exit polling policy with the other networks. ''I don't
think the public would appreciate our getting together to decide what policy we
should follow,'' Mr. Rather said. ''I would prefer for us to make our own
decisions.''

George Watson, an ABC News vice president, said his organization also would be
reluctant to discuss a mutual policy.

Mr. Rather, said that so far he was generally satisfied with the content of the
special CBS primary broadcasts.

''We have no apologies for covering the horse race aspect of this,'' Mr. Rather
said. While some viewers might desire a more detailed accounting of candidates'
stands on issues, Mr. Rather said, the majority do not. ''They want to know who
lost, who won and why. I don't think they want a lengthy discussion of the
issues.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Marshall Shulman

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 14, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THE PROPER SPONSER OF A VETERANS' BILL

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 188 words


To the Editor:


New York State Senator Frank Padavan - with the support of Senate Majority
Leader Warren Anderson - opposes Assemblyman John Duane's sponsorship of a
tuition-assistance bill for Vietnam War veterans (news story April 4). Senator
Padavan thinks Assemblyman Duane, who was a conscientious objector during the
war, is an inappropriate sponsor because he ''dishonored (Vietnam veterans) by
his personal action.''

No matter how misguided our war effort may have been, I thought it was clear
that our servicemen fought in Vietnam in the name of a government that honors
and protects decisions of conscience. In 1971, I volunteered for Army service
and at the same time actively supported the petitions of college classmates who
claimed C.O. status. I felt honored, not dishonored, by their action; I hoped
they felt the same way about mine.

Senators Anderson and Padavan should take to heart the words of the New York
State Council of Vietnam Veterans of America: ''It's time this country laid to
rest the open wounds, the sores of the Vietnam War.''

THOMAS WILLIAM MAYO Washington, April 4, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 14, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By William E. Farrell and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 634 words


3 Heroes' Kin Found

Two weeks ago the Marine Corps

was reported in this space to be

searching for relatives of four Medal of Honor winners killed in battle to
inform them of plans to name new ships for the men. Maj. Paul Wisniewski, who is
in charge of the search, said that readers' responses had resulted in contacts
with relatives of three of the four men.

An attorney for the State of Florida, E. J. Salcines, located the family of
First Lieut. Baldomero Lopez, who was killed in Korea.

Maureen Cassidy of the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company in New York City put
the four names in a computer and was instrumental in finding relatives of Pvt.
1st Class Eugene A. Obregon, also killed in Korea. These relatives were located
in Pico Rivera, Calif., by the retired secretary of a school, now closed, that
Private Obregon had listed on a bank application form.

A call to Major Wisniewski provided information that led to a distant relative
of Sgt. William R. Button of St. Louis, who was killed in Haiti in April of
1921.

Major Wisniewski said that so far, no information leading to relatives of Pfc.
James Anderson Jr., killed in Vietnam in 1967 when jumped on a grenade to
protect other marines, had been received.  Private Anderson was from the Los
Angeles area. He attended Los Angeles Harbor Junior College before enlisting on
Feb. 17, 1966.

Major Wisniewski can be reached at (202) 694-2589, (202) 694-2812 or (202)
694-5375.

Guess Who Came to Dinner

A few State Department eyebrows were raised when the word got out that a
fledgling Ambassador had given a dinner for the dean of the diplomatic corps
Thursday night.

The host was Prince Bandar, the newly appointed Saudi Arabian Ambassador to the
United States, and the principal guest was the Soviet Ambassador, Anatoly F.
Dobrynin, who has been in Washington more than 21 years.

The Saudi Government has no formal diplomatic ties with the Soviet Union. The
fact that the Prince entertained the Russian raised, but did not answer, a
question - whether a warming of relations between the two countries was in the
offing.

A Morning Made in Japan

A Washingtonian awoke yesterday morning to the music playing on his Japanese
clock radio, brewed coffee in a Japanese coffee maker and flicked on his
Japanese television set to watch the morning news.

An hour later he set out for work in his Japanese automobile, moving slowly
through a sea of other Japanese cars in the morning rush hour. At the Tidal
Basin, the traffic slowed still more while the drivers took in the Japanese
cherry trees, which reached full blossom this week.  Under his breath, the
Washingtonian whispered thanks in Japanese: ''Arigato gozaimasu.''

Asbestos Count

The House Public Works and

Transportation's Subcommittee on Public Buildings and Grounds is examining the
effectiveness of the General Services Administration in ridding Federal
buildings in Washington and elsewhere of asbestos, which is on the list of
carcinogenic hazards.

''There appears to be a clear and present danger to the health and safety of
Federal employees which is not a situation that this Government should
tolerate,'' said Representative Robert A. Young, Democrat of Missouri. the
subcommittee's chairman.

Asbestos problems, according to the G.S.A., the Government's landlord,
warehouser and supplier, have been detected in the Old Executive Office
Building, next to the White House.

Other Federal properties with ''serious problems'' are the Federal Building at
26 Federal Plaza in New York; the Peter Rodino Federal Building in Newark; the
Federal Courthouse in Bridgeport, Conn.; the Federal Building in Buffalo, N.Y.;
and the Burton Building in San Francisco. The subcommittee described that one as
''the most seriously affected building.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 14, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HELPING IMMIGRANTS TO SHOP WISELY

BYLINE: By SHARON JOHNSON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1268 words


''We came empty-handed,'' said the slender 28-year-old man who had traveled more
than 11,000 miles to begin a new life in New York City. ''We left everything we
owned in Vietnam,'' Khai Minh Nguyen told his classmates in the English language
and employment services project for adult refugees at the McBurney Branch of the
Y.M.C.A. in Manhattan.

For two years, including some dark days of unemployment, Mr. Nguyen has had too
little income and too many needs.

''Buying clothes, food and household furnishings is so difficult in America,''
he said as he studied his worn but well-polished shoes. ''I often wonder if I
paid too much because I don't understand how the stores and banks work.''



Problems That Had Been Overlooked

In the past, the consumer problems of immigrants like Mr. Nguyen were largely
overlooked. Many refugees fell prey to unscrupulous merchants and confidence
schemes because no one taught them how to shop, use credit and negotiate
contracts.

Today, however, governmental offices responsible for consumer affairs, human
relations and housing complaints in New York and other cities are beginning a
variety of programs to educate immigrants. Although short on funds, consumer
affairs and mayors' offices and other departments are hiring bilingual
personnel, some of whom are answering complaint hot lines.

Y.M.C.A.'s, the United States Catholic Conference, the Lutheran Refugee Service
and other assistance organizations are also devoting more attention to consumer
education. Stephen Brobeck, executive director of the Consumer Federation of
America in Washington, one of the nation's largest consumer advocacy
organizations, said that more is being done to help immigrants because
''governmental agencies and private organizations realize that these people are
the most vulnerable consumers.''

''They fall victim to frauds that other people don't,'' he said. ''They pay
excessive rates of interest, buy shoddy merchandise and never complain because
they don't speak English and understand American business practices, and are
poor or uneducated.''

Immigrants are also getting more attention because there are more of them. There
were 14 million people who were foreign- born living in the United States in
1980, according to the Census Bureau, an increase of 4.4 million from 1970. In
New York State alone, there were 2.3 million foreign-born people in 1980, 13.6
percent of the population, an increase from 2.1 million in 1970 when
foreign-born people constituted 11.6 percent of the total.

From 1975 to 1984, the Census Bureau said the United States took in 900,000
refugees: 680,000 from Southeast Asia, 100,000 from the Soviet Union, 49,000
from Eastern Europe, 29,000 from Latin America and the rest from other
countries.

The consumer problems of immigrants vary widely, according to interviews with
government officials in eight cities. Those from Western Europe usually have the
least difficulty adjusting, because the economies there are most similar to that
of the United States. On the other hand, immigrants from developing and
Communist countries sometimes buy things they don't need. Faced with abundance
rather than shortages and government rationing, they may revel in this new-found
freedom and buy in excessive quantities.



'I Didn't Know What to Do' Banks are another source of problems, as Mr. Nguyen
discovered when he tried to open a savings account. ''All I wanted was a safe
place for my money, but the man at the bank tried to interest me in all those
different accounts,'' he said. ''I didn't know what to do because we don't have
these things in Vietnam.''

Signing contracts can get some immigrants into trouble. For example, the New
York City Department of Consumer Affairs helped a Spanish-speaking immigrant
resolve a problem after he paid a $250 deposit for some new furniture. When the
man signed the contract, he did not realize that city law provides that stores
must refund a buyer's money if they fail to deliver the merchandise within 30
days. After six months, when he still had not received his furniture, the
department wrote the store a letter informing its managers of the law. The store
refunded the deposit.

Immigrants from Communist countries often fall prey to mail-order frauds,
exploitative telephone solicitations and other schemes, according to Henry
Weiss, deputy director of education for the New York City Department of Consumer
Affairs, who has worked with immigrants from the Soviet Union.

''These people are used to working with the black market, and so if somebody
comes up to them and offers what seems to be a bargain, they fall for it,'' he
said. ''They don't comparison-shop because they are used to uniform prices set
by the state.''

To educate consumers, public agencies now offer booklets in languages other than
English, most often in Spanish, French, Russian and Vietnamese. Philadelphia,
for example, has distributed more than 50,000 copies of its Spanish version of
''Your City at Your Service'' booklet, and the New York City Department of
Consumer Affairs has given out more than 30,000 copies of its booklet of
shopping tips in Spanish, French, German and Japanese.

Workshops on credit laws, contract negotiations and comparison shopping have
been given by consumer affairs departments in New York and Los Angeles. Staff
members, often with the aid of translators fluent in Spanish, Japanese and other
languages, have discussed warranties, refund policies and laws designed to
protect tenants.

Groups like the Y.M.C.A. are also including more consumer education in their
English-as-a-second-language classes. The teachers will use typical situations
such as buying a television set on credit, hiring a carpenter or signing a lease
to introduce English vocabulary and grammar.

''We find that the students like this approach because it teaches them how to
negotiate in American society,'' said Donna Kelsh, project director of the
McBurney Y.M.C.A.'s program.

Bilingual services, especially in Spanish, are becoming increasingly common. The
New York City Department of Consumer Affairs has a special complaint telephone
number for Spanish-speaking consumers (566-3779).

The Dallas Action Center, the central complaint and request bureau for that
city, has several staff members who speak Spanish. Consumer affairs departments
in several California cities that have sizable Asian populations have staff
members or volunteers who speak Chinese, Korean, Vietnamese and Japanese.



Sometimes, a Simple Solution

''Sometimes all it takes is something as simple as getting someone who knows the
newcomer's language to talk to the store to work out a settlement satisfactory
to both sides,'' said Angelo J. Aponte, New York City Commissioner of Consumer
Affairs. ''In other cases, an investigation to find out if the proprietor has
violated any laws may be warranted.''

The Chicago Commission on Human Relations has persuaded more than 100 businesses
in the three neighborhoods where many immigrants live to give discounts on
everything from hamburgers to shoe repairs. The coupon booklets will be
distributed to about 3,000, beginning in June.

Innovative programs to solve immigrants' consumer problems are difficult to
start because of a lack of money for refugee assistance and consumer programs,
according to officials interviewed.

''Consumer programs are the first things to go whenever there is a cutback in
governmental funds,'' said Mr. Brobeck of the Consumer Federation of America.
''Consequently, newcomers often have severe problems that go unresolved.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mary Jane Cowan

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese Attack Cambodian Rebel Base

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 178 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 14


Vietnamese troops attacked a guerrilla base on the Thai-Cambodian border today,
killing and wounding about 60 Cambodian civilians, provincial military sources
said.

The dawn attack was supported by tanks and artillery. The sources said about 50
artillery shells landed on Thai territory near the base of guerrillas who oppose
Cambodia's Vietnamese- backed Government.

In a broadcast monitored in Bangkok today, guerrillas loyal to Prince Norodom
Sihanouk said Vietnam had eight battalions within striking distance of their
stronghold at Ta Tum, a settlement just inside Cambodia's northern border. Thai
troops had been put on full alert to prevent a spillover of the fighting, the
provincial sources said.

BANGKOK, April 14 (UPI) - A Cambodian official and his family have defected to
Thailand because they ''had enough of Communism,'' it was reported here today.
The official, identified as Sek Yen, 39 years old, was in charge of political
education for Government officials in Phnom Penh, a report in the Nation Review
and other Thai papers said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Due in Falklands

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 56 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, N.Y., April 14


Officials close to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees said today
that seven Vietnamese refugees in Britain would be resettled in the Falkland
Islands. In London, Adrian Monk, a spokesman for the Falkland Islands
Government, said the Vietnamese were related to the wife of a Briton who is
already in the Falklands.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Unkown Soldier Is Selected

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 36, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 36 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 14


Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger announced Friday that an unidentified
serviceman from the Vietnam war has been selected to be interred at the Tomb of
the Unknown Soldier at Arlington National Cemetery.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD ;
Asian Neighbors

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenhei and Henry Giniger

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 257 words


At It Again


In what has become virtually a spring ritual along their 400-mile frontier,
China and Vietnam last week exchanged artillery fire and insults. The Communist
neighbors have clashed periodically since 1979, when Vietnamese troops occupied
Cambodia and Chinese forces invaded Vietnam in a fierce month- long border war.
Western diplomats linked the latest fighting to Vietnamese attacks against bases
in Thailand of Pol Pot, the former Cambodian leader.

Radio Hanoi seemed to concede as much, accusing the Chinese of crossing the
border in hopes of bolstering ''the Pol Pot remnants.'' In Bangkok, officials
accused the Vietnamese of entering Thailand to raid a Pol Pot base and of
preparing to attack another Pol Pot bastion deeper inside Thailand. Thai
military officers said they captured 47 Vietnamese soldiers last month, but
Radio Hanoi denied that its forces had crossed the frontier. The Thai accounts
coincided with the visit to Washington last week of Thailand's Prime Minister,
Prem Tinsulanond. President Reagan promised him increased defense aid, including
40 M-48 tanks. Officials said Thailand would also be permitted to buy advanced
American F-16A tactical fighter planes but would be urged to buy cheaper, more
easily maintained planes.

By Hanoi's account, China committed ''very serious acts of war'' on the
Vietnamese side of their border. Peking, however, said Vietnamese soldiers
crossed into China to plant mines and that its frontier guards had killed more
than 40 of them since April 2.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Bella Abzug on Mayor Koch

SECTION: Section 6; Page 114, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 454 words


Ed Koch's pose of candor in his book ''Mayor'' is fraudulent (''The World
According to Koch,'' Feb. 5). My dictionary (O.E.D.) defines candor as
''innocence; freedom from mental bias; impartiality; freedom from malice;
frankness.'' Mayor Koch's writings about me and other public figures display
none of these qualities and, in my case, he has lied.

In the excerpts printed in The New York Times Magazine, he claims that at a
meeting of the 17th Congressional District Peace Action Committee in my
apartment in 1968, we talked about his position on jets for Israel. He says that
he favored the United States' sending jets to Israel and alleges that I said
this was ''terrible, terrible, terrible.'' But, in fact, the issue of jets for
Israel did not come up and was never discussed at our meeting. This has been
verified by several other people present at the meeting, including an associate
of Mr. Koch who accompanied him. Mr. Koch also indicates that this supposed
disagreement led to a fundamental parting of the ways between us.

The real story is totally different. The 17th Congressional District Peace
Action Committee was a group of about 1,000 men and women from the district -
doctors, teachers, lawyers, scientists, artists, homemakers, business people,
etc. - to organize public pressure to end American intervention in Vietnam. We
met in early 1968 with then-Councilman Koch, who was making his first run for
Congress and wanted our endorsement. After the meeting with Mr. Koch, in which
there was absolutely no discussion of jets for Israel, we endorsed him for
Congress and, at his request, I wrote a letter, in behalf of the committee,
urging voters to give their ''active support'' to Mr. Koch. Our committee
campaigned for his election to Congress, and he was more than eager to accept
our endorsement and assistance. Fifteen years later, he rewrites history to suit
his own purposes. Parenthetically, the jets-for-Israel question was not a
campaign issue when we met with Mr. Koch in 1968.

Mr. Koch has turned a canard first used against me when I ran for Congress, in
1970, into a retroactive smear, even though the record shows that throughout my
six years in Congress, from 1971 to 1977, I voted for every bill providing
economic and military assistance, including jets, to Israel and that I have also
supported subsequent measures necessary for Israel's survival.  Mayor Koch does
not forgive anyone who had the ''chutzpah'' to compete with him in an election,
as I and others did in the 1977 mayoral primary. There is a consistent pattern
of personal attack by him on political leaders, especially women, who are past
or possibly future competitors.

BELLA S. ABZUG New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS April 15, 1984Fiction 116

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1248 words


THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  255

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about the
nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  3424

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  4310

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  5733

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?  created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  623

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  6132

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  8810

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  966

LORD OF THE DANCE, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) In
seeking her long-lost cousin, a teen-ager probes the mysteries of life and
death.  10933

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  11 1

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  121143

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  13139

NIGHT SKY, by Clare Francis. (Morrow, $16.95.) Three intertwined lives in
occupied France during World War II.  14103

ONE MORE SUNDAY, by John D. MacDonald. (Knopf, $15.95.) Behind the scenes with a
charismatic television preacher.  151510

THE JOURNEYER, by Gary Jennings. (Atheneum, $17.95.) Marco Polo's journey to the
Orient in the 13th century.


Nonfiction 119

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.

225

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W. Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  3330

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  4624

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a California preacher.  548

LINES AND SHADOWS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $15.95.) Adventures of
the San Diego police force that stalks bandits along the Mexican border.

656

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty. (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  7733

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  8915

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  9109

TOUGH-MINDED FAITH FOR TENDERHEARTED PEOPLE, by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $14.95.) More inspiration from a California preacher.  101210

PEOPLE OF THE LIE, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
psychiatrist's prescription for ''healing human evil.'' 111315

APPROACHING HOOFBEATS: HORSEMEN OF THE APOCALYPSE, by Billy Graham. (Word Books,
$11.95.) The evangelist's interpretation of the Book of Revelation.

111482

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  13866

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.

14153

MAFIA PRINCESS, by Antoinette Giancana and Thomas C. Renner.  (Morrow, $15.95.)
Growing up in the family of the mobster Sam Giancana.  151131

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Selections from the writings
of the Yorkshire veterinarian.

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

113

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  229

THE JAMES COCO DIET, by James Coco and Marion Paone. (Bantam, $13.95.) A regimen
based on nutritional education, menu planning and behavior modification.  339

WEIGHT WATCHERS' FAST AND FABULOUS COOKBOOK.  (NAL Books, $15.50.) Recipes for
tasty dishes dieters can prepare in a hurry.  454

PUTTING THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER TO WORK, by Kenneth Blanchard and Robert Lorber.
(Morrow, $15.) Increasing your productivity and that of those with whom you
work.  5370

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.



The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

BEYOND A BOUNDARY, by C. L. R. James. (Pantheon. Cloth,

$16.95. Paper, $8.95.) West Indian cricketers who brought glory to

an English game, but fell victim to prejudice and neglect, are

recalled in this cricketer's ''Iliad.''

CHILDHOOD, by Nathalie Sarraute. (Braziller, $14.95.) One of the

great women of French letters, now in her 80's, recounts her life up

to World War I, her purpose to seek out the most delicate of

impressions that lie in the unnamed corners of consciousness.

D. W. GRIFFITH: An American Life, by Richard Schickel. (Simon

& Schuster, $24.95.) The definitive biography of the pioneering

director who transformed movies from a crude novelty into the

most influential art form in history.

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF COTTON MATHER, by Kenneth

Silverman. (Harper & Row, $29.95.) The first comprehensive

biography of the preacher who has entered folklore as the

archetypal Puritan, perhaps to blame for the witchcraft furor.

MONTE CASSINO, by David Hapgood and David Richardson.

(Congdon & Weed, $17.95.) A skillful yarn of the battle for a key

German position in Italy during World War II that led to the

American bombing of a huge, historic abbey on the site.

THE PAPER MEN, by William Golding. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux,

$13.95.) In his latest novel, the Nobel Prize winner develops his

recurrent theme of the inner depravity of man in the story of a

prominent novelist and his loathsome would-be biographer.

WEAPONS AND HOPE, by Freeman Dyson.  (A Cornelia & Michael

Bessie Book/Harper & Row, $17.95.) A noted physicist and

advocate of nuclear disarmament provides an excellent layman's

guide to that most misunderstood problem, arms races.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 15, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOVELISTS AND VIETNAM: THE WAR GOES ON

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3851 words


Michiko Kakutani is a book critic for The New York Times.


''AFTER a battle each soldier will have different stories to tell, vastly
different stories,'' wrote Tim O'Brien in ''Going After Cacciato,'' and ''when a
war is ended it is as if there have been a million wars, or as many wars as
there were soldiers.'' The most documented war in history, Vietnam was covered,
relentlessly, by the newspapers, by magazines and by television; and now, almost
a decade after the fall of Saigon, as memories of all those endless facts and
polemics recede, the stories of individual soldiers and other witnesses have
slowly begun to emerge. There exist, according to archives at Colorado State
University, some 200 novels set in or around Vietnam.

Because it casts men in extreme situations, because it summons up the most
visceral of emotions - fear and courage, hatred and compassion, malice and
generosity - and because it resonates with political and social implications,
war has always been regarded as one of the great imaginative tests for the
writer of serious fiction. And for American writers, the challenge posed by
Vietnam would seem particularly large. The war, after all, stands as the central
historical fact for at least one generation of Americans and, together with the
tumultuous domestic events of the 60's, informs, in some very basic ways, what
this country has become.

For all its rich literary potential, however, Vietnam has remained curiously
resistant to fictional treatment. It has proved as difficult to transmute the
experience into fully imagined works of art as it was to capture it through
straightforward reportage. As we shall see, both the difficulties Vietnam poses
as a fictional subject and its lasting effects on writing are inextricably tied
up with its anomalous moral, political and military nature.

All wars change society and hence leave an indelible imprint on literary
culture. World War II, which produced Norman Mailer's classic war novel, ''The
Naked and the Dead,'' also produced Kurt Vonnegut Jr.'s ''Slaughterhouse Five,''
Joseph Heller's ''Catch- 22'' and Thomas Pynchon's ''Gravity's Rainbow'' -
novels that attempted to portray that war's absurdity with black comedy and new
methods of narrative play. If fiction has thus far failed to deal successfully
with the radical evil of the Holocaust - some critics question whether art can
or should address such matters - that terrible event nonetheless reverberates in
the contemporary mind. It not only elicited a wholesale re-evaluation of our
Enlightenment legacy of humanism but also underlined the limits of realism as a
useful artistic tool. As a result, it tended to accelerate certain literary
processes that had been set in motion decades before by World War I.

That earlier conflict, as Paul Fussell argued in his brilliant study, ''The
Great War and Modern Memory,'' destroyed an entire set of values and beliefs and
in doing so also remade language and generated a new way of interpreting the
world. In that respect, it served as the crucible in which modernism was formed;
the sense of irony, of dislocation, of fragmentation that we now accept as
commonplace would have been unimaginable in the innocent days before the war.

In many ways, Vietnam has exerted on the American imagination an effect similar
to the one that World War I had on the British - a fact that perhaps helps to
account for the frequent references in Vietnam novels to such writers as
Siegfried Sassoon and Wilfred Owen. In both wars, a fundamental sense of
innocence - that peculiar amalgam of optimism and confidence - was destroyed;
and in both cases, the existing national mythology was assailed and broke down.
After Vietnam - the first war that the United States lost, its longest and
probably its most morally ambiguous - Americans could no longer think of
themselves as they had before. They could no longer think of themselves as
omnipotent missionaries, capable of saving the world; and the literature that
has emerged from the war reflects that change.

Indeed, that time-honored theme of American innocence - addressed by such
novelists as Henry James and Mark Twain - assumes a special prominence in
fiction about Vietnam. In such novels as Graham Greene's ''The Quiet American''
and Jack Fuller's ''Fragments,'' the dangers and potentially destructive power
of that innocence are revealed; in other novels that recount a soldier's coming
of age, its loss - along with the loss of youth and youthful idealism - is
chronicled and mourned. Many of these coming-of-age novels are fairly typical
Bildungromans. They relate the story of a young man, usually identifiable with
the author, whose progress from idealism to disillusionment echoes the changes
that America itself underwent in the 60's.

With Vietnam, however, the classic scenario of a boy going off to war and
returning home a man (if he returns at all) suffers a dark revision. There are
few opportunities for old-fashioned heroics - or any of the other conventional
tests of manhood - in the cynical landscape of Vietnam. In Vietnam, simple
physical and psychological survival is difficult enough. In Rob Riggan's ''Free
Fire Zone,'' in Ward Just's ''Stringer,'' in Ed Dodge's ''Dau,'' the hero does
not mature in any conventional sense; he emerges from war emotionally damaged,
if not mad. In Stephen Wright's ''Meditations in Green,'' the protagonist
becomes a heroin addict; and in Gustav Hasford's ''The Short-Timers,'' he kills
one of his earliest Vietnam friends .

Urgent in tone, autobiographical in content, many of these novels seem to have
provided their authors with an emotional catharsis. This need to testify to what
one has witnessed and somehow to make sense of it through words, however, would
often have been better served by a memoir. A flaw shared by many Vietnam novels,
in fact, is that they do not become works of imagination; rather they retain the
predictable shape and close-up, grainy texture of personal history. In novel
after novel, a variation of the following true-to-life sequence occurs: the
naive or gung-ho hero's initiation into military life at boot camp; his arrival
in Southeast Asia; his encounters with suffering, pain and death; his attempts
to escape the realities of war by drinking, whoring and fantasizing; and his
return to an indifferent America.

Why do so many authors pattern their books so closely on their own experience in
the war? The obvious reason is that many of these works are first novels, a form
in which the autobiographical impulse is pronounced. Another reason has to do
with the problem of finding alternative narrative strategies for dealing with a
war that tends to defy standard literary methods. In the first place, Vietnam
simply does not lend itself to the political, engage novel typified by, say,
Andre Malraux's ''Man's Fate.'' Not only are Americans nonideological by nature,
the ambiguities of this war inhibit the drawing of easy political morals.

Another traditional approach to writing about war - the story of male
camaraderie, which narrates the adventures of a disparate group of buddies -
also seems unsuited to Vietnam. Instead of serving for the duration, most
soldiers went there for a one-year term, and in often being transferred from
company to company had little opportunity to make close friendships. Perhaps as
a result, many war accounts - especially those by former infantrymen - tend to
have poorly defined supporting casts. Aside from the hero, most of the
characters are either vague, interchangeable nonentities, distinguished by
nicknames or nervous habits, or stereotypes straight from Central Casting. Take,
for instance, James Webb's highly acclaimed novel, ''Fields of Fire.'' The book
demonstrates its author's eye for detail and forceful command of language, but
its Marine heroes, who represent a cross section of American society, are little
more than blurry sitcom personalities: a small-town kid from Kentucky, a Harvard
philosopher, a savvy, streetwise black - the kind of crew also found in, say,
Steven Phillip Smith's ''American Boys'' and Charles Durden's ''No Bugles, No
Drums.''

Among the few books to feature a convincing cast is John Del Vecchio's ''The
13th Valley,'' which follows the day-by-day progress of a platoon through a
two-week operation. While flawed by the characters' relentless philosophizing -
they are constantly talking about the meaning of the war and the universe - the
book does succeed through Mr. Del Vecchio's gift for characterization and
description, and through his use, as an armature for the book, of a military
operation, probably more typical of World War II than Vietnam. Not only is the
operation ''clean'' - there were no civilians involved - it possesses the
semblance of a beginning, middle and end.

For the most part, Vietnam was not a war of conventional battles and historic
campaigns. From the soldier's point of view, it had a strangely episodic
quality: ambushes and fire-fights, interspersed with long periods of monotonous
waiting, melted into a kind of existential haze; it was frequently difficult, if
not impossible, to tell which side was winning or falling behind, losing ground
or winning.

''It was an incoherent experience in many respects,'' says Philip Caputo, the
author of ''A Rumor of War'' and ''Del Corso's Gallery.'' ''With previous
conflicts, the events themselves formed the broad structure for the narrative of
the novel. A novelist seeking to portray the experience could take his
characters on a literal level from A to B to C, and the reader could observe
what changes everyone underwent as they passed through these events toward some
identifiable end.Trying to impose the sort of narrative thread you find in 'The
Naked and the Dead,' 'The Thin Red Line' or 'For Whom the Bell Tolls' was
literally impossible with Vietnam. It was a question of a square peg in a round
hole.'' In Mr. Caputo's case, these difficulties caused him to abandon an early
novel based on his experiences in the war. His eventual decision to write ''A
Rumor of War'' as a memoir proved a shrewd one, for the book gains resonance
from the readers' knowledge that the events portrayed are real.

Other writers, intent on producing a novel but unable to find a persuasive
narrative line, often ended up relating a picaresque sequence of violent events.
Such authors as James Webb presumably hope that the sheer accumulation of
closely observed details will communicate the ugliness of the war and give the
reader a vivid sense of what it was like on the front lines. All too often,
though, the one emotion shared by reader and hero is the sort of emotional
numbness that comes from witnessing too many terrible events. When unmediated by
an authorial vision, the parade of grim descriptions - the cut-off ears, the
eviscerated corpses, the wounded children, the bombed-out villages - simply
become an abstraction, a litany of horror that, in the end, has all the
emotional impact of the statistics we once heard each night on the news.

The extensive coverage of Vietnam, in fact, helps underline just how inadequate
naturalism and documentary realism are as narrative strategies for dealing with
the war. Having already been exposed to an overwhelming supply of images and
facts, we tend to hope that fiction will provide us with a truth that eluded the
cameras and neat columns of wire copy. At the same time, the Vietnam war - which
so defies reason and the rules of causality - also resists such traditional
prerogatives of fiction as interpretation. For instance, books like Winston
Groom's ''Better Times Than These'' - which attempts to explicate the meaning of
the war through an old-fashioned story that ends in a court-martial - seem all
too tidy and contrived; something of the heightened weirdness of Vietnam escapes
the neat mechanisms of their plots.

According to journalists and soldiers stationed there, Vietnam possessed a
surrealism worthy of Louis-Ferdinand Celine - a day-to-day surrealism that
distinguished it from previous conflicts. The moral and political uncertainties
of American involvement, the intense savagery of the jungle fighting, the heavy
use of drugs and the extraordinary bureaucratic confusions of military life
there - all produced what Robert Stone calls ''a real hall of mirrors.''

''The war carried with it the most awful sense of absurdity and futility,'' he
says. ''To realize that the whole thing was absolutely cockeyed, that it was an
enormous, breathtaking mistake, was alarming to begin with, and then you
realized there was nothing much you could do about it - except try to exist
within it. Everyone was passing the buck. Everyone was putting everybody else on
- kidding themselves and lying to one another. Generals were lying to
Washington, and Washington was lying to the press. And for the guys on the line,
the nature of the war didn't afford the satisfaction of taking enemy ground, so
to keep morale up, the brass made the body count a measure of success. That
really shocked the G.I.'s, and it reinforced that whole nightmare feeling.

''The moral slipperiness and double-crossing in Vietnam bent everybody's head
out of shape. It gave you the sense that everything was scrambled. And this kind
of stoned despair created its own idiom, its own language. There was a
distinctly 'in-country' way of talking, an 'in-country' sense of humor - like
you were on another planet. It was a very spacey way of talking, a profoundly
cynical attitude toward everything.''

To convey this feeling remains perhaps the biggest challenge facing the novelist
writing about Vietnam. Some authors, like Nicholas Proffitt (''Gardens of
Stone''), attempt to recreate the dislocation by constructing complicated
narratives, filled with flashbacks and flashforwards that jar the reader's sense
of time; others, like Rob Riggan, employ italicized stream-of- consciousness
sequences in an attempt to approximate the war's blurring of appearance and
reality. More often than not, however, the result of these efforts is not
artistically ordered disorder but plain confusion.

In fact, only a handful of books satisfyingly represents the peculiar
psychological atmosphere of Vietnam and at the same time function as fully
fashioned literary works. In ''Going After Cacciato'' - the title refers to a
soldier's dream in which he and his platoon pursue a deserter named Cacciato
across a continent and all the way to Paris - Tim O'Brien created an
extraordinary Garcia Marquez-like fable that in capturing the hallucinatory mood
of the war opened out into an eloquent meditation on the need of human beings to
dream. His first book, ''If I Die in a Combat Zone,'' had been a fairly
conventional memoir about his experiences in Vietnam, and, having gotten that
out of his system, he says he was no longer interested in ''holding a mirror up
to the reality of the war''; he was interested, rather, in exploring the
emotions it elicited and the possibilities of what might have happened.

In the case of ''Cacciato,'' Mr. O'Brien's clean, lyrical prose counterpoints
the fantastical elements of his story. And other writers, with less surreal
stories to tell, have tried to set up a similar tension between the terrible
events they are describing and the dispassionate objectivity of their prose. In
his slim novel, ''The Short- Timers,'' for instance, Gustav Hasford discovered
an economical and unsentimental idiom that, by means of understatement, made the
progressive brutalization of his hero seem all the more horrific.

An alternative to this low-key approach is for the writer to attempt to find a
language that approximates, in its exuberance and anger, the bizarre
complexities of Vietnam - the ''in-country'' sensibility mentioned by Robert
Stone. This, of course, is a high-risk proposition that has resulted in all
sorts of self-indulgent pyrotechnics on the part of lesser writers. Michael
Herr's ''Dispatches,'' however, succeeds so brilliantly in this respect that it
has the effect of making the measured lucidity of Hemingway's prose seem
strangely anachronistic. In fact, Mr. Herr's voice - hyped-up, nervous,
willfully subjective, by turns furious and rhapsodic - seems perfectly
commensurate with the chaos of his subject, and it infuses what is ostensibly a
work of nonfiction with a novel's sense of drama and style.

A self-conscious and highly wrought - in fact, sometimes overwrought - style
also holds Stephen Wright's ''Meditations in Green'' together. His language,
too, is manic and expressionistic; the form of his novel, suggestive of the
fragmented nature of the war. Told in cinematic ''takes'' of different lengths
that cut back and forth in time, ''Meditations'' relates the story of an
intelligence adviser who becomes a drug addict, and in doing so it creates an
allegory of a society in disrepair.

''Some idea of ourselves came apart over there,'' says Mr. Wright, ''and I
believe that when a society is coming apart, individuals also feel that inside
themselves. So while any war has incredible stress, with Vietnam you had this
added thing - of values coming apart. What it comes down to is an incredible
tenuousness of identity and a feeling of total ignorance of what the future is -
your future and your country's future. It was a feeling that made every moment
extremely anxiety-ridden, even those that had nothing to do with combat.

''It was a struggle to find a form for writing about Vietnam. If you had been
there earlier - I didn't get over till '69 - you could write about an innocent
going off to war and learning certain lessons. I couldn't really do that because
by the time I went the war had been going on for a while. It had been on
television, and we were already sort of cynical by the time we got there. In
earlier years, people went over, fired up by Kennedy rhetoric; they went to help
the Vietnamese people fight for freedom and democracy. Those of us who went
later - we were just sort of sucked up into the machine, and the point was to
survive.

''What I tried to do was simply put down the experience as well as I could. You
couldn't take a definite moral outlook, so instead of holding up signs as to
what's proper and what isn't, I tried to leave it up to the reader to decide. I
tried to convey the specific feel of Vietnam with the texture of the language.
There was a kind of dislocation I tried to get in there - a constant nervousness
and jumpiness.''

What Mr. Wright is saying about narrative strategies, applies, of course, not
only to novels about Vietnam but to what has been taking place in much of
serious American fiction. The war, after all, was very much a part an entire era
- an era informed by social and political upheavals, by drugs and music, by the
adversary stance of a generation - and it is not surprising that writers who
came of age during the 60's should share certain stylistic and thematic
concerns. In this respect, the finest Vietnam novels must be seen not so much in
relation to other war fiction but in relation to other contemporary writing.

A fragmented approach to storytelling, a reluctance on the author's part either
to interpret events or speculate about characters' motivations, a tendency to
see everything in the present tense, as though the past and future were
impossible to connect - these techniques, which recur with startling frequency
in Vietnam novels, are the same that have begun to filter down from the
postmodernist masters of the nouveau roman to mainstream American fiction. In
addition, many of the recurrent themes that one finds in Vietnam novels, as well
as the attitudes purveyed by their central characters - alienation, cynicism, a
tendency to see life as a series of disconnected episodes - echo those found in
the work of such writers as Ann Beattie, Raymond Carver and Mary Robison.

As Philip Caputo sees it, many of these currents in contemporary fiction stem,
directly or indirectly, from the war. ''That chaotic and violent era has formed
the values, the ideas, even the literary values of a new generation of America
writers,'' he said in a speech delivered at a seminar in Key West, Fla. ''It
colors their emotions and haunts their imaginations, a legacy that will not let
them go.'' Robert Stone, too, believes that ''most writers under 45 were in some
way conditioned by their reactions to the war.'' ''It was this great
counterforce to all the claims of America to be the country it imagined itself
to be,'' he says. ''And I think that if you feel your job is to render this
country and society today, you've got to come to terms with it.'' It was this
very conviction, in fact, that led Mr. Stone himself to go to Vietnam in the
late 60's as a journalist; seeing the war firsthand, he recalls, enabled him to
start ''Dog Soldiers,'' his second book.

While Vietnam functions as a setting for only half of ''Dog Soldiers'' and is
little more than an echo in ''A Flag for Sunrise,'' the war remains a pivotal
reference point for Mr. Stone and his characters. ''In a way I want to get away
from trotting it out as a whole metaphor in all my work,'' he says. ''I feel
exploitative, and I'm afraid if I keep using it, I'll vulgarize my feelings
about it. And yet, I always come back to it because it's such a central fact.
When I'm writing a character like Holloway (in ''A Flag for Sunrise'') I'm
always tempted to wonder, where was this guy during Vietnam?'' Indeed, as the
war is absorbed into our national consciousness, it will doubtless come to play
a larger subliminal role in fiction only indirectly concerned with Vietnam. As
in Jayne Anne Phillips's forthcoming novel, ''Machine Dreams,'' it will become
less of a combat situation, to be recreated with earnest detail, and more of a
backdrop against which passions - both national and personal - were played out;
less a magnet for easy moralizing and more of a sounding board for ideas we hold
about ourselves.

As for fiction about the war, much remains to be written. There is still a
myopic focus to many of the current novels set in Vietnam, and even such fine
achievements as ''Going After Cacciato'' and ''Meditations in Green'' remain
curiously hermetic works - reflections of an individual experience. A large
novel that embraces the entire scene, that deals with the military and political
complexities of the war, its consequences in public and private lives, as well
as its reverberations at home - that novel has yet to be written.

''The war itself was a nasty, brutish, unepic thing,'' Mr. Caputo says, ''but as
you look back, it wasn't an event separate from what was going on in America. It
was one vast experience - and no experience since the Civil War has affected the
life of the nation like that. It qualifies, in that sense, as a historical epic,
and that deserves to be written. Of course, Tolstoy wrote about Napoleon's
invasion some 60 years after it happened, and it may be that that kind of
perspective on Vietnam can come only with the passage of time.''B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIANS FLEE VIETNAMESE ATTACK

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 887 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 15


Vietnamese forces invaded the headquarters of a Cambodian resistance group
today, driving thousands of guerrillas into the hills and forcing tens of
thousands of refugees across the border into Thailand, military and aid
officials reported.

A Thai Army spokesman in Bangkok said Vietnamese troops rained artillery and
mortar shells on the sprawling Ampil headquarters camp of the Khmer People's
National Liberation Front for eight hours before attacking it with about 2,000
troops in late morning.

It was Vietnam's most dramatic military victory of the winter dry season
offensive, the army spokesman said.

A Red Cross official said most or all of the refugees at Ampil, estimated to
number more than 30,000, had been evacuated into Thailand.

Another relief official said 30,000 other refugees had been evacuated to a site
in Thailand on Saturday for fear of a possible Vietnamese attack on a camp at Ta
Tum straddling the northern sector of the Thai-Cambodian border. The camp is the
headquarters of followers of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian
ruler.



Parts of Camp Burned

As the Vietnamese burned parts of the Ampil camp, several thousand guerrillas
fled about half a mile west, broke up into small groups and counterattacked, the
Thai Army spokesman said. He said fighting continued into the evening at the
camp.

The army spokesman also said about 1,000 Vietnamese troops attacked a camp
housing forces of former Prime Minister Pol Pot along the northern border early
today, sending ''many thousands'' of refugees to the village of Trawaeng, six
miles inside Thailand. He said the camp had contained about 500 Cambodian
guerrillas.

The spokesman said a Thai patrol plane had been shot down by Vietnamese
antiaircraft guns near the battle zone. He said that witnesses reported having
seen three crewmen parachute from the plane but that the men had not been found.
The plane crashed about a mile inside Thailand, he said.

The forces of Prince Sihanouk, the Liberation Front and Mr. Pol Pot are fighting
to expel the Vietnamese troops who have occupied Cambodia since driving Mr. Pol
Pot's Communist regime from power at the end of 1978. The Vietnamese installed
the regime of Heng Samrin in Phnom Penh.

United Nations relief officials counted 30,738 Cambodian civilians at the Ampil
camp in July 1983, and several thousand more have arrived since then. The exodus
from the camp is the largest single refugee movement reported this year.

Prasong Soonsiri, Thailand's national security chief, said by telephone that
Thailand ''will allow these refugees to stay for humanitarian reasons since they
might be killed in the fierce fighting.''

37 Admitted to Hospital

The Red Cross official near Ampil, reached by telephone at the Thai border town
of Aranyaprathet, said 37 people had been admitted to the Red Cross emergency
hospital at the Khao-i-Dang refugee holding center near the border.  A military
officer at Aranyaprathet told reporters that 50 civilians had been killed or
wounded in the attack on Ampil, and that 35 others had suffered burns from what
he described as poison gas shells fired by the Vietnamese.

Mr. Prasong said the fighting going on in Cambodia was the heaviest of this
season. Fierce battles have also been reported in the interior, in Ratanakiri,
Kompong Thom and Oddar Meanchey Provinces, and in the Tonle Sap area of the
northwestern province of Battambang.

He said Vietnamese forces along the northern border, bolstered by 130-millimeter
mortars, were poised to attack the Sihanouk forces' headquarters at Ta Tum.

An international aid official at the Thai town of Surin said Thai military and
aid officials had evacuated more than 30,000 Cambodian refugees from Ta Tum on
Saturday to a site about three miles inside Thailand. He said his information
indicated that the border camp itself had not yet been shelled, and that there
had been no civilian casualties.

Most resistance camps on the border contain both military and civilian
populations, although they have recently become somewhat more separated at the
insistence of international aid officials.



Hanoi Accuses Peking

BANGKOK, April 15 (AP) - Vietnam accused China today of carrying out an attack
against Quang Ninh Province and of firing scores of mortar rounds into
Vietnamese villages along the four-province border area.

The Vietnamese News Agency, monitored in Bangkok, said a farmer was killed and
several Chinese soldiers were killed or captured in attacks by the Chinese last
week.

China, meanwhile, denounced what it called years of border harassment, spy
missions and a major anti-Chinese propaganda effort based on ''wanton
slanders.'' It said Chinese military actions were taken in self-defense.

Independent confirmation of the reports of the fighting, which was said to have
intensified two weeks ago, has been impossible because foreigners are not
allowed into border areas of the two Communist countries.

The Vietnamese agency said a Chinese military squad intruded 500 yards into
Vietnamese territory Wednesday and fired on villagers in the Hai Ninh district
of Quang Ninh. The incursion came a day after Chinese troops fired more than 100
mortar rounds into the province's Than Poun area, damaging many houses, the
agency said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Thailand

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RELATIONSHIPS;
WHEN FRIENDS DRIFT APART

BYLINE: By Olive Evans

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 829 words


''YOU can be nostalgic and evoke the time when you were the same, but because
you no longer are the same there is no forward momentum in the friendship.''

Dr. Michael R. Milano, a psychiatrist, was musing on ''The Big Chill,'' the film
about a group of 1960's college friends who meet for a sentimental weekend and
then go their separate ways. ''In a way, it was about failed friendships,'' he
added.

Along with failed marriages and stagnated careers, one of the symptoms of what
is referred to as midlife crisis may be a feeling that one is no longer
connected to friends who once were significant. The symptoms may be as simple as
a tendency to yawn during conversations, or they can reflect a deep
philosophical divergence.

''We had friends we didn't talk to for years because they were in favor of the
Vietnam War,'' said Joan Gordon, a teacher who lives outside Boston with her
husband, Mark. ''We grew apart on that issue. It had nothing to do with life
style or values. It was a principle.''

Principles and politics may change, but there can be subtler evolutions as one
grows older. What one looks for in friends at the age of 45 may be far different
than at 25. ''Such changes in the self occur over the years, and it's basically
a healthy phenomenon,'' said Dr. Milano, assistant clinical professor of
psychiatry at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center. ''But if a friendship
validates our sense only of what we were and does not validate our sense of what
we are now, then it can become untenable.''


The fact that old friends have shared crises and been witnesses to one's life
(''How many people do I know who knew my parents?'' one man asked) can make
letting go a source of unhappiness and even guilt. ''It's self-centered to feel
guilty,'' said Dr. Dorothy Cantor, a psychologist in Westfield, N.J. ''It's
possible that the other person, having arrived at a different juncture, is just
as happy to be rid of you. They don't understand you anymore.''

The comparison with marriage is inevitable, she pointed out. In both marriage
and friendship, people are faced with ''getting past the point of changing
needs,'' she said. ''People grow and develop, and not necessarily at the same
rate and in the same direction. But in a friendship there isn't the commitment.
You don't have to work at it. More likely you will move on to people who can
meet the needs you feel now.''

But not all the changes are inward. When a friend marries, the friend who
remains single may or may not admire or be admired by the new spouse. When
babies arrive, the conversation may focus on diapers instead of dialectics.
Divorces can result in a dividing up of friends along with furniture. Career
success may strain a friendship with someone who is not so successful. And even
plain geography takes its toll.

''What ends up happening is you have a Christmas-card relationship,'' said Frank
Sesno, of Associated Press Radio in Washington. He added that job and time
pressures also affect the quality of friendship: ''The shared experiences I had,
such as backpacking with a friend, have given way to dinnertime friendships
where you sit around and talk. But that's not the kind of experience of which
reminiscences are made.''


Kathleen Holmay, a Washington social-sciences consultant, worries about what the
fast pace of life is doing to friendships. ''I don't see people reaching out to
other people,'' she said. ''People tend to have friendships that have to do with
work or are expedient in other ways. We are not valuing people enough.''

But even in a valued relationship, as time goes by people may sense puzzling
changes in each other. Miss Holmay believes that may be the time to say, ''Let's
talk.''

''But instead,'' she said, ''people cover it up, and pretty soon the friendship
doesn't have that much going for it because they are not leveling with each
other. People have to express their feelings to each other beyond, 'What did you
do today?' ''

In assessing the positive and negative aspects of a friendship, the concept of a
balance sheet may be helpful, with, for instance, dependability and mutual
respect on one side, stale jokes and irritating traits you didn't used to notice
on the other.

''There are dividends in relationships as there are in other investments,'' said
Dr. E. Gerald Dabbs, a clinical associate professor of psychiatry at Cornell
University Medical College. In the beginning of the friendship, he said, ''There
may have been something you needed or wanted, but it had a very different
meaning to you then than it does now. It's not a dividend that's important to
you anymore. And the transitions we go through in life influence not only what
we get out of a relationship but what we give to it as well.''

Dr. Cantor suggested something specific to give. ''Ask yourself, 'Have I done
anything to help this person come along with me where I'm going?' '' she said.
''If the answer is no, why not give it a try?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 16, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

C.C.N.Y. ALUMNI RECALL 1949 STRIKE

BYLINE: By WALTER GOODMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 891 words


I came to see if the old spirit was still here,'' said a man with a pepper-
and-salt beard while Shelley Tenzer strapped on an accordion and gave out with a
spirited rendition of an old folk song: ''Hold the fort, for we are coming/Union
men be strong.''

The two, former City College students, gathered Saturday night with 60 other
former colleagues to mark the 35th anniversary of the great event of their
college days - what The New York Times called ''the first general strike at a
municipal institution of higher learning.''

Few of the guests, at the Congregation Ansche Chesed on West 100th Street, knew
more than a handful of the others. But the company was united by the vivid
memories that decorated the walls of the meeting room - illustrated newspaper
accounts of picketing and marches, clashes with the police, arrests and charges
and denials of Communist instigation.

The cause that brought hundreds of students onto a picket line at the campus at
Convent Avenue and West 137th Street on April 11, 1949, and kept thousands of
others out of classrooms had to do with allegations of anti- Semitism and racism
against two faculty members.

'We Shall Not Be Moved'

One of them, Prof. William E. Knickerbocker, a former chairman of the Romance
languages department, who joined the faculty in 1907, was accused of withholding
honors and advancement from Jewish students and instructors.

The other, William C. Davis, an economics instructor, had already been removed
from the job of overseeing the Army Hall dormitory for veterans because he had
segregated blacks from whites.

''Jim Crow must go!'' shouted the pickets, some of them World War II veterans.
When they refused to disband, the police arrested 17, to chants of, ''We shall
not be moved!''

''Everything was peaceful till the cops came,'' recalled Sidney Rubinstein,
whose picture, taken as he was being shoved into a patrol wagon, was on page 1
of The Times. The smooth- cheeked, defiant 21-year-old in the photograph was not
recognizable in the full-bearded figure at the reunion.

Drawn Into Maelstrom


A picket leader, Albert Ettinger, recalled: ''Many volunteered to be arrested.
They asked for it.''

Arnold Raynor, whose main interest in those days was baseball, said he had seen
the strike as a device of the left to radicalize the campus, but was drawn into
it, along with many other nonpolitical students, by ''the way the police banged
people around.''

The strike was suspended after the Easter holiday.

All those arrested were found guilty of disorderly conduct and received
suspended sentences. They were defended by several lawyers identified with
left-wing causes, including Emanuel H. Bloch, who two years later was a defense
lawyer for Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, who were convicted of conspiring to pass
secrets to the Soviet Union.

'Parents Were Working-Class'


Most of the strikers were sons and daughters of immigrants from Eastern Europe,
commuting to the college from bustling Jewish neighborhoods in Brooklyn and the
Bronx. ''Our parents were working-class,'' a man at the reunion said with a note
of pride.

''Striking at that time on an issue of discrimination was not typical,'' Mr.
Rubinstein said at the reunion. ''It was nice later to see the American public
begin to deal with this.''

The get-together was the fourth reunion. The first, in 1959, was followed in
1964 and 1969. Behind them all was Jonathan Goldberg, class of '51. A spinal
injury that confined him to a wheelchair years ago obliged him to cut back on
his activities, resulting in the gap between reunions.

''This year,'' he said, ''a couple of us were talking, and we realized that 1984
was the 35th anniversary, and it seemed like time to do it again.''

Effects on Children


For Mrs. Tenzer, the strike reflected an outlook she has tried to pass on to her
five children. She spoke with special pride of her eldest daughter, ''a typical
flower child'' who lived on a commune for a time:

''She's a registered nurse in San Francisco City Hospital. Now she's learning
Spanish, for her Hispanic patients. She's a giving person.''

Mrs. Tenzer, a schoolteacher of music in Manhattan, volunteers an hour a day
with young children and the elderly.

An engineer who lives in Suffolk County, Lee Lambert, said with evident
satisfaction that two of his children had recently been arrested for protesting
against the nuclear-power plant being built at Shoreham, L.I.

Although a few of the former strikers have kept college friendships or crossed
paths over the years in such activities as the movement against the Vietnam War,
they have mostly gone their own ways and done their politicking on school boards
rather than picket lines.

Some seemed wary about discussing their political views with a stranger. The son
of Max Sapatkin, a strike leader who died recently, said that his father, an
employee of the Board of Education, ''was petrified'' lest he be revealed as a
former member of the Communist Party. ''He wouldn't even talk to me about the
strike.''

In reflecting on the strike in the yearbook for the class of '52, an anonymous
historian wrote, ''As we look back now, we see that this year began at the
college the period of the great silence, the silence of conformity or seeming
conformity.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GEN. MARK CLARK DIES AT 87; LAST OF WORLD WAR II CHIEFS Conqueror of Rome

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1852 words


Gen. Mark W. Clark, who led the capture of Rome in 1944, had a sometimes
controversial career that spanned both World Wars and the Korean War.

He came to prominence with the planning and execution of the North African
invasion of November 1942. As commanding general of the Fifth Army and then of
the 15th Army Group, the Fifth plus the British Eighth Army, he was a key figure
in the Mediterranean theater campaign.

In addition to a historic meeting in Rome with his corps commanders, held June
5, 1944, on Capitoline Hill, the campaign involved him in the Anzio beachhead
mission of Jan. 22, 1944, the costly charge of the 36th Division at the Rapido
River, and the bombing of the Abbey at Monte Cassino three weeks later.

In his 1950 book, ''Calculated Risk,'' General Clark acknowledged that the
failure at the Rapido was a ''serious blow,'' but he said he believed the
assault there had been essential to permit the ''spectacular end run'' at Anzio.
The landing, to divert German forces from Cassino, was achieved virtually
without casualties. It was followed, however, by weeks of bloody battle.

With regard to the bombing of the abbey atop Monte Cassino, a height from which
the Germans commanded the juncture of two roads to Rome, General Clark said he
authorized it only after Gen. Bernard Freyberg of the New Zealand Corps insisted
that it was a military prerequisite to a breakthrough there. ''I was never able
to discover on what he based his opinion,'' General Clark wrote of General
Freyberg.

He Commanded Occupation

After the collapse of the German forces, General Clark became commander of
United States Occupation Forces and High Commissioner in Austria. Later, as a
Deputy United States Secretary of State, he helped negotiate a treaty for
Austria.

In 1949-50, General Clark was Chief of Army Field Forces, stationed at Fort
Monroe, Va. In October 1951, President Truman nominated him to be Ambassador to
the Vatican but dropped the idea amid criticism by Protestants.

General Clark was sent to Tokyo in April 1952 to succeed Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway
as United Nations Commander in Korea and Commander in Chief of the United States
Far East Command. He signed the Korean armistice on July 27, 1953, and initiated
the difficult prisoner exchange that followed.

He relinquished his command in October and retired that month after 36 years in
the Army. The next spring General Clark became president of The Citadel, the
military college at Charleston, S.C., a position he held until 1965.

He Praised Nixon Bombing Order


In the early 1970's, General Clark was hawkish on the war in Indochina even as
popular pressures for American withdrawal echoed in the halls of Congress. He
praised President Nixon for ordering the bombing of North Vietnam and advocated
a stronger military to deter adversaries.

The feat that first brought General Clark to public attention was a dramatic
voyage by submarine to North Africa in October 1942. Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower,
his superior in the European Theater of Operations and longtime friend, had
asked him to go into French Morocco, then hostile, to meet with French officers
loyal to the Allied cause.

Risking capture, General Clark and a handpicked team of officers were able
return to London with vital information to prepare the North African invasion
and campaign that followed.

The details of this secret and often precarious mission were related only after
the North African landings. For his role, General Clark was decorated by General
Eisenhower with the Distinguished Service Medal. And his coinciding promotion to
lieutenant general made him, at the age of 46, the youngest three-star general
in the Army.

When American and British forces landed in North Africa, General Clark was
General Eisenhower's deputy. ''The fact that land resistance was not great
anywhere,'' General Eisenhower once said, ''testifies to the success of Clark's
mission.''

Part of General Clark's task was to work with Adm. Jean Francois Darlan, who
turned on Marshal Henri-Philippe Petain's Government after the landings. This
collaboration with former Vichy officials drew censure in some Allied quarters
but was upheld as a matter of military expediency.

General Clark's most important combat assignment was command of the Fifth Army,
which he organized and trained in North Africa in 1943 for the invasion of
Italy. It was the first American unit to reach the European continent in World
War II.

Meanwhile, the Seventh Army, led by Gen. George S. Patton Jr., invaded Sicily in
July 1943, and with the British Eighth Army, led by Gen. Sir Bernard Montgomery,
conquered Sicily in just 38 days.

The Fifth Army landed at Salerno, south of Naples, on Sept. 9, 1943, while
General Montgomery's troops crossed the Strait of Messina from Sicily at the toe
of the Italian boot to begin the bitter, difficult conquest of Italy. It took
the Allied forces 20 months to advance the 600 mountainous miles to the Swiss
border, where the Germans surrendered in May 1945.

Tactics Drew Criticism


The tactics of the Italian campaigns drew some serious criticism, and General
Clark bore his share of it.

Entrenched in the mountains, the Germans under Field Marshal Albert Kesselring,
barred the way north with at least 20 divisions. General Clark noted afterward
that Allied ground forces outnumbered the defenders only for the final push into
the Po Valley, and then only barely.

With General Clark's Fifth Army on the west and the British Eighth Army on the
east, the Allies pushed up the Italian peninsula. For a long while they were
stopped by the German line based on Cassino. The 36th (Texas) Division was sent
to cross the Rapido just south of Cassino in January 1944, an attack that failed
utterly and cost 2,100 men in 24 hours.

In 1946, when his nomination for permanent rank of major general went to the
Senate, veterans of the 36th Division complained to Congress that General Clark
was an ''inefficient and inexperienced officer'' who had destroyed ''the young
manhood of this country wastefully and uselessly'' in the Rapido action. The
promotion, however, was confirmed after the War Department defended General
Clark's decision as ''sound.''

The Germans also were ready for the next amphibious attempt in the Italian
campaign, the strike at Anzio, south of Rome, where, after the uneventful
landing, they soon pinned the American invaders to a narrow beachhead for many
days. The beachhead was eventually relieved by pressure from the south, and Rome
was occupied without resistance June 4, 1944.

He Protested Loss of Troops


The Allies quickly drove the Germans north of Florence, but later the advance
was stalled once again in by a Kesselring stand in the Apennines outside
Bologna, the gateway to the Po Valley. Before that, part of the Allied force was
diverted by General Eisenhower for a flank attack on southern France in August,
which weakened the Italian front. General Clark protested this decision, but in
vain.

At the end of 1944, he succeeded Field Marshal Viscount Harold Alexander as
commander of the 15th Army Group in Italy, consisting of American and British
troops, joined by Indians, South Africans, Australians, New Zealanders,
anti-Fascist Italians, as well as Polish, Jewish and Brazilian brigades.

With these forces, General Clark opened the final big push into the Po Valley in
April 1945 and brought about a German surrender in the Alps on May 2, a week
before the final collapse of the Third Reich.

In the long campaign, General Clark was sometimes careless of his own safety.
Men in the line often saw their tall, lanky commander, tieless in warm weather,
his uniform unadorned save for the three stars of his rank and a holstered
revolver dangling at his side.  At Salerno, he personally led a unit that
knocked out a charge of 18 German tanks. At Anzio, shellfire hit his landing
craft and two men standing next to him were wounded.

President Roosevelt personally pinned the Distinguished Service Cross for
Heroism on General Clark.

'Where Are Our Troops?'


In a typical episode of the campaign from Salerno to Naples, the plain- spoken
general lay beside a forward artillery observer watching Allied shelling of
stubborn but thinly entrenched German troops. ''Damn rear guard holding up a
whole division,'' he complained. ''Where are our troops?''

Swinging his binoculars toward a different view, he answered himself. ''Oh,
yeah. I see three of them. Crossing an open field. Why the hell don't they take
cover?''

Moments later he crawled to a field telephone in a slit trench and was talking
to a regimental commander. ''Of course, your battalion commander knows more
about the situation than I do,'' he said. ''But maybe we ought to get in there
fast and exploit this barage.'' Returning to an outpost, he said, ''We're going
to attack in half an hour.'' Then, hopping into a jeep and extending one long
leg along a fender, he rode off to inspect another forward action.

Third-Generation Soldier


Mark Wayne Clark was a third-generation soldier.

He was born May 1, 1896, in Madison Barracks, N.Y. His parents were Col. Charles
C. and Rebecca Clark. He was reared in Army camps and went to West Point, where
he was commissioned in 1917.

He sailed for France in 1918 and was wounded in combat that June. Following
further assignments in France and Belgium, he returned to the United States in
mid-1919.

His career then took him to the usual series of Army posts around the country
until he graduated from the Command and General Staff School at Fort
Leavenworth, Kan., in 1935, and from the Army War College in Washington two
years later.

His next assignment was to the staff of the Third Division at Fort Lewis, Wash.
He briefly served as Chief of Staff of the Army Ground Forces before taking
command of ground forces in the European Theater of Operations in June 1942. By
then, he had risen to the two-star rank of major general.

Some postwar critics, including the author Dan Kurzman in ''The Race for Rome''
in 1975, accused General Clark of having been obsessed with beating fellow
Allied commanders to the Italian capital in the spring of 1944. The glory of
reaching the Eternal City first, they asserted, took precedence over cutting off
and trapping the Germans before they could retreat north to fight another day.

But such arguments went unspoken when, in 1975, at the age of 79, General Clark,
accompanied by his wife, led an American Fifth Army contingent at ceremonies at
the American military cemetery in Nettuno, Italy, where 7,000 G.I.'s lay buried
on the seaside near Rome. On that tour of battlefields, General Clark also
visited Rome, where President Giovanni Leone presented him with Italy's highest
award, the Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Italian Republic.

General Clark was married in 1924 to Maurine Doran, who died in 1966 on her 74th
birthday. His second marriage was to Mary Millard Applegate, who survives. Also
surviving is a son, William Doran Clark of Washington, and five grandchildren.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of General Mark W. Clark (page A20)

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Peking Says Its Militia Killed 21 Vietnamese on the Border

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 193 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Tuesday, April 17


Chinese militia units killed 21 Vietnamese soldiers and espionage agents in
recent clashes along the border, the New China News Agency said today.

It gave no Chinese casualties and said the frontier incidents occurred between
April 9 and 12 on the border of Yunnan Province and of the Guangxi Zhuang
Autonomous Region.

Foreign reporters are barred from the frontier region by both countries, and
there has been no independent verification of China's reports.

The agency said four Vietnamese agents crossed the border in heavy fog on the
morning of April 9 ''for sabotage activities,'' but a militia squad found and
''easily killed the four invaders.''

Nine Vietnamese troopers were reported killed April 9 after they began shooting
at the Jinlong People's Commune in Guangxi with automatic rifles and light
machine guns and Chinese units returned the fire.

In another incident in Guangxi, on April 11, six Vietnamese soldiers were killed
after they crossed the border and tried to attack peasants planting spring rice,
the agency said. It added that two Vietnamese were slain April 12 when they
opened fire on peasants working in the fields.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW IMAGE FOR ANTINUCLEAR LOBBY

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 16


When the House of Representatives is in session, the ground floor entrance to
the House chamber is a favorite gathering place for lobbyists of all types.

Labor, military, civil rights, White House and other lobbyists line the walls of
the hallway, waiting to pull aside a member for a question or a short
conversation.

Standing among this buzzing group of would-be influence peddlers is Beth Duker,
an activist for the Committee for a Sane Nuclear Policy, known as SANE. She is a
key lobbyist for the nation's growing disarmament movement.

Wearing a blazer, grey skirt and blouse, Miss Duker hardly fits the stereotype
of the disheveled antinuclear activist. Nor is she the exception in the
disarmament movement these days.

In the last decade, antiwar and antinuclear groups have been struggling to
change the radical leftist image that was a part of the demonstrations against
the Vietnam War.

Working 'Within the System'


''In the late 60's and early 70's, the peace movement had an aura of
antipatriotism.'' said David Cortright, executive director of SANE, which is
based in Washington. ''Our vision is more specific, and we're willing to work
within the system, rather than working to bring it down.

''The movement today is much more unified. Militant and sectarian arguments used
to split the movements in those days. Now we are in the mainstream - no longer
dominated by the student hippie types but rather more by the middle class,
religious groups and women.''

In accordance with the newly coordinated antinuclear movement here, which
consists of more than 30 such groups, SANE is concentrating on the ''swing
votes'' in the MX missile debate. The ''swing group,'' those moderate
Republicans who voted for the $50 billion missile system last November under
White House pressure, who might change their vote the next time Congress debates
the issue.

The increased coordination and a more homogenous agenda - namely, unseating
President Reagan - allows groups like SANE to be more competitive with
well-financed military industry lobbyists and has helped mold what was an
unorganized and ideologically divided movement into a more effective lobbying
force.

New Vigor for Movement


Since Mr. Reagan took office, the antinuclear movement has taken on new vigor.
Among the diverse coalition of groups that participate in the weekly Monday
lobby group meetings, held to coordinate their lobbying efforts, are the
American Baptist Church, Americans for Democratic Action, Common Cause, the
Federation of American Scientists, Greenpeace, U.S.A., Physicians for Social
Responsibility, and Woman's Action for Nuclear Disarmament.

SANE's membership has increased sixfold in four years, to more than 80,000
members.

The antinuclear movement's members have not lost their taste for strong
rhetoric. ''Nobody likes Reagan,'' Mr. Cortright said, ''and because of that,
because of his radical right-wing policies, we've been able to bring a wide
range of people into the process.''

According to Miss Duker, moderate Republicans were leaning toward the MX last
year to give the President a bargaining chip to help him move foward on arms
control.

''Now that they see he is doing nothing in arms control,'' she said, ''it's been
much easier for Republicans to say no to White House pressure.''

The antinuclear lobby is making a concerted effort on Capitol Hill to challenge
President Reagan's military budget for 1985, which calls for additional outlays
for the Pentagon.

An Emphasis on Results


Contrary to what might have been true in the past, the emphasis in the
antinuclear movement is not on protests, marches or festivals, although these
remain a part of the movement's public relations arsenal.

The priorities today, according to Mr. Cortright, are more pragmatic and
legislative and directed at action rather than protests. At the top of the
agenda is the fight to stop the MX missile, a goal movement members say they
feel is within reach.

Last year, the House voted against providing further money to build and base the
missile system, but did not cancel the program altogether.

''When we started lobbying against MX, for example,'' Miss Duker said, ''we lost
the first vote by 40 votes in May, then lost the second by 19 July, and by last
November we were down to 9 votes.

''The way Reagan has handled, or rather not handled arms control,'' she said,
''we think we have a good chance of stopping this thing this year.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of lobbyist, Beth Duker

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COURT REFUSES TO REMOVE U.S. AS DEFENDANT IN AGENT ORANGE CASE

BYLINE: By ARNOLD H. LUBASCH

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 507 words


A Federal appeals court has refused to remove the Government as a defendant in a
major civil trial over the use of the herbicide Agent Orange in the Vietnam War.

The decision, issued Friday in Manhattan by the United States Court of Appeals
for the Second Circuit, eliminated a key obstacle to beginning the trial May 7
in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.

Vietnam veterans sued several manufacturers of Agent Orange for internal and
genetic injuries that they attributed to a potent contaminant, dioxin, in the
herbicide, which the military used to destroy vegetation in Vietnam. The complex
case involves thousands of veterans and billions of dollars.

Arvin Maskin, the Government's chief counsel in the case, said yesterday that a
firm decision had not yet been made on whether to ask the United States Supreme
Court to review the appeals court ruling. He said the pending trial raised ''a
profoundly serious situation.''

No Strategy Change


The chief counsel for the veterans, David J. Dean, said the ruling did not
change his strategy in any way for the trial.

''Our claim against the chemical companies,'' Mr. Dean said, ''is based on the
fact that they failed to inform the Government that there was a toxic
contaminant in Agent Orange, which caused many veterans to have serious
injuries.''

The defendants are several chemical manufacturers, including the Dow Chemical
Company. They filed third- party complaints against the Government to obtain
Federal contributions if the plaintiffs win damages in the case.

In a pretrial motion, the Government asked to be removed from the case, based on
a doctrine that someone cannot sue the Government for injuries suffered in the
course of military service.

But the trial judge, Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of the district court, ruled
that the Government might still be liable for claims by wives, children and
parents of the veterans. The Government then argued to the appeals court that
Judge Weinstein had abused his power.

The Appeals Court Ruling


The appeals court decided in an important procedural ruling that Judge Weinstein
''may proceed to try the merits of the case.'' The decision said, however, that
the Government might yet win its point in a possible appeal after the trial.

According to the 10-page decision, which Judge Charles L. Brieant wrote with the
concurrence of Judge Richard J. Cardamone and Judge Ellsworth A. Van
Graafeiland, there was no abuse of power by the district court ''although
reasonable persons may differ on the result reached.''

The scheduled trial of the five-year- old lawsuit would focus on the claims of
the veterans and their families for injuries that they said were a result of
herbicide exposure in the Vietnam War.

The jury in the trial would be asked to decide whether dioxin in the herbicide
Agent Orange had caused injuries and genetic damage to about five representative
veterans and their families, and whether the manufacturers had failed to provide
proper warnings of the danger.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

WINNERS OF PULITZER PRIZES IN JOURNALISM, LETTERS AND THE ARTS;

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2673 words


Public Service


The Los Angeles Times

In one of the largest reporting efforts it has made, The Los Angeles Times
assigned 11 reporters and 2 editors, all Mexican-Americans, to a series on the
more than three million people of Hispanic descent in Southern California. The
editors and reporters conducted more than 1,100 interviews and polled nearly
1,500 people, including non-Hispanic residents. The result was a 27-part series,
''Latinos,'' that began last July with an examination of a Mexican-American
family and concluded with an essay on the Chicano movement of the 1960's and
what it meant for the future. The study included autobiographical accounts of
growing up in the East Barrio of Los Angeles and being employed as migrant
workers. The problems, achievements and changing nature of the Hispanic people
were examined, leading to what the Pulitzer board said was a better
understanding among the non-Hispanic majority about the minority group.




General Local Reporting

Newsday Beginning in October 1983, when a lawyer went to court to force
corrective surgery for a baby born with severe physical defects at University
Hospital in Stony Brook, L.I., the Long Island newspaper Newsday followed the
Baby Jane Doe case with a team. The lawyer, who had no connection to the family,
was insisting it was a medical duty to operate although the parents opposed
surgery for the infant, who was born with an open spinal column and a small
skull. When the Surgeon General disclosed Federal authorities had intervened in
49 similiar cases of severely handicapped children around the country, Newsday
assigned 11 reporters and assistants to prepare a national story on the human
and ethical problems posed by decisions on withholding medical treatment. The
interviewing and reporting was developed into six pages of coverage on Sunday,
Nov. 13. The newspaper was the first to interview the baby's parents. The
stories gave detailed attention to the medical arguments on both sides and the
moral pressures experienced by parents.




Special Local Reporting

The Boston Globe

Since the tension and violence of the 1970's over school busing, editors of The
Boston Globe began to discuss examining race relations in institutions in the
city, according to Matthew Storin, managing editor. By using statistics and
interviewing black and Hispanic residents and the leaders of the most powerful
institutions, seven staff members wrote six articles on the difficulties blacks
and other minority groups had in getting hired and succeeding and why. They
compared six other cities with Boston in nine articles that also featured
personal experiences by minority-group members and interviews with business,
political, labor and academic leaders.





National Reporting

John Noble Wilford The New York Times

In his 19 years as a reporter and editor for The New York Times, Mr.  Wilford
has specialized in coverage of science news and, in particular, the exploration
of space. His Pulitzer award was for articles written during 1983 that included
accounts of the efforts by the United States and the Soviet Union to develop
''space war'' weapons, analyses of the direction of the American space- shuttle
program and such topics in astronomy as aberrations in the orbits of planets in
the solar system. Mr. Wilford, who is 50 years old and was born in Murray, Ky.,
received a bachelor's degree from the University of Tennessee and a master's
from Syracuse. He was a reporter for The Wall Street Journal and a contributing
editor at Time magazine before joining The Times, where he was assistant
national news editor and science news director before returning to full- time
reporting. He has written three books and edited another on scientific subjects.




International Reporting

Karen Elliott House

The Wall Street Journal Mrs. House, appointed foreign editor of The Wall Street
Journal this year, was honored by for a series of articles written a year ago
that forecast the failure of the American peace plan in the Middle East. The
articles resulted from more than 20 exclusive interviews with King Hussein of
Jordan, in which the King revealed secret promises made to him by President
Reagan and afforded a rare insight into his own political motivations. Born in
Matador, Tex., Mrs. House, who is 36 years old, received a bachelor's in
journalism from the University of Texas. She joined The Journal's Washington
bureau in 1974.




Editorial Writing

Albert Scardino The Georgia Gazette

Mr. Scardino, editor of The Georgia Gazette, was honored for his editorials on
state and local issues that ranged from corruption in the Georgia Department of
Labor to the use of tax-exempt bonds to finance private construction in
Savannah, the home of the newspaper. The Pulitzer board praised his ability to
present complex problems in a clear manner and to exert influence on public
opinion and the actions of public officials. Mr. Scardino, who is 35 years old
and a native of Baltimore, received a bachelor's degree from Columbia College
and a graduate degree in journalism from the University of California at
Berkeley. He was a documentary film maker and a reporter and editor for The
Associated Press, The Baltimore Evening Sun, The Atlanta Constitution and The
Savannah Morning News before becoming a co-founder and editor of The Georgia
Gazette in 1978.




Editorial Cartooning

Paul Conrad

The Los Angeles Times

This is Mr. Conrad's third Pulitzer Prize for editorial cartooning. His work
last year focused on government and military affairs, covert intelligence
activity and the nuclear- arms race. Mr. Conrad, 59, won his other Pulitzers in
1964 and 1971. Born in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, he graduated from the University of
Iowa in 1950 and was an editorial cartoonist at The Denver Post for the next 13
years. He has been the editorial cartoonist of The Los Angeles Times since 1964,
and his work is syndicated by the newspaper. His books include ''Pro and
Conrad'' (1979), ''The King and Us'' (1974) and ''When in the Course of Human
Events'' (1973).




Spot News Photography

Stan Grossfeld The Boston Globe

Mr. Grossfeld won for pictures from Lebanon showing the faces of men, women and
children caught in the tragedy, fear and violence of war. Mr. Grossfeld joined
The Boston Globe in 1975 after two years as a staff photographer for The
Star-Ledger of Newark. Born in 1951 in New York City, he earned a bachelor's
degree in photography from the Rochester Institure of Technology in 1973 and a
master's in journalism from Boston University in 1980.



Feature Photography

Anthony Suau The Denver Post

Mr. Suau won his prize for a series of pictures on the horrors of mass
starvation taken on a two-week assigment in Ethiopia and another picture of a
wife hugging the burial stone of her husband in a Denver cemetery on Memorial
Day. The Ethiopia pictures, published in color in a two-page Sunday feature,
focused on the faces of parents and children to convey the hopelessness and
harshness of a parched land. Born in Peoria, Ill., in 1956, Mr. Suau graduated
from the Rochester Institute of Technology and has been a photographer at The
Denver Post since 1981.

Commentary

Vermont Royster

The Wall Street Journal

When Mr. Royster won his first Pulitzer, for editorial writing, in 1953, the
judges cited him for ''an ability to discern the underlying moral issue,
illuminated by a deep faith and confidence in the people of our country.'' His
award yesterday was for his column ''Thinking Things Over.'' He was noted for
bringing compassion to the column and displaying a talent for putting
contemporary events in a historical context. His topics included such subjects
as tax laws, veterans of Vietnam and other wars, the legacy of the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther Jr. and moral relativism. Born in 1914 in Raleigh, N.C., Mr.
Royster graduated from the University of North Carolina and joined The Wall
Street Journal in 1936. He retired as editor in 1971 but continues to write his
column.




Criticism

Paul Goldberger The New York Times

Mr. Goldberger, senior architecture critic of The New York Times, was honored
for his judgments on architectural developments across the country in the last
year and his criticisms of styles and structures ranging from country homes to
corporate headquarters. Mr. Goldberger, 33, was born in Nutley, N.J., graduated
from Yale and joined the staff of The Times Magazine in 1972. In 1973, he was
appointed the newspaper's daily architecture critic and in 1981 was named senior
architecture critic. He has written three books on architecture.




Feature Writing


Peter Mark Rinearson The Seattle Times

Mr. Rinearson, 29, the aerospace reporter of The Seattle Times, chronicled the
international political and financial forces that shaped the decision to
manufacture the Boeing 757 and then build and market it. He said the building of
the two-engine plane was a $3 billion risk for Boeing that involved painstaking
compromises and all the complexities and nuances of a huge industrial process.
''This is the story of 30,000 people making 130,000 pounds of high technology,''
Mr. Rinearson said in his series, ''Making It Fly.'' He said he had just started
the aerospace beat and did the series to get a grip on the process of building
the plane. Mr. Rinearson was born and raised in Seattle, where he attended the
University of Washington.




Fiction

William Kennedy ''Ironweed''

''Ironweed'' is the latest in a cycle of novels, including ''Legs'' and ''Billy
Phelan's Greatest Game,'' set in Albany, where Mr. Kennedy was born in 1928. He
has always lived in the upstate area, except for brief periods. ''Ironweed,''
which won the 1983 National Book Critics prize for fiction, is the story of
Francis Phelan, a former baseball player turned murderer who returns to Albany
after 22 years on the road to reflect on his life as an outcast. After a series
of real and imagined encounters with people from his past, Phelan kills again
and returns to the road, yielding to his compulsion to flee. Critics have said
that the hero is a man of ''perverse integrity'' and that the author has a
''tough-minded and defiant humanism.'' Mr. Kennedy graduated from Siena College
and began his newspaper career in Glens Falls, N.Y. He later worked for
newspapers in Miami, Puerto Rico and Albany.




Drama

David Mamet

''Glengarry Glen Ross'' Mr. Mamet's ''Glengarry Glen Ross'' had its American
premiere last January and was acclaimed for its depiction of the driven world of
Florida real-estate salesmen. Born in Chicago in 1947, Mr. Mamet graduated from
Goddard College in Vermont and lives in New York City. Since 1978, he has been
associate artistic director of the Goodman Theater in Chicago. His other works
include ''Sexual Perversity in Chicago'' (1976 Obie Award), ''American Buffalo''
(1976 Obie and 1977 New York Drama Critics Circle Award) and ''Edmund'' (1982
Obie), and screenplays for ''The Postman Always Rings Twice'' in 1980 and ''The
Verdict'' in 1982, for which he was nominated for an Academy Award.




Biography

Dr. Louis R. Harlan

''Booker T. Washington''


A professor of history at the University of Maryland, Dr.  Harlan last month was
a winner of the Columbia University Bancroft Prize for the second volume of his
biography about Booker T. Washington, which now has won him a Pulitzer award.
The first volume, 11 years earlier, also won him a Bancroft. The second and
concluding volume in the biography traces Washington's career during his last
years, when he was regarded as the most influential black leader of his time. It
examines his skillful and ambitious building of a complicated power base that
extended far beyond the confines of the Tuskegee Institute by cultivating favor
with prominent white philanthropists and politicians. The author's work was
pursued simultaneously with his editing of the 13th and final volume of
Washington's papers. Born in Clay County in Mississippi in 1922, Dr. Harlan
graduated from Emory University and received graduate degrees from Vanderbilt
and Johns Hopkins Universities. He has taught at the University of Maryland
since 1965 and also is the author of ''Separate and Unequal: Public School
Campaigns and Racism in Southern Seaboard States, 1901-1915,'' published in
1958.




Poetry

Mary Oliver

''American Primitive''

Miss Oliver won for a collection of 50 poems celebrating nature and humanity,
''American Primitive,'' published last April by Atlantic-Little, Brown. Miss
Oliver was born 48 years ago in Maple Heights, Ohio, near Cleveland, attended
Ohio State University and Vassar College and now lives in Provincetown, Mass.
Her ''No Voyage and Other Poems'' first appeared in 1963. Since then, she has
published ''The River Styx, Ohio,'' ''The Night Traveler,'' ''Twelve Moons'' and
''Sleeping in the Forest.'' She has contributed to The American Scholar, The New
Yorker and other periodicals, and she has won a Shelley Memorial Award, the
Cleveland Women's Club Arts Prize for Literature, the Alice Fay di Castagnola
Award, an award from the National Institute of Arts and Letters, a Guggenheim
Fellowship and a creative- writing fellowship from the National Endowment for
the Arts.




General Nonfiction

Paul Starr

''Social Transformation of American Medicine

Mr. Starr was cited for ''The Social Transformation of American Medicine,'' a
history of the medical profession and its power, of health- care reforms and
crises and the evolution of medicine into an industry. A resident of Cambridge,
Mass., the 34-year-old Mr. Starr is an associate professor of sociology at
Harvard. He is a Columbia graduate and former editor of The Columbia Daily
Spectator and received his Ph.D. at Harvard in 1978. He previously wrote, with
James Henry and Raymond Bonner, ''The Discarded Army: Veterans After Vietnam.''




Special Citation

Theodor Seuss Geisel

Better known by his pen name ''Dr. Seuss,'' Mr. Geisel has been writing books
full of playful rhymes and nonsense words for 47 years. With their strange
illustrations - characters with necks so long they wind and twist or with huge
whiskers and sly eyes - his books have taught countless children reading can be
fun. His titles, including ''The Cat in the Hat,'' ''How the Grinch Stole
Christmas'' and ''Green Eggs and Ham,'' have sold more than 100 million copies.
Born in 1904 in Springfield, Mass., Mr. Geisel began his career as an
advertising illustrator after graduating from Dartmouth College. He wrote his
first children's book, ''And to Think That I Saw It on Mulberry Street,'' in
1937, reportedly to drive out a singsong rhythm that had lodged in his head.
But the rhythm persisted through the years in 43 more books including, ''Yertle
the Turtle,'' ''One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish'' and ''The Lorax.'' Mr.
Geisel, who is editor in chief and president and publisher of Beginner Books
Inc., a division of Random House specializing in children's books, lives in La
Jolla, Calif.




Music

Bernard Rands ''Canti del Sole''

Mr.  Rands won for his ''Canti del Sole'' for tenor and orchestra. It presents a
day's progression from dawn to dusk through a continuous setting of poems in
several languages about the sun. The work was given its premiere by Zubin Mehta
and the New York Philharmonic during the Horizons '83 Festival. Born in England
in 1934, Mr. Rands studied at the University of Wales and in Italy. He taught in
Britain before moving to California in 1975. He lives in Encinitas and is a
professor of composition at the University of California at San Diego.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing; photo of Anthony Suau photograph

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TUESDAY, APRIL 17, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 851 words


The C.I.A. reversed itself and acknowledged it had delayed for six weeks a
response to a request by the Senate intelligence committee for a briefing on
covert activity in Nicaragua. (Page A1, Column 6.)

A Salvadoran conservative leader of a large party said he would remain neutral
in next month's presidential runoff. Political officials said the decision was a
blow to the far right presidential candidate, Roberto d'Aubuisson. (A1:5.)

Assassins in San Salvador killed the senior Salvadoran security employee of the
United States Embassy. Witnesses said that the official, Juaquim Alfredo Zapata
Romero, was driving with his wife and daughter when a taxi with five men pulled
up beside his car and the occupants began shooting. (A8:3-4.)

Nicaraguan insurgents based in Costa Rica who say they have seized a southern
coastal town in Nicaragua said they now plan to establish a provisional
government there soon. A Government leader denied that rebels had seized the
town. (A4:3-6.)

An offensive against terrorism has been approved by President Reagan, according
to Administration officials. They said the new measures include pre-emptive
strikes and reprisals around the world in an effort to stop terrorists before
they act. (A3:1-3.) National

A key issue in campaign financing for the Presidency will be decided by the
Supreme Court, but a decision is unlikely until after the 1984 election. The
issue is whether individuals and political action committees can continue to
spend unlimited amounts to support a candidate. (A1:4.)

Major scientific endowments were announced by the University of Texas. It said
it would establish 32 new faculty positions, each endowed for $1 million, and
all in scientific and engineering fields. The university is deeply committed to
research and scholarships in the microelectronics and computer fields. (A21:1.)

The Silicon Valley engineer charged with selling key missile research data to
Polish intelligence agents pleaded quilty to one count of espionage in Federal
District Court in San Francisco. The engineer, Edward Durward Harper Jr., read a
statement implicating himself and at least four others. (A14:1.)

A ruling in an Agent Orange case will keep the Federal Government as a
defendant. The case involves thousands of veterans who have sued several
manufacturers of the herbicide that was used in the Vietnam War. The decision by
an appeals court paves the way for a major civil trial to begin on May 7.
(A15:3-6.)

Louis Farrakhan unleashed a storm with remarks about Jews and threats against a
Washington Post reporter, but he has made similar comments in radio broadcasts
and speeches for years. Although Jesse Jackson has put some distance between
himself and the Black Muslim leader, the Democratic Presidential aspirant has
refused to reject Mr. Farrakhan's support.(A16:1-2.)

Two interns have acknowledged that they were awarded medical degrees by a
university in the Dominican Republic that they never attended. Both are
interning at Worcester (Mass.) City Hospital. One intern said he had paid about
$9,000 to a broker in medical credentials for a degree and transcript. (C1:4.)

Small turboprop aircraft makers are returning to an idea used by the Wright
Brothers with a ''backward'' configuration they say will make their new craft
virtually stall-proof. The nose-mounted wings and rear ''pusher'' propellers of
the business aircraft echo the aeronautical design of the earliest airplanes.
(C1:2-3.)

Geoff Smith won the Marathon in Boston. Running in a cold drizzle into a
headwind, the Briton finished the 26-mile, 385-yard race in 2 hours 10 minutes
34 seconds, exceptional time for the difficult conditions. Gerry Vanesse of New
Milford, Conn., came in second in 2:14:49, his fastest ever. The women's winner
was Lorraine Moller of New Zealand, who finished in 2:29:28. (B7:5-6.)
Metropolitan

The 1984 Pulitzer Prize for fiction was won by William Kennedy for his novel
''Ironweed.'' The drama prize was awarded to David Mamet for his biting comedy
''Glengarry Glen Ross.'' In journalism, two prizes each were awarded to The New
York Times, The Wall Street Journal, The Boston Globe and The Los Angeles Times.
Theodor Seuss Geisel, known by his pen name of ''Dr. Seuss,'' won a special
citation. (A1:2-3.)

Revenge over narcotics dealings may have prompted gunmen to murder eight
children and two women in a Brooklyn house, according to the police. They said
that paraphernalia commonly used by drug dealers was found in the first-floor
apartment of the two-story house. (A1:1.)

An unusual prisoner transfer plan was announced by the Nassau County Executive,
Francis T. Purcell, in an effort to ease overcrowding. He said he had asked
state correction officials to approve an interim plan to house county jail
inmates in a prison that is to open in New Mexico Oct. 1. He said the county
would pay New Mexico $60 a day for each inmate, but added that it cost $80 a day
to house an inmate in the Nassau jail. (A20:1-2.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 17, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TWO INTERNS TELL DETAILS OF SUSPECT DEGREES

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 6; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1622 words

DATELINE: WORCESTER, Mass., April 16


TWO interns at Worcester City Hospital have acknowledged in an interview that
they were awarded medical degrees by a university in the Dominican Republic that
they never attended.

''I don't think I've done anything wrong, but in retrospect maybe I did,'' said
Raymond Allard, one of the interns, who received a medical degree in June 1982
from the Universidad Centro de Estudios Tecnologicos, generally known as
Universidad Cetec, in Santo Domingo.

Mr. Allard said in the interview here that he had paid about $9,000 to Pedro de
Mesones, a broker in medical credentials, for a Universidad Cetec degree and
transcript.

Mr. de Mesones is serving a three-year sentence in Federal prison after being
convicted on two counts of mail fraud and conspiracy to commit mail fraud in the
sale of bogus medical degrees.

The other intern, Barbara Gillon, also said in the interview that she received a
medical degree from Universidad Cetec in June 1982 without doing any work there.
She said she, too, had been a client of Mr. de Mesones.

Yet hospital officials here spoke glowingly of their performance as interns and
pointed out that, aside from the issue of their degrees, they had spotless
records. The officials said Mr. Allard was a certified physician's assistant and
a Vietnam veteran who had been decorated four times, while Miss Gillon was a
registered nurse, In addition to praising the interns, the chief of medicine at
the hospital, Dr. John Merritt, said the institution had checked their
credentials thoroughly before their employment. Hospital officials declined to
state at present what action they planned to take regarding to two interns. But
in several New York state hospitals, where similar cases have occurred, those
involved have been suspended pending an investigation.

Both Mr. Allard and Miss Gillon agreed to be interviewed after their identities
were learned from public hospital records and interviews with people familiar
with the investigation. They are the first persons actually practicing medicine
who have agreed to discuss the origin of their Caribbean Basin medical degrees.

They said that they had been misled by Mr. de Mesones and that their dreams of
practicing medicine as fully accredited doctors were starting to unravel.

Miss Gillon said: ''I had no idea that I was doing anything illegal. What I was
doing was the fulfillment of a dream to become a doctor.''

For most students, that dream entails two years of classroom study followed by
two years of learning by doing in clinical clerkships. After four years, they
receive an M.D.

As the demand for a place in medical school has risen, however, an increasing
number of Americans are going out of the country for the first two years of
study. They can complete their clerkships here only if they pass a standardized
test.



Shortcut for a Fee

It was those first two years that Mr. Allard and Miss Gillon did not complete.
Mr. de Mesones, they say, assured them that their previous experience in health
care would permit Cetec to waive the classroom study in exchange for a fee.

The two interns stressed that they felt they had acquired sufficient medical
knowledge to perform their duties capably, offering as proof that they had
passed both the test for foreign students and another basic test of medical
knowledge taken by American medical students.

In addition, medical staff members at the hospital were unanimous in their
praise of the performance, capability and motivation of the two interns, who
work as doctors under the supervision of the staff of medical educators at the
hospital.

''If I had doubts about the backgrounds of any of the interns, they would be the
ones I would be least suspicious of,'' said Dr. Jack Kelly, a physician on the
staff of the hospital.

His comments were echoed by Dr. James L. McGuire, head of medical education at
the hospital when they were accepted as interns last year.

''Ray and Barbara are very bright, capable doctors,'' Dr. McGuire said, adding
that ''they are the gold standard by which all the other foreign medical
graduates are measured.''

Dr. McGuire said they were on a par with graduates of American medical schools.

Dr. John Merritt, director of medicine at Worcester City Hospital, was away from
the city and could not be reached for comment. However, in response to inquiries
last month about the checking of credentials, he insisted that it had been done
properly at the hospital and declined to discuss the background of any interns
on the staff.



Hundreds Under Investigation

The scrutiny of foreign medical graduates stemmed from the investigation of the
activities of Mr. de Mesones and the subsequent discovery by the Federal and
state authorities that there were others in the business of manufacturing
fraudulent medical diplomas.

When Mr. de Mesones pleaded guilty in Alexandria, Va., in December, he had
admitted concocting medical credentials for at least 100 people. In New York
State the credentials of 500 doctors are under investigation, while other
inquiries involving smaller numbers of people are going on in 15 other states.

An investigation into the scandal by five Federal agencies is to open at the
headquarters of the Department of Health and Human Services in Washington on
Tuesday.

Inspectors of the United States Postal Service began an investigation of the
activities of Mr. de Mesones about two years ago and eventually said they
concluded that he had accepted $1.5 million from 165 clients who had sought
medical degrees.

He was arrested last summer by Federal postal inspectors and a search warrant
was executed on his home. Federal officials said that the 10,000 documents in
his home detailed a pattern by which he solicited and concocted fraudulent
medical degrees.



Trips to New York City

Although he operated out of his home in Alexandria, Mr. de Mesones would
customarily go to New York City, rent a suite at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel and
interview persons who had answered advertisements he had placed in newspapers
and magazines offering assistance in getting into foreign medical schools,
according to Federal investigators.

Miss Gillon said she first met him at the Waldorf-Astoria after hearing about
his services from fellow workers at the United States Public Health Service
Hospital on Staten Island, where both she and Mr. Allard worked at one time.

Mr. Allard, however, said he first met Mr. de Mesones in Tampico, Mexico, while
in his first semester at the Universidad Noreste medical school.

''De Mesones was on the campus passing out little cards and telling us that we
could transfer to Cetec, even with advanced standing,'' Mr. Allard said.

Officials at Cetec have acknowledged that five staff members there formed a
conspiracy to produce fraudulent diplomas and medical school transcripts, and
the Government of the Dominican Republic has a special commission investigating
their activities.



Focus on the Knowledgeable

As outlined at the trial of Mr. de Mesones, in interviews with other clients of
his, and in the interview with Mr. Allard and Miss Gillon, Mr. de Mesones
focused on people in the medical care system most familiar with its operation:
physician's assistants, nurses, pharmacists and podiatrists.

''I believed de Mesones was telling me the truth,'' Miss Gillon said, adding
that her letter of acceptance from Universidad C.E.T.E.C. ''was proof that he
was right.''

Mr. Allard and Miss Gillon completed their clerkships with the knowledge and
approval of Cetec at the Polk County General Hospital in Bartow, Fla., which
itself is under investigation by both Federal and state officials.



Investigation in Florida

Mr. Allard and Miss Gillon said there had been students who underwent clinical
clerkships at Polk County General Hospital who knew virtually nothing about
medicine.

Mr. Allard and Miss Gillon insisted here that they were knowledgeable about
medicine: She holds a bachelor's degree in nursing from Wagner College on Staten
Island; he holds a bachelor's degree in biology with honors from the University
of Massachusetts.

In addition, both of them took and passed two basic tests of medical knowledge
given to either foreign or American-trained students.

A native of Worcester, Mr. Allard, now 33 years old, spent two and a half years
in the Army, most of the time as a veterinary technican in Vietnam, where he
served with a scout dog platoon. Among his decorations are the Bronze Star, the
Army Commendation Medal, two unit citations and several others awarded by the
South Vietnamese Army.

''Medicine is what I wanted to do all my life,'' he said, ''but after college I
was told that I would never be accepted into an American medical school because
my grade point average was 3.3, and the schools insisted on 3.9.''

''So I decided to go to school in Mexico, and I was the top student in the
school after the first semester,'' he went on. ''Then I got involved with de
Mesones, who produced a transcript from the Mexican school stating that I had
spent four semesters there when I had spent only one.''

Mr. Allard added that he originally became suspicious of Mr. de Mesones after
finding a duplicate copy of his transcript from the University of Massachusetts
with someone else's name on it, the name of another student in his class in
Mexico.

Mr. Allard said he had borrowed $30,000 to finance his medical education and
probably would not have sufficient funds to continue. Should he be forced to
give up now, he said, he could envision his career slipping away.

''If that were to happen after all the efforts I've made and all the money I've
spent,'' he added, ''my life would end up as a great big goose egg.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

AMERASIAN WAR ORPHANS COME TO U.S.

BYLINE: By NAN ROBERTSON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1757 words

DATELINE: AMHERST, Mass., April 16


The Vietnamese call them ''children of the dust.'' They are the despised, mixed-
race children of American fathers and Vietnamese mothers, one of the most
poignant legacies of the Vietnam War.

And now they are coming over here.

They are beginning to come in significant numbers because the Government of
Vietnam, for the first time since the American armed forces pulled out nine
years ago, is now pursuing an aggressive policy in cooperation with the United
Nations of locating these children and getting rid of them, legally, safely and
fast.

About 1,000 mixed-blood children from Vietnam, many half-black, reflecting the
predominantly black makeup of American ground forces, have been resettled in the
United States so far. Now a hundred Amerasian children are arriving every month,
a rate that is accelerating.

Most of the children are coming to the United States with their mothers, who
remember names and other facts making it possible to trace the fathers.

For these families, the persistant dream of reunion is fraught with ambiguity
and sorrow. Refugee experts say that only a minuscule number of fathers, 2
percent or less, want to see their Vietnamese children again.  There are several
reasons for their rejection.

''Life goes on and other bonds are forged,'' said Leo Dorsey, until recently
director of the International Institute of Boston, a refugee agency. ''The men
don't want to create problems with their existing families by raising the
specter of another woman and children in their background.''

Mr. Dorsey added that many of the relationships between American men and
Vietnamese women were ''opportunistic on both sides, not likely to produce
feelings of loyalty and commitment.'' Further, he said, ''after the Communists
took over in 1975, the mothers feared their association with Americans would
cause them to be mistreated, and all communication between them and the U.S.
stopped. They also destroyed all documents, including photos, that would prove
that connection.''

In one sense, the nine Vietnamese- American children just arrived in this
college-rich area around Amherst are lucky. They are orphans and ''unaccompanied
minors'' without any known relatives in Vietnam or the United States. Nine to 14
years old, they have come bearing documents such as the following, signed by the
Vietnamese Government:

''Lam, Binh, male, born in Ho Chi Minh City in 1975, is an Asian-American
orphan, whose mother and father are dead, unknown, have disappeared and left the
child to be raised by the Government of Vietnam.'' They are not being encouraged
to believe they will find their fathers, even if the fathers are alive.

But the seven foster families in the Amherst area have greeted their new
children with such enthusiasm and love that the nine orphans, at first
frightened and untrusting, are beginning to open up like morning glories.

Estimates on Children


How many Amerasian children are left in Vietnam? The best estimate possible from
the State Department and refugee agencies is that there are from 8,000 to 10,000
Vietnamese-American children in and around Ho Chi Minh City, formerly Saigon,
alone. There is no formal count on others in Vietnam's provinces, but John A.
Shade Jr., executive director of the Pearl S. Buck Foundation, which has focused
entirely on the plight of Amerasian children since 1964, estimates the number in
all of South Vietnam at 25,000 to 40,000.

On this side of the world, nearly all of these children, like others before them
from previous wars fought by Americans abroad, had been ignored both by the
United States Government and the men who fathered them. In October 1982,
however, Congress amended the immigration law to recognize Amerasian children as
the sons and daughters of American citizens.

Religious and other volunteer agencies are resettling the refugee children all
over the country. There are special reasons, however, for the choice of this
area in western Massachusetts.

Marlena Brown of Lutheran Child and Family Services, which has resettled this
group of Amerasian refugee children and is nationally sharing with the United
States Catholic Conference the task of finding foster care, points out that the
Amherst area is multiracial, multilingual and tolerant of outsiders. Four of the
five colleges around here - the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Mt.
Holyoke and Smith - have a total of 65 Vietnamese students able to be big
brothers and sisters. There are also numerous, recently settled Vietnamese
families.

Dramatic Changes Seen

None of the orphans speak more than a few words of English yet. Most are very
tiny for their age because of worms and malnutrition, and all were reared from
birth in institutions where life was drab and sometimes harsh. Several weeks in
this country, at home and in school, have made a dramatic difference in some of
the children.

The group of nine, none of whose members are related, arrived March 26 at the
Logan Airport in Boston. David Rosenberger, an official of the Luthern agency,
described the scene:

''There they came, down the tunnel from the plane. They seemed more tattered and
neglected than even the Cambodians we had seen in the refugee camps in Thailand.
I don't think I ever felt more moved, seeing those kids. They were the people we
left behind. Yet they are the true survivors. There is steel in those little
bodies.''

Beryl Ohlson, a nurse with five fair- haired children of her own who has also
been foster mother for more than a year to a retarded Cambodian boy, said: ''We
saw the children all huddled together. We focused in on Yen right away. We
couldn't take our eyes off her. She was so absolutely beautiful.''

Her daughters, Anna-Stina, 16, and Kiersten, 12, began opening parkas and
peering at the children's name tags inside. When Anna-Stina reached Yen Vu, aged
12, a black, finely featured child of exceptional beauty and verve, she read the
name tag and cried: ''It's her! Mom, it's her!'' The mother said, ''I was
already in love with Yen.''

This is the first such acceptance these Amerasian children have ever known. The
''children of the dust'' epithet that followed them and those like them of mixed
blood back in Saigon was explained by Lucy Nguyen. Mrs. Nguyen fled Vietnam in
1975 with her four daughters, was finally rejoined here by her Vietnamese
husband and is now a teacher of French at Amherst College and the Lutherans'
bilingual Vietnamese case worker in the Amherst area.

'Children of the Dust'


''Everyone called them bui doi - children of the dust - worthless, throwaway
things,'' she said. ''They were at the mercy of the wind, and of time.''

They were jeered at and discriminated against, she said, not only on racial
grounds, but also for political and moral reasons: because Amerasian
''half-breeds'' are vivid, living reminders of the bitterness of the war waged
by Americans on Vietnamese soil, and of their long liaisons or fleeting
encounters with Vietnamese women. The Vietnam Government has denied that the
mixed-blood children are social outcasts, saying that all Vietnamese children
have suffered and are victims of war.

But, ''these children are really not wanted by the Vietnamese, who consider them
a burden on the state,'' Mrs. Brown of the Lutheran agency insists. ''They all
show a lifetime of neglect, emotionally and medically. We chose them at random
because we consider all of them to be equally needy. As for the foster parents,
we look for people who are flexible, who are problem- solvers and who have, if
you will, a world view and would understand children of a different culture.''

Pledge for Long-Term Homes


Almost all of the foster parents have agreed to give the Amherst orphans
long-term homes. ''These children are anything but impermanent,'' Mr.
Rosenberger said. ''Chances are we will keep them at least until their
majority.''

Most of the orphans seemed alert, even fascinated with the goings- on at home
and at local schools, where they are learning English but cannot yet participate
properly in class. In every case but one, there are biological children already
in the foster family.

David Slade's 12-year-old son, Jody, grabbed scrappy little Duong Le, whose age
is given as 13 but is about as tall as an 8-year-old, and hugged the Vietnamese
boy to him to show the difference in heights. ''Would you believe that Duong is
older than me?'' Jody asked, as Duong wriggled out of the embrace.

The other new addition in the little Victorian house of Mr. Slade, who is
divorced, is Rang Thach, 14. At first Rang jumped at sudden noises, such as
ringing telephones, but he is much less nervous now. He told Mrs. Nguyen that
the reason that he had been abandoned and put in an orphanage was because he was
black.

'They Want to Participate'


Now he is wreathed in smiles much of the time, directed mainly at his new, white
brother and father. ''I'm amazed how he and Duong pitch in to chop things for
dinner or clear the table,'' Mr. Slade said. ''They want to participate. My son
always has six reasons why he can't do the dishes. And there isn't a thing I've
given them that they haven't eaten.''

There have been some problems, such as balkiness at eating a strange diet and
fear of needles and other medical paraphernalia in physical examinations.

Barbara Ayers, the guidance counselor at a school in nearby Granby, described
the Vietnamese-American orphans as ''much less trusting at first'' than the
Cambodian refugee children who came here with their families in the past two
years. ''The orphans are more withdrawn, but that's changing already,'' she
said. ''After all, they've been institutionalized all their lives. They haven't
had the exposure to the outside world the Cambodians have had.''

'Terribly Responsive to Love'


At Beryl Ohlson's house, Yen Vu tumbled about like a puppy, giggling, hugging
and kissing her two new sisters, Anna-Stina and Kiersten. Bit by bit, she has
moved all her new possessions from her own bedroom into Anna- Stina's bedroom,
and now sleeps there. Mrs. Ohlson calls her ''terribly affectionate, terribly
responsive to love.''

What would happen, Mrs. Ohlson was asked, if Yen's real father ever showed up?
She set her lips. ''I'd meet him at the front door with my lawyer,'' she said.
''Nobody is going to take her away from me.''

She was equally vehement on another point. ''I think every single Amerasian
child should be in this country,'' she said. ''I think we owe it to them.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 2, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, a dispatch from Amherst, Mass., on April 18 about
Amerasian war orphans in the United States incorrectly characterized the racial
makeup of American ground forces in the Vietnam war. They were predominantly
white.


GRAPHIC: photos of orphan children (page A25); photo of Binh Lam, an orphan

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM ATTACKS CONDEMNED BY U.S.

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 362 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


The Administration today condemned new Vietnamese attacks along the
Thai-Cambodian border as a threat to Thailand's security and pledged to stand by
its commitments to Thailand.

A State Department spokesman, John Hughes, said Vietnamese troops overran three
Cambodian refugee camps near the Thai border Sunday and shelled a fourth. He
said more than 75,000 refugees and others had been forced to flee, most going
into Thailand.

Mr. Hughes said, ''Such Vietnamese attacks along the Thai border highlight the
threat to Thailand's security posed by Vietnam's occupation of Kampuchea,'' as
Cambodia is called.

President Reagan told Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda, Prime Minister of Thailand, at a
meeting in Washington last week that he would approve the sale of 40 M-48 tanks
to Thailand to help improve its border defenses, according to American
officials.

Mr. Hughes also criticized new Soviet amphibious exercises in Vietnam, saying
Moscow was continuing a military buildup in Southeast Asia, particularly
Vietnam.

Meanwhile, the Defense Department said Vietnam had postponed a meeting to
discuss American servicemen still missing from the Vietnam War.

Pentagon officials said there was no sign Vietnam had retreated from its
previous willingness to try to resolve the issue of some 2,500 Americans still
missing. They said the talks were expected to be rescheduled soon.

Thai Jets Attack a Hill

BAN SANGAE, Thailand, April 17 (AP) - Thai air force jets attacked a hill on the
Thai side of the border with Cambodia where Vietnamese troops were believed to
have intruded, an army spokesman said today.

In Bangkok Col. Pobsuk Suttaranand said Thai warplanes struck Hill 450 in
Thailand's Surin province Monday after reports that Vietnamese troops might be
hiding there after shooting down a Thai observation plane Sunday.

Colonel Suttaranand said that Thai troops had moved in to sweep the area, but
that he had no other details.

Prince Norodom Ranaridh, personal representative of the Cambodian resistance
leader Prince Norodom Sihanouk, said in Bangkok that Vietnamese forces were
expected to attack his headquarters at Tatum in a few days.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WEDNESDAY, APRIL 18, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


A London police officer was killed and 10 people were wounded as machine- gun
fire from the Libyan Embassy raked a group of Libyans protesting the Government
of Muammar el-Qaddafi. The police, who said the shots were fired by a lone
gunman without warning, surrounded the building. The gunman and staff members of
the embassy remained behind locked doors and shuttered windows into the night.
(Page A1, Column 6.)

The C.I.A. directed a sabotage raid against the key Nicaraguan port of Corinto
last October, destroying 3.2 million gallons of fuel and forcing the town's
evacuation, according to Congressional informants. They said that, like the
mining of Nicaragua's harbors that began in January, the Corinto raid was
carried out by Latin mercenaries working for the C.I.A. who reached the port by
speedboat from an offshore mother ship where American intelligence agents
directed the operation. (A1:2.)

Salvadoran rebels are now receiving mostly ammunition, not weapons, from
Nicaragua, according to the military commander of an area in which the
guerrillas have been active. (A1:3-4.)

The President defended his policy in Central America, saying that debate on it
had ''strayed too far from reality'' and asserting that more United States
military aid to the region was urgently needed. Mr. Reagan made the remarks to a
group of prominent Hispanic Americans at a White House luncheon. (A13:1.)

A top-level dispute at The Observer, Britain's oldest Sunday newspaper, has
erupted over competing interests of business and journalism. Employees of the
paper said the dispute between the new owner and the editor, Donald Trelford,
could end in Mr. Trelford's dismissal or with a change in the paper's ownership.
(A3:1-3.) National

Surprise searches for illegal aliens were upheld by the Supreme Court in a
7-to-2 ruling. The Justices, overturning a lower court's decision, ruled that
immigration officials looking for the aliens may conduct unannounced raids on
factories and businesses. (A1:1.)

Vietnam's mixed-race children are beginning to enter the United States in
significant numbers for the first time because the Vietnamese Government has
begun to cooperate with the United Nations in locating the children of American
fathers and Vietnamese mothers and getting rid of them. Most of the children are
coming to the United States with their mothers, who plan to trace the fathers
despite expectations of rejection. (A1:1-3.)

John Z. DeLorean was rebuffed by a Federal bankruptcy judge in Detroit. The
judge denied Mr.DeLorean's claim to about $900,000 from the estate of his
bankrupt auto company before a panel of unsecured creditors received any money
from its liquidation. (A14:1-5.)

The independent counsel investigating Edwin Meese 3d was asked by Senator Edward
M. Kennedy to examine whether the Presidential Transition Foundation Mr. Meese
headed in 1980 and 1981 had complied with Federal tax laws. (A28:1-4.)

More stringent pollution controls to reduce the discharge of toxic substances
into water supplies will be adopted by the oil industry under a settlement with
an environmental group and the Environmental Protection Agency. The settlement
of a suit brought by the environmental group, the Natural Resources Defense
Council, requires that refineries reduce toxic pollution discharges by nearly
400,000 pounds a year. (A15:1-2.)

Gen. Mark W. Clark died of cancer and heart disease at a Charleston, S.C.,
hospital at the age of 87. General Clark's capture of Rome in 1944 highlighted a
sometimes controversial career spanning both world wars and the Korean War.
(B7:1-4.)

The first Sumerian dictionary is being prepared by scholars at the University of
Pennsylvania. The team of specialists in the cuneiform writing of ancient
Mesopotamia will issue the first volume next month. When completed, the
Pennsylvania Sumerian Dictionary is expected to revolutionize the study of the
world's first great civilization, which created the first written language.
(A1:2-4.) Metropolitan

Glen Cove's two-year ban on the use of municipal recreational areas by Soviet
personnel living in the Nassau County city would be lifted under an agreement
between the Mayor and the City Council majority leader. The full Council is
expected to follow their recommendation. (A1:4-5.)

Creation of a medical school that would stress the training of black and
Hispanic doctors was said to have been tentatively agreed on by the Cuomo
administration and the City University of New York. The proposed school would be
established in Queens and it would, in return for comparatively low tuition
costs, require graduates to practice for at least several years in medically
underserved areas. (A1:5-6.)

Some headway was reported by a police official in the investigation of Sunday's
execution-style murders of 10 people, including 8 children, in a house in the
East New York section of Brooklyn. A force of 75 detectives questioned
relatives, neighbors and acquaintances. (B3:6.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 18, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

GEN. MARK W. CLARK, LAST OF WORLD WAR II COMMANDERS, DIES AT 87

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1830 words


Gen. Mark W. Clark, whose capture of Rome in 1944 highlighted a sometimes
controversial career spanning both world wars and the Korean War, died early
yesterday at the Medical University of South Carolina Hospital in Charleston. He
was 87 years old and a resident of Charleston.

A hospital spokesman, Charles Gudaitis, said General Clark died of cancer and
heart trouble. He had entered the hospital on March 20 for tests.

General Clark came to prominence with the planning and execution of the North
African invasion of November 1942. As commanding general of the Fifth Army and
then of the 15th Army Group, the Fifth plus the British Eighth Army, he was a
key figure in the Mediterranean theater campaign.

General Clark, the last of the top five United States Army commanders of World
War II, led American efforts in the war with Generals George S. Patton Jr.,
Douglas MacArthur, Dwight D. Eisenhower and Omar N. Bradley.

Conqueror of Rome


In addition to a historic meeting in Rome with his corps commanders, held June
5, 1944, on Capitoline Hill, the campaign involved him in the Anzio beachhead
mission of Jan. 22, 1944, the costly charge of the 36th Division at the Rapido
River, and the bombing of the Abbey at Monte Cassino three weeks later.

In his 1950 book, ''Calculated Risk,'' General Clark acknowledged that the
failure at the Rapido was a ''serious blow,'' but he said he believed the
assault there had been essential to permit the ''spectacular end run'' at Anzio.
The landing, to divert German forces from Cassino, was achieved virtually
without casualties. It was followed, however, by weeks of bloody battle.

With regard to the bombing of the abbey atop Monte Cassino, a height from which
the Germans commanded the juncture of two roads to Rome, General Clark said he
authorized it only after Gen. Bernard Freyberg of the New Zealand Corps insisted
it was a military prerequisite to a breakthrough there. ''I was never able to
discover on what he based his opinion,'' General Clark wrote of General
Freyberg.

Commander of Occupation


After the collapse of the German forces, General Clark became commander of
United States Occupation Forces and High Commissioner in Austria. Later, as a
Deputy United States Secretary of State, he helped negotiate a treaty for
Austria.

In 1949-50, General Clark was Chief of Army Field Forces, stationed at Fort
Monroe, Va. In October 1951, President Truman nominated him to be Ambassador to
the Vatican but dropped the idea amid criticism by Protestants.

General Clark was sent to Tokyo in April 1952 to succeed Gen. Matthew B. Ridgway
as United Nations Commander in Korea and Commander in Chief of the United States
Far East Command. He signed the Korean armistice on July 27, 1953, and initiated
the difficult prisoner exchange that followed before retiring in October of that
year.

The next spring General Clark became president of The Citadel, the military
college at Charleston, a position he held until 1965.

Nixon Bombing Order Praised


In the early 1970's, General Clark was hawkish on the war in Indochina even as
popular pressures for American withdrawal echoed in the halls of Congress. He
praised President Nixon for ordering the bombing of North Vietnam and advocated
a stronger military to deter adversaries.

The feat that first brought General Clark to public attention was a dramatic
voyage by submarine to North Africa in October 1942. General Eisenhower, his
superior in the European Theater of Operations and longtime friend, had asked
him to go into French Morocco, then hostile, to meet with French officers loyal
to the Allied cause.

General Clark and a team of officers were able return to London with vital
information to prepare the North African invasion and campaign.  For his role,
General Clark was decorated by General Eisenhower with the Distinguished Service
Medal. And his coinciding promotion to lieutenant general made him, at the age
of 46, the youngest three-star general in the Army.

When American and British forces landed in North Africa, General Clark was
General Eisenhower's deputy. ''The fact that land resistance was not great
anywhere,'' General Eisenhower once said, ''testifies to the success of Clark's
mission.''

Part of General Clark's task was to work with Adm. Jean Francois Darlan, who
turned on Marshal Henri-Philippe Petain's Government after the landings. This
collaboration with former Vichy officials drew censure in some Allied quarters
but was upheld as a matter of military expediency.

General Clark's most important combat assignment was command of the Fifth Army,
which he organized and trained in North Africa in 1943 for the invasion of
Italy. It was the first American unit to reach the European continent in World
War II.

Meanwhile, the Seventh Army, led by General Patton, invaded Sicily in July 1943,
and with the British Eighth Army, led by Gen. Sir Bernard Montgomery, conquered
Sicily in just 38 days.

The Fifth Army landed at Salerno, south of Naples, on Sept. 9, 1943, while
General Montgomery's troops crossed the Strait of Messina from Sicily at the toe
of the Italian boot to begin the bitter, difficult conquest of Italy. It took
the Allied forces 20 months to advance the 600 mountainous miles to the Swiss
border, where the Germans surrendered in May 1945.

Tactics Drew Criticism


The tactics of the Italian campaigns drew some criticism, and General Clark bore
his share of it.

Entrenched in the mountains, the Germans under Field Marshal Albert Kesselring,
barred the way north with at least 20 divisions. General Clark noted afterward
that Allied ground forces outnumbered the defenders only for the final push into
the Po Valley, and then only barely.

With General Clark's Fifth Army on the west and the British Eighth Army on the
east, the Allies pushed up the Italian peninsula. For a long while they were
stopped by the German line based on Cassino. The 36th (Texas) Division was sent
to cross the Rapido just south of Cassino in January 1944, an attack that failed
utterly and cost 2,100 men in 24 hours.

In 1946, when his nomination for permanent rank of major general went to the
Senate, veterans of the 36th Division complained to Congress that General Clark
was an ''inefficient and inexperienced officer'' who had destroyed ''the young
manhood of this country wastefully and uselessly'' in the Rapido action. The
promotion, however, was confirmed after the War Department defended General
Clark.

The Germans also were ready for the next amphibious attempt in the Italian
campaign, the strike at Anzio, south of Rome, where, after landing, they soon
pinned the American invaders to a narrow beachhead for many days. The beachhead
was eventually relieved by pressure from the south, and Rome was occupied
without resistance June 4, 1944.

He Protested Loss of Troops


The Allies quickly drove the Germans north of Florence, but later the advance
was stalled again by a Kesselring stand in the Apennines outside Bologna, the
gateway to the Po Valley. Before that, part of the Allied force was diverted by
General Eisenhower for a flank attack on southern France in August, which
weakened the Italian front. General Clark protested this decision, but in vain.

At the end of 1944, he succeeded Field Marshal Viscount Harold Alexander as
commander of the 15th Army Group in Italy, consisting of American and British
troops, joined by Indians, South Africans, Australians, New Zealanders,
anti-Fascist Italians, as well as Polish, Jewish and Brazilian brigades.

With these forces, General Clark opened the final big push into the Po Valley in
April 1945 and brought about a German surrender in the Alps on May 2, a week
before the final collapse of the Third Reich.

In the long campaign, General Clark was sometimes careless of his own safety.
At Salerno, he personally led a unit that knocked out a charge of 18 German
tanks. At Anzio, shellfire hit his landing craft and two men standing next to
him were wounded.

President Roosevelt personally pinned the Distinguished Service Cross for
Heroism on General Clark.

'Where Are Our Troops?'


In a typical episode of the campaign from Salerno to Naples, the plain- spoken
general lay beside a forward artillery observer watching Allied shelling of
stubborn but thinly entrenched German troops. ''Damn rear guard holding up a
whole division,'' he complained. ''Where are our troops?''

Swinging his binoculars toward a different view, he answered himself. ''Oh,
yeah. I see three of them. Crossing an open field. Why the hell don't they take
cover?''

Moments later he crawled to a field telephone in a slit trench and was talking
to a regimental commander. ''Of course, your battalion commander knows more
about the situation than I do,'' he said. ''But maybe we ought to get in there
fast and exploit this barage.'' Returning to an outpost, he said, ''We're going
to attack in half an hour.'' Then, hopping into a jeep , he rode off to inspect
another forward action.

Third-Generation Soldier


Mark Wayne Clark was a third-generation soldier.

He was born May 1, 1896, in Madison Barracks, N.Y. His parents were Col.
Charles C. and Rebecca Clark. He was reared in Army camps and went to West
Point, where he was commissioned in 1917.

He sailed for France in 1918 and was wounded in combat that June. After further
assignments in France and Belgium, he returned to the United States in mid-1919
and served in a series of Army posts.

He graduated from the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth,
Kan., in 1935, and from the Army War College in Washington two years later.

His next assignment was to the staff of the Third Division at Fort Lewis, Wash.
He briefly served as Chief of Staff of the Army Ground Forces before taking
command of ground forces in the European Theater of Operations in June 1942.

Some postwar critics, including the author Dan Kurzman in ''The Race for Rome''
in 1975, accused General Clark of letting the glory of beating fellow Allied
commanders to the Italian capital in the spring of 1944 take precedence over
trapping the Germans before they could retreat north to fight another day.

But such arguments went unspoken when, in 1975, General Clark, led an American
Fifth Army contingent at ceremonies at the American military cemetery in
Nettuno, Italy, where 7,000 G.I.'s lay buried on the seaside near Rome. General
Clark also visited Rome, where President Giovanni Leone presented him with
Italy's highest award, the Grand Cross of the Order of Merit of the Italian
Republic.

General Clark was married in 1924 to Maurine Doran, who died in 1966 on her 74th
birthday. His second marriage was to Mary Millard Applegate, who survives. Also
surviving is a son, William Doran Clark of Washington, and five grandchildren.

A funeral service is scheduled for noon tomorrow at The Citadel, with burial
afterward on the campus.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Mark Clark and Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
FEAR OF CHANGE

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 796 words

DATELINE: BOSTON , April 18


Last month, near the end of his struggle with cancer, former Senator Frank
Church made a passionate appeal to his country to learn to live with revolution
in the third world. Writing in The Washington Post, he said the habit of seeing
Communism behind every change - and of opposing change by force - had done
terrible damage to U.S. interests.

I thought of Senator Church's words this week as we learned more about the
C.I.A. war on Nicaragua. For the new disclosures gave dramatic emphasis to a
vignette that he offered as a human example of the misunderstanding that
bedevils our policy in Central America. The story was about Henry Kissinger and
his commission on that policy.

The Kissinger commission visited Managua and met Sandinista leaders last Oct.
15. By all reports it was a bristling occasion. The commissioners found the
Nicaraguans truculent, showing off their access to Soviet intelligence. The
occasion was evidently useful to Mr. Kissinger in pushing the commission to the
conclusion that U.S. national security is threatened in Central America.

Senator Church looked at what must have been the feelings of the Nicaraguans
that day. They had defeated the U.S.-supported Somoza dictatorship. Now they
faced U.S.- supported ''contras'' who were trying to overthrow them. They saw
Henry Kissinger as a destabilizer of the Allende Government in Chile, and his
commission as a facade for the contras' campaign. Just five days before the
meeting, on Oct. 10, the contras had blown up three million gallons of fuel in
an attack on the Nicaraguan port of Corinto.

''Is it any wonder,'' Senator Church asked, ''that there was no meeting of
minds?''

No, and there would have been even less wonder - less tendency to credit Henry
Kissinger's disdain for the uncouth Nicaraguans - if we had known then what we
do now. For this week we learned that the sabotage raid on Corinto Oct. 10 was
directed by the C.I.A.  The Associated Press reported that C.I.A. agents ran the
operation from a ''mother ship'' off the port, sending Latin mercenaries in to
do the job on speedboats supplied by the C.I.A. It was ''totally a C.I.A.
operation,'' one source said. The point is not that the Sandinistas are gentle
souls; they hardly could be. Revolutions are not usually, as Senator Church
said, ''romantic or pleasant,'' but they happen. And the question is whether the
United States will do better for itself by trying to get along with the forces
of economic and social change or by fighting them.  Recent history provides one
powerfully illuminating example of that choice and its effects on America. The
example is the People's Republic of China. President Reagan might try thinking
about it as he travels there next week.  For 30 years American Governments
refused to accept the Chinese Revolution. They excoriated what they called Red
China. They parachuted C.I.A. agents into the country.  They kept the People's
Republic out of the United Nations. They fought the Vietnam War, as Richard
Nixon and others explained, in order to hold back the Red Chinese hordes.

Then one day Mr. Nixon changed his mind. He decided that American interests
would be better served by getting along with the People's Republic - and so
would his political interests. He began a process that Jimmy Carter carried on
to normal diplomatic relations with Peking, and on to political cooperation in
the world. Even Ronald Reagan, for all his fulminations against the People's
Republic, has apparently got the message that we do better by relating to it
than by fighting it.

Communism also turned out not to be a winning ideology in Asia. Despite the
outcome of the Vietnam War, the momentum today is with the capitalist areas of
the region: Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore. Senator Church put
it: ''You don't hear Asians describing Communism as the wave of the future.''

The lesson is plain enough. In dealing with revolutionary governments, the
strength of the United States does not lie in war, covert or otherwise. It lies
in the open economy - and the open society.

What is so puzzling about our inability to accept the fact of revolutionary
changes in the third world is that we so obviously harm ourselves. We armed an
expeditionary force against Fidel Castro, we repeatedly tried to assassinate
him, we have embargoed trade with Cuba for decades - and by all that we have
made Mr. Castro into a heroic figure. We also made him ever more dependent on
Soviet support.

The self-defeating fear is not new, but the Reagan Administration has carried it
to new extremes. Some of us yearn, with Frank Church, for the day ''we stop
trying to repress the irrepressible and exchange our unreasonable fear of
Communism for a rekindled faith in freedom.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodia Rebels Report Killing 100 Hanoi Troops

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 102 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 18


Anti-Communist guerrillas from Cambodia said they beat Vietnamese troops
attacking a key rebel base today, killing more than 100 soldiers along the
Thai-Cambodian border.

Maj. Kon Saruen, commanding a battalion of the Khmer People's National
Liberation Front, said his men repulsed a Vietnamese infantry charge on the
fringes of Ampil, 25 miles northeast of the Thai border.

Major Saruen said only four of his guerrillas were killed and that six others
were wounded.

The guerrillas are fighting to topple the Vietnamese-installed Government in
Phnom Penh and oust the 170,000 Vietnamese troops in Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SOME OTHER YEAR, MAYBE, BUT NOT THIS TIME

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1089 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


The calls started coming into his office around the turn of the year, one or two
a week at first. Now there are half a dozen or more every day.

Many have a pleading quality. ''Please get into it. Please run.''

The reply is always the same. ''I am not a candidate for President of the United
States. If drafted, I will not run.''

That is about as unequivocal as things get in Presidential politics. But hope -
or skepticism - springs eternal when it comes to Presidential politics and
Senator Edward M. Kennedy. No matter how hard the Massachusetts Democrat knocks
down the pleas and the speculation, they keep popping up again.

The Senator's highly visible role in the debate about Central America has again
led to increased conjecture about his motives and goals. He had not been in the
news much up until a couple of weeks ago.

Nothing 'Else in Mind'


Mr. Kennedy says that he is not after publicity, that he jumped into the Central
America debate only because he fears the United States may be edging into
another Vietnam. He wants to to be a good senator, nothing more, he insists.

''The only thing I'm trying to do is call attention to a problem that I've had
an interest in for a long time,'' he said the other day during a discussion
about his role in American politics. ''I don't have anything else in mind.''

Some of the faithful refuse to take no for an answer, among them Willie Brown,
Speaker of the California Assembly, and Matthew Flynn, chairman of the
Democratic Party in Wisconsin. They have been talking about somehow getting the
Senator into the 1984 race, ignoring his statement in December 1982 in which he
said he would not be a candidate this year and choosing instead to remember his
last words at the 1980 convention in New York: ''And the dream shall never
die!''

But, generally speaking, most political professionals seem to be taking Mr.
Kennedy at his word as far as 1984 is concerned. They do not see him getting
into the race or being drafted into it, and they say they believe him when he
says he will be out on the road in the fall, working for the Democratic nominee,
whether it is Walter F. Mondale or Gary Hart. Beyond that, however, all bets are
off.

'Not Going to Do It'


So what, if anything, is Mr. Kennedy up to?

His friends and aides say he is privately telling them exactly what he is saying
publicly. ''We are under strict instructions to knock down all talk that he is
going to run because he is not,'' a close associate said. ''He's just not going
to do it. Some other year? That's something else. This time around? It's not in
the cards, not his year, not in the works. No way.''

Still, Mr. Kennedy is not conducting himself in a political vacuum. There are
forces at work, and they appear to be carefully balanced and directed.

According to one of his close friends, he has spread the word in his office that
whenever his name comes up in public, it should come up in association with an
issue, not a political personality or political contest.

''He wants people to think of him in terms of ideas and beliefs at this point as
opposed to being a personality or a disruptive force in the nominating
process,'' the friend said. ''It's a delicate line. But it explains why he has
come down so hard on the Central American issue.''

Looking Ahead


Such a perception could serve Mr. Kennedy well. First, should he decide to run
in 1988 or even later, the distance back to his defeat in 1980 will not only be
greater but, more to the point, will seem greater as well. Second, in the 1980
contest he was frequently accused of having no new ideas with which to lead his
party, and at the same time of having flaws in his personality. Third, it leaves
him in good position to compete in the future, if necessary, with Gary Hart, who
also portrays himself as an ''ideas'' politician.

In an effort to assure that he is not too closely connected with the 1984
political fray, Senator Kennedy has also instructed his staff not to schedule
him on any television interview programs if a good part of the questioning might
center on his views of the 1984 race and whether he might get into it.

''We've been deliberately turning down most of the Sunday news shows for the
better part of a year,'' a Kennedy aide said. ''They just won't commit
themselves to a straight discussion of issues. We understand why, but
nevertheless we don't have to be a part of it if they won't concentrate on
issues. The Senator wants to talk about Central America, civil and women's
rights, the reindustrialization of the country, medical care, taxes - not
candidates and votes.''

Debating With Dole


To further his image as a politician of ideas, the Senator will take part in a
five-day-a-week radio program in which he will debate issues with Senator Bob
Dole, Republican of Kansas. Each of the programs will run only two minutes, but
they will be heard nationwide on a hundred or so stations.

Finally, Mr. Kennedy continues to try to win and influence friends with his
political action committee, the Fund for a Democratic Majority. In the last 18
months, through mail solicitations and ''mixers'' at his home and elsewhere, he
has raised more than $2.5 million, distributing it not only to Democrats running
for the House and Senate but also to young up-and-coming members of the party
competing for seats in state legislatures - ''the future,'' as a Kennedy aide
puts it.

In the fall, the Mr. Kennedy says, he will hit the road to raise money as well
as votes for the Democratic nominee. ''I can support either of them,'' he added.
''I think the debate so far has been pretty good.''

Considering a Speech


Has he considered what role he might play in July at the Democratic nominating
convention in San Francisco? ''Not really,'' he replied.

Some of his aides are mulling the matter, however. Their thinking is that he
should give a brief speech at a key moment, thereby keeping his profile high,
yet not so high that he seems to be stealing the limelight from the nominee. But
even that is speculative as far as the Senator is concerned.

''Look,'' he said, ''I've been living with speculation about me and the
Presidency since the 1960's. But the fact is that I've always ended up doing
what I said I was going to do. And in 1984 I say I'm not running.''

Would he care, then, to speculate on 1988?

''In 1988,'' he said, grinning broadly, ''I intend to support the Democratic
nominee.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 19, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WORKING PROFILE: SENATOR EDWARD M. KENNEDY;
SOME OTHER YEAR, MAYBE, BUT NOT THIS TIME

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1078 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


The calls started coming into his office around the turn of the year, one or two
a week at first.  Now there are half a dozen or more every day.

Many have a pleading quality ''Please get into it. Please run.''

The reply is always the same, ''I am not a candidate for President of the United
States.  If drafted, I will not run.''

That is about as unequivocal as things get in Presidential politics.  But hope
of skepticism - springs eternal when it comes to Presidential politics and
Senator Edward M. Kennedy.  No matter how hard the Massachusetts Democrat knocks
down the pleas and the speculation, they keep popping up again.

The Senator's highly visible role in the debate about Central America has again
led to increased conjecture about his motives and goals.  He had not been in the
news much up until a couple of weeks ago. Nothing 'Else in Mind'

Mr. Kennedy says that he is not after publicity, that he jumped into the Central
America debate only because he fears the United States may be edging into
another Vietnam.  he wants to be a good senator, nothing more, he insists.

''The only thing I'm trying to do is call attention to a problem that I've had
an interest in for a long time,'' he said the other day during a discussion
about his role in american politics.  ''I don't have anything else in mind.''

Some of the faithful refuse to take no for an answer, among them Willie Brown,
Speaker of the California Assembly, and Matthew Flynn, chairman of the
Democratic Party in Wisconsin.  They have been talking about somehow getting the
Senator into the 1984 race, ignoring his statement in December 1982 in which he
said he would not be a candidate this year and choosing instead to remember his
last words at the 1980 convention in New York: ''and the dream shall never
die!''

But, generally speaking, most political professionals seem to be taking Mr.
Kennedy at his word as far as 1984 is concerned.  They do not see him getting
into the race or being drafted into it, and they say they believe him when he
says he will be out on the road in the fall, working for the Democratic nominee,
whether, it is Walter F.  Mondale or Gary Hart.  Beyond that, however, all bets
are off.

So what, if anything, is Mr. Kennedy up to?

His friends and aides say he is privately telling them exactly what he is saying
publicly.  ''We are under strict instructions to knock down all talk that he is
going to run because he is not,'' a close associate said.  ''He's just not going
to do it.  some other year?  That's something else.  This time around?  It's not
in the cards, not this year, no in the works.  No way.''

Still, Mr. Kennedy is not conducting himself in a political vacuum.  There are
forces at work, and they appear to be carefully balanced and directed.

According to one of his close friends, he has spread the word in his office that
whenever his name comes up in public, it should come up in association with an
issue, not a political personaltity or political contest.

''He wants people to think of him in terms of ideas and beliefs at this point as
opposed to being a personality or a disruptive force in the nominating
process,'' the friend said.  ''It's a delicate line.  But it explains why he has
come down so hard on the Central American issue.''

Such a preception could serve Mr. Kennedy well.  First, should he decide to run
in 1988 or even later, the distance back to his defeat in 1980 will not only be
greater but, more to the point, will seem greater as well.  Second, in the 1980
contest he was frequently accused of having no new ideas with which to lead his
party, and at the same time of having flaws in his personality.  Third, it
leaves him in good position to compete in the future, if necessary, with Gary
Hart, who also protrays himself as an ''ideas'' politician.

In effort to assure that he is not too closely connected with the 1984 political
fray, Senator Kennedy has also instructed his staff not to schedule him on any
television interview programs if a good part of the questioning might center on
his views of the 1984 race and whether he might get into it.

''We've been deliberately turning down most of the Sunday news shows for the
better part of a year,'' a Kennedy aide siad.  ''They just won't commit
themselves to a straight discussion of issues.  We understand why, but
nevertheless we don't have to be a part of it if they won't concentrate on
issues.  The Senator wants to talk about Central America, civil and women's
rights, the reindustrialization of the country, medical care, taxes - not
candidates and votes.'' Debating with Dole

to further his images as a politician of ideas, the Senator will take part in a
five-day-a-week radio program in which he will debate issues with Senator Bob
Dole, Republican of Kansas.  Each of the programs will run only two minutes, but
they will be heard nationwide on a hundred or so stations.

Finally, Mr. kennedy continues to try to win and influence friends with his
political action committee, the Fund for a Democratic majority. In the last 18
months, through mail solicitsations and ''mixers'' at his home and elsewhere, he
has raised more that $2.5 million, distributing it not only to Democrats running
for the House and Senate but also to young up-and-coming members of the party
competing for seats in state legislatures - ''the future,'' as a Kennedy aide
puts it.

In the fall, the Mr. kennedy says, he will hit the road to raise money as well
as votes for the Democrartic nominee.  ''I can support either of them,'' he
added.  ''I think the debate so far has been pretty good.''

Has he considered what role he might play in July at the Democratic nominating
convention in San Francisco?  ''Not really,'' he replied.

Some of his aides are mulling the matter, however.  their thinking is that he
hould give a brief speech at a key moment, there by keeping his profile high,
yet not so high that he seems to be stealing the limelight from the nominee.
But even that is speculative as far as the Senator is concerned.

''Look,'' he said, ''I've been living with speculation about me and the
Presidency since the 1960's.  But the fact is that I've always ended up doing
what I said I was going to do.  And in 1984 I say I'm not running.''

Would he care, then, to speculate on 1988?

''In 1988,'' he said, grinning broadly, ''I intend to support the Democratic
nominee.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: caricature of Senator Edward Kennedy

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COURAGEOUS FOES OF DRAFT REGISTRATION

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 401 words


To the Editor:


The remark by Wil Ebel of the Selective Service System that ''perhaps we should
not expect an incarcerated individual to have accurate and up-to-date
information'' (letter April 5) is an attempt to demean Edward Hasbrouck, whose
March 21 letter he answered, and all of us who share conscientious objection to
the settling of disputes through the violence of war. Registration is the first
step in the process of a military draft. The draft system is already set up and
ready to function.

Several months ago, Gen. Thomas Turnage, Director of the Selective Service
System, met with a small group of Quakers for dialogue concerning registration.
I recall that Mr. Ebel was also present. Our immediate concern was that the
registration forms now used do not provide a space to indicate that one is a
conscientious objector.

General Turnage said such things as ''If we let them get away with this (not
registering), next thing we know they'll be running red lights'' and ''It is
reprehensible to break the law; doesn't it ever occur to you people that there
are so few of you, you must be wrong?'' So much for meaningful dialogue.

In his letter, Mr. Ebel surely underestimates ''that rare individual who
determines to choose prison over registration.'' These rare young men know what
it means to accept responsibility for their actions and are willing to accept
the consequences of openly challenging a law they cannot, in good conscience,
obey - to stand in court and hear the clerk announce, ''The United States of
America against . . . .''; to face Federal prison; to become convicted felons.
President Reagan supports the virtues of prayer in public schools.
Paradoxically, in a recent news conference he indicated that war should have
been declared during the Vietnam conflict because that would have allowed
prosecution of protestors for treason. The young men now being prosecuted seek
to change a man-imposed law which defies the commandment ''Thou shalt not
kill.'' A decade ago, one of my sons was the only young man in the United States
serving time in Federal prison for refusing to register. He is, of course, still
a pacifist. Thank God for Ed Hasbrouck, Ben Sasway, Sam Matthews, Enten Eller,
David Wayte and all of the other young men with the courage of their
convictions. Theirs is true patriotism.

MARJORIE BAECHLER Glastonbury, Conn., April 7, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

CUOMO SIGNS RISE IN AID FOR TUITION ASSISTANCE

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 625 words


Governor Cuomo said yesterday that he had signed legislation raising student aid
by $48 million, the largest such increase ever. Most of the increase will go to
students at private colleges.

The legislation will increase aid to 250,000 full-time undergraduates, including
20,000 who will be eligible for the first time under new income limits.

Mr. Cuomo signed the bill Tuesday, and it will take effect next summer.

Under the new rules, 80 percent of the increased aid will go to students at
private colleges. The students have been faced with sharply increased tuition
costs in the last few years.

Importance of Program


''We are very pleased,'' said a vice president at the Commission of Independent
Colleges and Universities, James Ross. ''Tuition has increased faster than the
cost of living.''

''We are happy for whatever we can get,'' a spokesman for the City University,
Peter Barrett, said.

With their enrollments declining, public and private universities see state aid
as a key in controlling charges and attracting students.

In negotiations in the Legislature over a new state budget, the program was
linked to a decision to block a $200-a-year tuition increase at the public
universities.

Maximum Is Raised $500


The aid program for students at institutions in the state, called the Tuition
Assistance Program, will help 315,000, about half the full-time students in the
state next year. Established in 1974, it is the largest state-run student-aid
program in the country. Last year, it cost $340 million.

Most of the increase will go to raising the maximum award from $2,200 to $2,700.
Because this is higher than tuitions at the public universities, those students
will not receive the increase.

Under the new rules, students would be entitled to the full maximum if their
families earn $5,000 or less. The limit had been $4,000.

The rules would also expand eligibility to students with family incomes up to
$29,000, rather than the current $25,000. Students with incomes near the maximum
would receive minimum awards of $300, rather than $250.

Covers 41% of Tuition


Mr. Ross said that the increase in the maximum would fall short of an average
$600 increase in tuitions forecast for next year at private colleges. Tuitions
have increased 10 percent a year recently.

He said that the private colleges would press for further increases in the next
few years, until the awards cover 60 percent of average tuitions, as it did in
1974. With this year's increases, the aid covers 41 percent of the average
tuition of $6,500.

In negotiations, the Legislature also agreed to provide $3.2 million for Vietnam
veterans and $11 million for part- time students. But the bill for part-time
students has been held up in a dispute with Mr. Cuomo over distributing the
money.

Governor Cuomo also signed legislation intended to crack down on chop shops,
places that dismantle stolen cars for resale. The legislation makes it a felony
for shop owners to possess automobile parts with vehicle-identification numbers
that have been removed or altered.

The measure was introduced at the request of District Attorney Elizabeth
Holtzman of Brooklyn, who said prosecutors had had difficulty obtaining felony
convictions in shops where numerous altered parts were found. Under the new law,
any time five or more altered vehicles or parts are found, there would be a
presumption the owner knew the altered parts were in the shop.

In New York City, 91,075 cars were reported stolen last year, at an estimated
cost to consumers of $178 million. About 1,500 chop shops are believed to be
operating in the state.

The new crime would be punishable by up to four years in prison and a fine of up
to $5,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
 Accord Reached In Wiretap Case

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 164 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, April 19


A $1.75 million settlement has tentatively been reached in a police wiretapping
case involving more than 1,000 plaintiffs and the city of New Haven, officials
announced today.

The settlement calls for New Haven to pay the money over three years to
plaintiffs whose telephones were tapped in the late 1960's and 1970's. The
settlement needs approval from two city boards and a Federal judge.

The illegal wiretaps were made in a time of civil unrest in New Haven over the
anti-Vietnam War movement and the trial of several Black Panthers. The
surveillance included activists and reporters covering the demonstrations.

''This is a complete, 100 percent victory,'' said John Williams, the
coordinating counsel for the 1,233 plaintiffs. He said the settlement provides
each plaintiff with at least $1,000 and as much as $6,000.

Mayor Biagio DiLieto said he preferred not to characterize the settlement.

The settlement leaves a case pending against several police officials.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Books: Latin Overview By Barbara Crossette;

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 580 words


VIOLENT NEIGHBORS: El Salvador,

Central America and the United States.

By Tom Buckley. 343 pages. Times

Books. $17.95.  IN the impassioned but not always well-informed debate

over Central America, a book

with perspective and context has been long overdue. It is that kind of book Tom
Buckley has attempted to write: an overview of present turmoils set against the
tragic histories of small countries alternately neglected and bullied by
Washington.

It is also a look at the people, many of whom, the author writes, have trouble
understanding why the United States chooses to ignore their ''political fevers,
pains and problems'' until, its interest momentarily aroused, Washington
supposes that ''like physicians of the 18th century, it can cure them by
bloodletting.'' The title, ''Violent Neighbors,'' cuts both ways.


But this book is not a polemic written for a constituency. It is a work by an
author independent in his views and something of a loner in his methods. Neither
the left nor the right will find it satisfactory.  There are some weaknesses:
digressions, a little self-indulgent flippancy on occasion and, now and then,
the tantalizing introduction of an idea that is never fully developed. But the
author explains in a note to the reader that this book was intended to be a
casual, journalistic treatment of his subject. This may disappoint the scholar,
but not the ordinary reader.

The focus of ''Violent Neighbors'' is essentially El Salvador, where the author,
a former New York Times reporter with experience in Vietnam, has spent enough
time to appreciate the complexities and contradictions that are found even in so
small and politically and socially stunted a society. Mr. Buckley is widely
known as the writer who, in a New Yorker article in June 1981, gave American
readers one of the first well-rounded looks at Jose Napoleon Duarte, the
Christian Democrat who was attempting to hold the country together as head of a
ruling junta while the international left was trying to caricature him as
another Trujillo, Batista or Somoza. Mr. Duarte stands a good chance of becoming
Salvador's elected President on May 6, making Mr. Buckley's updated portrait of
the man timely reading.

''Violent Neighbors'' throws out interesting ideas worth more discussion. Mr.
Buckley, traveling throughout the isthmus, notes, for example, the inverse
relationship between economic growth and insurrection - a lesson for Washington
in Honduras, where a desperately poor nation is being sent a few hundred Peace
Corps workers but thousands of American troops. On Guatemala, he takes the
unfashionable line that the Protestant fundamentalism growing there may be a
positive phenomenon, offering wretched people the hope of self-improvement,
shared human responsibilities, literacy and an end to alcoholism.


This breezy and often irreverent book leaves us with a headful of images and
details: a Salvadoran family scavenging for valuables on a death-squad dumping
ground; hors d'oeuvres curling up in the heat; public plaques honoring beauty
queens; a Salvadoran press where political news has to be in the form of paid
advertisements, since journalists don't cover politics; the haggling over the
price of a kidnapping victim in Guatemala; a journalists' trek through the
Nicaraguan countryside in search of a phantom contingent of Cubans that turned
out to be one doctor from Havana too contemptuous of Americans to give the
author an aspirin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Jonathan Friendly

SECTION: Section C; Page 24, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1016 words


A MATTER OF HONOR. Gen. William C. Westmoreland Versus CBS. By Don Kowet. 317
pages. Macmillan. $16.95.

IN 1981, Ira Klein, then an editor at CBS News, was asked to help a producer,
George Crile, who had been assembling a documentary examining how military
commanders in Vietnam estimated the number of Vietcong and other forces their
soldiers were fighting. Mr. Klein, screening a completed interview with the
commander of the American troops, Gen. William C. Westmoreland, was impressed
with the forcefulness of the correspondent, Mike Wallace.

But then, writes Don Kowet, Mr. Crile astonished Mr. Klein by revealing that he
himself had prepared in advance not only the original questions but also the
follow-up ones. ''Klein had had no idea that Crile was scripting Wallace's
interviews, that Mike Wallace, America's most feared investigative reporter, had
merely been a puppet propped on George Crile's knee.''


CBS News is already unhappy with Mr. Kowet, co-author of a TV Guide article that
raised hard questions about some of the documentary's journalistic practices and
that contributed, according to General Westmoreland, to his decision to bring a
$120 million libel suit against the network. The anecdotes Mr. Kowet tells in
his book, and the judgments he renders, are already being attacked by CBS
executives who are battling in the law courts and the court of public opinion.

The book is largely an effort to flesh out questions about the making of the
90-minute documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.'' The program,
broadcast on Jan. 22, 1982, charged that commanders, anxious to avoid stirring
new domestic dissent about the war, conspired to give Washington a misleadingly
low estimate of enemy strength before the Vietcong's 1968 Tet offensive.

The TV Guide article by Mr. Kowet and Sally Bedell, now a reporter for The New
York Times, said that Mr. Crile repeatedly distorted accounts of events, that he
coddled sympathetic witnesses and that he left on the cutting-room floor
virtually all the evidence that contradicted the program's prejudgment of what
had happened in intelligence offices in Saigon. An internal investigation by CBS
upheld some of the article's conclusions about journalistic malpractice, but the
news organization said it still supported the basic conclusion about what the
commanders had done. (TV Guide dismissed Mr. Kowet from his $44,000-a-year job
because he insisted on writing the book and it insisted on having nothing
further to do with the controversy it had started.)

Mr. Klein's recollections, along with material drawn from the CBS internal
inquiry and Government documents, buttress Mr. Kowet's account.

But ''A Matter of Honor'' has a distinct and possibly fatal journalistic
weakness that curiously mirrors some of the problems of the documentary itself.
Mr. Kowet re-creates, often without attribution, events and conversations to
which he was not party, and in some cases he encourages readers to think the
moral worst of personal relationships that he does not then explore.

CBS says the author did not talk to the chief participants, ignored the
rebuttals by them available in court documents and relied too heavily on Mr.
Klein, whom CBS characterizes as a minor player with only peripheral information
about complex issues. Mr. Kowet says Mr. Klein's allegations are consistently
upheld by the documents he examined and that he has other sources for the events
he describes. He says he was rebuffed in efforts to interview Mr. Crile, Mr.
Wallace and others. The problems of getting to the CBS staff after the libel
suit started are obvious, but Mr. Kowet's book conceals the fact that he did not
get many of the major and minor players to give their versions of the events.

At one point, for example, he quotes an unidentified ''CBS source'' as saying
Mr. Wallace telephoned A. M. Rosenthal, the executive editor of The Times, to
protest a Times article about a Public Broadcasting Service program that
explored the same issues as the TV Guide article. Mr. Kowet then implies that
the call was at least partly responsible for an ''Editors' Note'' in which The
Times said its article had been too long and too prominentlly displayed. Both
Mr. Wallace and Mr. Rosenthal deny that Mr. Wallace made such a call, and they
say they would have told Mr. Kowet that but that he did not ask them.

The book also goes off track at the end, when Mr. Kowet tries to judge whether
there was, in fact, a conspiracy to falsify data. Mr. Kowet concludes that
President Lyndon B. Johnson knew accurately in advance how many troops the
Vietcong would throw into the Tet offensive and that the failure to mount a
second offensive showed the lower figures were essentially accurate. Thus, Mr.
Kowet finds, there could have been no conspiracy to keep the truth from the
White House. Mr. Kowet has a right to his opinions, but he is much better when
he sticks to the subject of journalistic conduct.


Indeed, one of Mr. Kowet's most interesting accomplishments is a documentation
of the military's fears that reporters covering the war would inevitably
misunderstand the sudden apparent rise in the official total of enemy forces
that would come from counting the irregular forces of village women and
children. If there was an effort to understate, he finds, it was not aimed at
confusing Washington, but at avoiding misleading headlines saying the danger to
American forces was growing. That is a useful insight into the mind set of the
Vietnam-trained commanders who more recently decided that reporters would only
have been in the way during the invasion of Grenada.

If the suit ever comes to trial, readers and viewers are likely to be inundated
with material drawn from Government files, from the recollections of the chief
civilian and military aides who supervised the war and from the journalists who
assembled the documentary. The book is helpful in identifying some of the actors
and the processes of decision making that shaped the program. But a reader
should be wary of taking it as revealed truth.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of a mechanical error, two paragraphs of the Books of The Times column
in Weekend yesterday, reviewing ''A Matter of Honor'' by Don Kowet, were printed
out of sequence. The two last paragraphs of the review were intended to appear
above the preceding two paragraphs.

GRAPHIC: photo of Don Kowet

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FIRST DAUGHTERS TELL OF WHITE HOUSE YEARS

BYLINE: By JUDY KLEMESRUD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 26, Column 2; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1117 words

DATELINE: GRAND RAPIDS, Mich., April 20


It was family day at the National Conference on First Ladies as three daughters
and a granddaughter of former first families discussed the joys and sorrows of
their years in the White House.

''It's like a fairy-tale role you enter into and then it's the end, but the
fairy tale never ends,'' said Susan Ford Vance.

''I always feel an empathy with anyone who lives at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue,''
added Luci Johnson Turpin. ''We've got to be able to empathize with each other,
because we're all we've got.''

These two former first daughters told of their experiences at a seminar today on
the last day of the two-day conference called ''Modern First Ladies: Private
Lives and Public Duties,'' at the Gerald R. Ford Museum here. It is believed to
be the first national conference to study the role of the American First Lady.

The panel members also included Lynda Johnson Robb and Eleanor Seagraves, the
first grandchild of Eleanor Roosevelt.

Being a President's grandchild rather than child meant you had ''all of the
pleasure and none of the pressure,'' said Mrs. Seagraves, who was known as
Sistie when she lived in the White House from 1933 to 1937.

And after she got married, she added, she gained ''complete anonymity,''
something she said she realized she was grateful for after she received a
telephone call in her hotel room during the conference from a woman who asked
her what kind of garlic pills her grandmother had taken to improve her memory.

''I'd forgotten those type of things could happen,'' she said with a smile.

The four women seemed almost as popular at the conference as the two former
First Ladies who attended, Rosalynn Carter and Betty Ford. For two days, the
first children spoke at seminars, press conferences, breakfasts, lunches and
dinners about what their lives had been like.



The Day Kennedy Was Shot

Mrs. Turpin, one of the conference's most enthusiastic participants, became
tearful as she told of the day President Kennedy was shot, and how a Secret
Service agent had come to her school and told her, ''Luci, I've come to take you
home.''

''I was only 13,'' she said, ''and I didn't know how to act or what to do. I
kept thinking, 'What happened to my father? Did he get shot, too?' Finally, I
did a very plebeian thing: I washed my hair, because my father always liked the
women in his family to look good. I didn't want him to come home and see me
looking like I'd been hit by a truck.''

Susan Ford Vance said her worst times came after the two assassination attempts
on her father.

''I remember miserable nights of nightmares,'' she said. ''After that I was
never comfortable when he went out in a crowd and I was always looking to see
whether he was wearing a bulletproof vest.''

All of the first daughters told of resentment they had felt toward their mothers
because they thought they were not receiving enough parental attention in the
White House. For Mrs. Turpin, it occurred whenever she would go to her mother's
room and find a pillow hanging on the doorknob that said, ''I want to be
alone.''

Mrs. Vance said that moving to the White House often means that old friends draw
away because they no longer know how to treat a first daughter and that new
people may want to become friends ''not because you're Susan, but because you're
the daughter of the President.''

Mrs. Seagraves said one of the ways her mother, Anna Roosevelt, tried to protect
her from getting ''false ideas about our station in life'' was to prevent her
from seeing photographs of herself in newspapers.

''I'm very grateful she did that,'' she said, ''because you never know how you
would have adjusted to that in later years.''

The first daughters seem to have mostly fond memories of their campaign
experiences. But Mrs. Turpin drew laughter when she told about the time she hid
in a closet in her room in the White House after she overheard her mother and
Jack Valenti agree that Luci should go campaigning on a weekend when she had two
dates.

''They came into my room and sat on the bed,'' Mrs. Turpin recalled. ''Finally I
walked out of the closet, and they told me I was going to Spearfish, South
Dakota. I didn't want to go to Spearfish; in fact, I wanted to give the people
the spear. But they turned out to be the nicest people in the world.''

Mrs. Seagraves said she and her brother, Buzzie, were occasionally used during
campaigns as ''decoration pieces, like Fala, the dog.''

''Sometimes,'' she said, ''celebrity children would be sicked on to us, like
Shirley Temple. Once she came up to Hyde Park, got out of her car like an
explorer, and said, 'Sistie and Buzzie, I believe.' ''



Vietnam Policies Defended

Several times during the conference, the Johnson sisters strongly defended their
father's policies in Vietnam. Mrs. Turpin, then married to Patrick Nugent, told
of sleeping in a White House bedroom facing Pennsylvania Avenue while her
husband was in Vietnam and hearing protesters chant: ''Hey, hey, L.B.J., how
many boys did you kill today?''

''The war was like a lance penetrating my father's stomach,'' she said. ''He
agonized, he wrenched, he labored. No one wanted the Vietnam War less than
Lyndon Johnson.''

Asked if she agreed with his policies, she said: ''I feel very proud of what my
father did with the information and circumstances he had.''

The three first daughters all agreed that they suffered whenever their parents
suffered and that they sometimes tried to do things to ease the tensions.

''Sometimes I would walk into my father's office with a very short gentleman and
say, 'We're engaged and are going to be married,' '' said Susan Ford Vance. ''Or
I would walk into Cabinet meetings and ask for my allowance, saying my mother
didn't have any money. These were the kind of things that helped you make it
through every day.''

The conference ended with a seminar in which the two former First Ladies and the
four children agreed that it was necessary to develop a ''tough skin'' to
survive criticism while in the White House.

''I did not have an affair,'' Mrs. Vance said, to laughter, referring to the
publicity, much of it critical, her mother had received while First Lady after
telling an interviewer that she wouldn't be surprised if her daughter had an
affair.

The panelists all agreed that there was much empathy among first families,
mainly because no one else could understand the kinds of things they go through.

Then the first family members shook hands, kissed one another goodbye and vowed
to stay in touch.

''Bye, Susan,'' Mrs. Robb said to Mrs. Vance, as she gave her a peck on the
cheek. Then, grinning devilishly, she added: ''And don't forget to pay your
taxes.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Betty Ford, Rosalynn Carter , Susan Ford Vance, Lynda Johnson
Robb, Luci Johnson Turpin and Eleanor Seagraves at conference

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA SAYS IT INFLICTED BIG LOSSES ON VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 469 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 20


China said today that over the last week its artillery killed or wounded several
hundred Vietnamese soldiers and destroyed guns and vehicles along its border
with Vietnam.

The Chinese report, which was carried by the official New China News Agency,
said Chinese frontier guards were retaliating against ''new'' armed provocations
''by the Vietnamese that wounded 12 Chinese.''

The report came a day after Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, told
journalists in Hanoi that the level of clashes, which were first reported early
this month, had remained about the same over the last two weeks.

Each side has blamed the other for starting the latest clashes, and the veracity
of the conflicting accounts or even the extent of fighting could not be
confirmed from here.

Today's claim of new artillery duels raised the possibility that the border
conflict could drag on during President Reagan's visit to China, which begins
next Thursday.

330,000 Chinese Troops

But the reported fighting has been confined to the frontiers of Yunnan Province
and the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region of southern China and seemed likely to
have little or no impact on Mr. Reagan's trip.

Western diplomats said earlier this week that they saw no signs of major Chinese
troop movements to reinforce the border areas, such as happened before Chinese
infantry and tanks swept into Vietnam for a short war in February 1979.

According to diplomatic estimates, China has about 330,000 soldiers stationed in
its three southernmost provinces. They confront some 600,000 Vietnamese soldiers
in northern Vietnam.

The reports of fighting have coincided with Vietnam's military campaign against
Cambodian guerrillas along the Thai-Cambodian border, prompting speculation that
China, which supports the resistance groups there, may be shelling Vietnam to
tie down Vietnamese troops who might otherwise be sent to fight in Cambodia.

'Fog of Invective'

China and Vietnam reported similar fighting a year ago. Those reports later
proved to be exaggerated, which has made diplomats here more cautious about
assessing rival claims through what one diplomat called the ''fog of
invective.''

Today's report by the New China News Agency said ''Chinese frontier guards in
Guangxi and Yunnan continued to hit back with artillery fire against armed
provocations by Vietnamese troops between April 12 and 19.''

''Several hundred Vietnamese soldiers were killed or wounded, a number of
Vietnamese field pieces and military vehicles destroyed or seriously damaged, in
addition to dozens of military installations,'' the press agency said.

The reported fighting appears to involve Chinese frontier guards, who were
detached from the army and given a separate designation, and Vietnamese militia
forces.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 459 words


Questions appear on page 9.

1. The Libyan Embassy was cordoned off after machine-gun fire from the building
raked a group of Libyans outside, protesting the Government of Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi. One person was killed and 10 were wounded.

2. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said he would resign as vice chairman of the
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence to protest what he said was a failure of
the Central Intelligence Agency to inform the committee ''properly'' about the
scope of United States involvement in the mining of Nicaraguan harbors. Senator
Goldwater, chairman of the committee, wrote a harsh letter last week to the
Director of Central Intelligence.

3. They are mixed-race children of American G.I.'s in the Vietnam War and
Vietnamese mothers, called ''children of the dust'' in their homeland. Some will
be adopted, but many are arriving with their mothers, hoping to trace their
long-lost fathers.

4. ''Diaries of Mario M. Cuomo, the Campaign for Governor.'' Former Gov. Hugh L.
Carey.

5. Theodor Seuss Geisel, better known as Dr. Seuss.

6. Prince Andrew of Britain sprayed members of his press entourage with white
paint.

7. Raids by immigration officials on factories and businesses to look for
illegal aliens.

8. Does not.

9. He won the Boston Marathon.  10. Lebanon. South-West Africa. Honduras.

11. The stone, believed to have been inscribed in approximately 2050 B.C., is
written in Sumerian. According to the editor of the world's first Sumerian
dictionary, which is to be issued next month, ''hallelujah'' was originally a
Sumerian word.

12. What used to be a standard 50- minute ''hour'' for psychoanalysis is
increasingly 45 minutes.

13. A foundation established to help pay costs of President-elect Reagan's
transition to office. The money was in addition to $2 million from the General
Services Administration.

14. The Green District Historic Commission debated whether Thomas Fitch of
Norwalk was the legendary Yankee Doodle of American folklore. At issue is
whether a model of a house, believed to have belonged to him, should be
constructed as a tourist attraction.

15. Fried chicken.

16. According to Congressional sources, the raid was directed by the Central
Intelligence Agency, and the raid, not the mining of Nicaragua's harbor, was the
first direct intervention by the agency in the fighting against the leftist
Nicaraguan Government.

17. For the first time since 1890, Chicago is no longer the nation's second most
populous city. Los Angeles is.

18. Ben Crenshaw won the Masters Tournament at the Augusta National Golf Club.

19. The Mayor and City Council of Glen Cove agreed to lift a two-year ban on the
use of municipal recreational areas by Soviet diplomats living in the city.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By William E. Farrell and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 605 words


For Truman at 100

Washington is preparing to commemorate the centennial of the birth of Harry S.
Truman, who died Dec. 26, 1972.

His birthday is May 8, but the ceremonies will begin April 29 at Washington
Cathedral. The 11 A.M. service will be attended by Truman's daughter, Margaret
Truman Daniel, and her husband, Clifton Daniel.

The music will be hymns the piano- playing President liked. Later events will
include a two-hour tribute at a joint session of Congress, with speeches by
Truman associates. The Army Band and Chorus will perform, among other things,
World War I songs.

The Smithsonian Institution has commissioned a 25-minute documentary film,
''Truman: A Self Portrait,'' offering some of Truman's characteristically pithy
observations as well as home movies. The film will be shown at the National
Museum of American History May 8-Sept. 1.

The Library of Congress has issued an updated list of references on Truman's
writing and books about him and his rise from a Missouri haberdashery to the
White House.

4th Hero's Kin Found

The the Marine Corps search

for relatives of four marines killed in battle in Korea, Vietnam and Haiti and
posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor has ended.

The purpose of the search was to inform the relatives that ships were to be
named for the men. Maj. Paul Wisniewski said yesterday that all four sets of
next of kin had now been found by readers of this column.

Pfc. James Anderson Jr.'s family, the last to be found, was located by a reader
who saw that the marine had attended Los Angeles Harbor Junior College.

Private Anderson was killed in Vietnam in 1967 when he jumped on a grenade to
protect comrades. He was the first black to receive the Medal of Honor for
heroism in Vietnam.

Lawfully Wed

It was, for law students, a dream

wedding.

On a recent weekend, Janet Rehnquist, a daughter of Associate Justice William H.
Rehnquist of the Supreme Court, was married to Joseph Lynch, a third-year
student at the University of Virginia Law School. Mrs. Lynch is in her second
year of law studies there.

After the ceremony, in a Lutheran church, the reception was held in one of the
Court's stately ceremonial rooms. A good time was had by all except the Court's
police force.

Normally, a skeleton staff is kept on duty on weekends. But, according to Court
sources, the force was considerably strengthened for the reception, and some
officers grumbled that their weekend had been disrupted.

Hopefully Yrs., Harvard

The current issue of the Yale

Alumni Magazine and Journal's data for the class of 1953 written by Silas
Spengler, says: ''As of this writing, Ed Meese is Reagan's appointment as
Attorney General. Hopefully by the time you read this his nomination will have
been confirmed.''

Edwin Meese 3d has not been confirmed, but a grammatical purist in Washington
saw and could not resist circulating the item because of the erring use of
''hopefully.''

The purist went to Harvard.

Politics and Soybeans

The Department of Agriculture

holds an annual ''outlook'' conference analyzing prospects for everything from
fertilizers to soybeans. This year the conference was scheduled for Oct. 29-Nov.
1. The time has been changed to Dec. 3-6; the Presidential election will be held
Nov. 6.

''When you come down to it, we just didn't want to mix politics with the
outlook,'' said Sally Michael, director of the conference. She said another
reason was that important information about the agricultural sector would be
buried in the press by pre- election articles and the conferees wanted as much
coverage as possible.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

MARKET-HUNTING IN 'PROGRESSIVE P.R.'

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 20


A press release turned up this month in reporters' mailboxes outlining the
schedules and public appearances of 11 European, Latin American and Canadian
figures, including a Nobel Peace Prize winner from Argentina and the film maker
Costa-Gavras, who had come to this country to protest United States
''intervention in Central America'' and express solidarity with Nicaragua.

Last month, in the few days before the presidential election in El Salvador,
another press release turned up in the same mailboxes.

It gave the locations and telephone numbers where political leaders of the
Salvadoran insurgents could be reached in Canada and Mexico for interviews about
the election.

These releases, on expensive-looking paper with a black top border, were the
work of Fenton Communications, a public relations concern that uses conventional
methods to promote some causes that are described as liberal, progressive,
left-wing or radical, depending on the perspective of the reader.

A Variety of Clients


The company also works for a variety of publishers, film makers and
environmental groups and for groups advocating nuclear disarmament and famine
relief.  Fenton Communications once worked for Runner's World Magazine, and it
now represents the Greek Government and the League of Women Voters' Presidential
primary debates.

It also represents a political action committee in the nuclear freeze movement.

Now the company is splitting up. David S. Fenton, who works out of a New York
office on West 57th Street, with six employees, has come to a parting of the
ways with Robert P. Pollock, who directed the concern's Washington office in its
first two years.

Both men say the disagreement involves business rather than ideology, Mr.
Pollock says he will open his own public relations company in Washington,
commenting, ''Now there will be two progressive public relations firms.'' Mr.
Fenton plans to retain his Washington office.

They Say There Is a Market


But both insist they have proved that a market exists for ''progressive P.R.''

Mr. Fenton said his company had survived solely on client billings, without
investment capital. He said he charged about $4,000 to $6,000 a month for
long-term clients, a fee he estimates is only about 30 to 40 percent of the
monthly retainers of large commercial public relations concerns.

''Our clients don't have a lot of money,'' Mr. Pollock said.

The Fenton company, which will continue to work on some projects with Mr.
Pollock's new company, handles numerous ''one shot'' projects, described as not
especially profitable.

An example was getting news media exposure for a coalition of members of the
clergy who wanted to dispute the findings of President Reagan's commission on
hunger, which had reported that hunger was not widespread in America.

Another example was briefly representing a group boycotting the Nestle Company
because of its sales of infant feeding formula in third world nations.

From the Vietnam Era


Both Mr. Fenton and Mr. Pollock are in their early 30's and are products of
Vietnam era causes. Mr. Fenton was once a photographer for the Liberation News
Service. In Michigan he joined an effort to help take over Ann Arbor's City
Council. He has also been the publicity director of Rolling Stone magazine. He
later helped organize antinuclear rock concerts at Madison Square Garden.

Mr. Pollock was a co-author of a book published in 1973, ''Vietnam: What Kind of
Peace?'' He then worked at the Indochina Research Center.

After that, for five and a half years, he directed Critical Mass, the
antinuclear project of Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate.

Mr. Fenton and Mr. Pollick use nearly identical language, saying they ''learned
the skills of professionally dealing with the press,'' something they say many
public interest groups have never really mastered.

Both men characterize most public relations operations as ''sleaze, hype,
manipulation and distortion.'' They say that their work is an effort to provide
journalists with useful, trustworthy facts and figures.

Brochure on Guerrillas

Although Fenton Communications produced a glossy brochure about the Salvadoran
leftist Opposition this year, Mr. Fenton and Mr. Pollock said they had never
been employed by the guerrillas or the Opposition political figures. The money
for that job, they said, came from a San Francisco foundation dominated by the
leftist National Lawyer's Guild.

In 1982, Mr. Fenton represented the Nicaraguan Government for a month, escorting
the Foreign Minister, the Rev. Miguel d'Escoto Brockmann, on a monthlong trip in
the United States. On an evening television program, Father d'Escoto staged a
spirited debate with Jeanne J. Kirkpatrick, the chief United States delegate to
the United Nations.

The only measure of success, Mr. Pollock said, ''is do you get your client's
story out.''

Earlier this year, when Mr. Pollock was still working for Mr. Fenton, he
arranged lunches in Washington for Guillermo Manuel Ungo, one of the Salvadoran
leftist leaders.

'Do It Right,' and in Style


Mr. Pollock says he favors good restaurants and press breakfasts at expensive
hotels like the Hay-Adams, near the White House.

''The conservative foundations and P.R. firms are the people we are going head
to head with,'' he said. ''Why should we surrender the Hay- Adams? We want to be
professional and to do it right.''

''Public relations,'' Mr. Fenton said, ''is actually very simple work. Ours
involves hard news and gaining exposure. We don't give clients a list of all the
press releases we wrote for them.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 8, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article on the Washington Talk page April 21, about publicity for liberal
causes, misidentified a public relations man who is opening a Washington office.
He is Richard P. Pollock.

GRAPHIC: photo of David S. Fenton

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CBS LOSES RULING TIED TO LIBEL CASE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 370 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 20


Richard Helms, a former Director of Central Intelligence, does not have to
submit to questioning on videotape for the CBS network's defense in a lawsuit
brought by Gen. William C. Westmoreland, retired, a Federal district judge ruled
today.

Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson also said the Central Intelligence Agency did not
have to produce a report done by its Office of the Inspector General and Review
Board in their investigation of alleged intelligence failures in Vietnam in
1960's, which General Westmoreland and CBS both sought.

Judge Jackson said, too, that the agency did not have to give CBS a ''draft
history'' of Mr. Helms's tenure as Director from June 1966 through February
1977.

General Westmoreland, former commander of United States forces in Vietnam, has
filed a $120 million libel suit in a Federal District Court in New York City
against CBS Inc. for its documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' which was broadcast on Jan. 23, 1982.

In the 90-minute documentary, CBS News said United States military leaders had
purposely underestimated enemy troop strength in Vietnam to present a rosier
picture of the war. General Westmoreland called the program ''vicious, false and
contemptible.''

In his rulings, which dealt with the seeking of information related to the case,
Judge Jackson said Mr. Helms did not object to being interrogated by CBS's
lawyers. The judge said Mr. Helms was cooperative in scheduling his deposition,
in producing the documents asked of him and in permitting his testimony to be
taken by a stenographer.

Judge Jackson said Mr. Helms refused only when CBS wanted to videotape him
giving his testimony.

CBS said it needs the videotape because Mr. Helms was 71 years old, lived beyond
the subpoena power of the New York court, had extensive travel plans and had
declared he would not promise to appear at trial voluntarily, although he now
expects to do so.

Mr. Helms said he did not want his deposition videotaped because he did not want
to help CBS ''accumlulate potentially attractive broadcast material'' for its
archives. The network said it had no plans to broadcast the tape, but it would
not unequivocally promise it would never do so.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Hanoi Says Chinese Artillery Killed 3 People in Past Week

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 129 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 21


China fired thousands of artillery rounds into Vietnam's northern border
provinces this week, killing three people and wounding two others, the Hanoi
radio said today.

The radio, monitored in Bangkok, also said two Chinese companies crossed 400
yards into Ha Tuyen Province on Wednesday but were driven back.

It said China lobbed nearly 5,000 artillery and mortar shells into its northern
provinces.

Vietnamese armed forces and residents counterattacked, destroying dozens of
artillery pieces and military vehicles, the radio said.

Vietnam accused China on April 7 of sending an invasion force across the border
and of other armed provocations since then. Chinese-Vietnamese relations have
been tense since the two countries fought a brief border war in 1979.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI ASKS U.S. VETERANS FOR TALKS

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 941 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 21


The Vietnamese Government, lacking formal diplomatic ties with the United
States, has asked an organization of American veterans of the Vietnam War to
visit Hanoi every three months for talks on a variety of issues.

The Reagan Administration says it opposes the plan, but a State Department
official indicated it would probably not try to prevent the veterans group from
talking to the Vietnamese. The group, the Vietnam Veterans of America, says it
will not seek to negotiate on behalf of the United States Government.

The meetings are expected to touch on such subjects as American servicemen still
missing in Southeast Asia, the resettlement of children of American servicemen
and Vietnamese women from Vietnam to the United States and cultural exchanges.
The date of the first meeting has not yet been set.

The arrangement was disclosed as Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach,
postponed a scheduled meeting with American officials to discuss the question of
some 2,490 American servicemen still listed as missing. Mr. Thach said Thursday
that the meeting was being delayed ''for technical reasons'' until the middle of
May, adding that United States hostility to Vietam was hampering the
relationship.

''A good atmosphere is needed,'' said Mr. Thach.

Invited as Intermediaries

Robert O. Muller, a former United States Marine lieutenant who was wounded in
Vietnam in 1969 and is now president of the Vietnam Veterans of America, said in
an interview that Mr. Thach and other Vietnamese officials had invited the
veterans group to send delegations to Hanoi at least every three months to serve
as intermediaries between the two Governments.

The invitation was extended when Mr. Thach met Mr. Muller and six other veterans
in Hanoi two weeks ago, Mr. Muller said.

''They expressed to us many times the desire to work directly with the U.S.
Government on issues such as Amerasians and Agent Orange information,'' Mr.
Muller said. ''But our Government will not talk to them. So we do represent the
only channel with which to exchange information.''

One State Department official, referring to the Vietnamese-backed regime in
Cambodia, said the United States ''will not consider normalization of relations
with Vietnam as long as it occupies Kampuchea.''

Some Informal Contacts

Vietnam invaded Cambodia in 1978, maintaining that it did so in order to save
the country from the atrocities of Mr. Pol Pot's regime. Since then the United
States has had some informal contacts with Vietnam, including visits by United
States officials and Congressmen as well as veterans to Hanoi.

''We see our role as providing a bridge to Vietnam, a conduit to dialogue,'' Mr.
Muller added. ''The U.S. has expressed to us the desire that we do not conduct
these discussions with Vietnam.''

Lyall Breckon, director of Vietnam, Laos and Cambodian affairs at the State
Department, who met with some of the veterans on Friday, said, ''As a general
principle, in the resolution of the P.O.W. and M.I.A. issue, we believe that
Government to Government contacts are the correct way to approach and resolve
the issue.''

Another State Department official said the Administration opposed the
intercession of the veterans group.

''We try to consult very closely with Vietnam organizations and the families but
we think these issues are best handled through Government channels,'' he said,
adding that, as far as he knew, the State Department ''will not stand in the way
of the veterans.''

List Issues for Talks

Mr. Muller said the veterans would seek to help deal with such issues as missing
servicemen, the acceleration of the resettlement of children of American fathers
and Vietnamese mothers, the visit of American scientists studying the effects of
the herbicide Agent Orange, which was sprayed by United States forces to
defoliate jungle battlefields, as well as cultural exchanges and visits.

In the last two years the United States has sought infrequent official visits to
Hanoi, mostly by Deputy Assistant Defense Secretary Richard L. Armitage, who has
traveled to Hanoi to inquire about Americans missing in action. Mr. Armitage
last visited Vietnam in February.

Since the end of the war in 1975, the remains of 88 soldiers have been returned,
and the Reagan Administration has not ruled out the possibility that some
Americans captured during the war are still alive. The Hanoi Government denies
such a possibility.  Mr. Muller said he saw the role of the veterans as
''serving as a backstop, monitoring progress'' as well as lobbying Congress on
several issues including the plight of Amerasian children. Mr. Muller pointed
out that there are an estimated 25,000 to 40,000 of the children in Vietnam.
They are treated as outcasts, but only 1,000 have been resettled so far in the
United States.

A key reason for the small number of the children in the United States, Mr.
Muller said, was the fact that quota restrictions in the United States had
limited their emigration from Vietnam. Mr. Muller said that Vietnamese officials
had told him that American officials had suggested that more children would be
allowed into the United States if the Vietnamese released a number of prisoners
in ''re-education camps'' who had worked for the United States Embassy during
the war.

A State Department official said: ''There's absolutely no connection. The
Amerasian children are one issue. Another issue is we'd like to see movement on
the Vietnamese held in re- education camps to whom we feel a special
responsibility. The Vietnamese have so far refused to release people from these
camps.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUNDAY, APRIL 22, 1984;
 International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 659 words


The Soviet newspaper Pravda rejected new Western proposals for force reductions
in Western Europe that the Reagan Administration had presented as a possible
opening toward wider improvement in East- West relations. It was the second time
in a week that the Kremlin had reacted negatively to a new Western arms
initiative. (Page 1, Column 6.)

West Germans say they saw a United States Army helicopter enter Czechoslovak
airspace Friday, when American officials say it was fired on by two Soviet-built
fighter planes. West German border police said that at least eight people have
asserted they saw the helicopter fly into Czechoslovak air space. Statements to
the border police by the helicopter crew that they were in West German airspace
when fired on could not be confirmed by a United States Army spokesman in
Stuttgart. (1:5.)

C.I.A.-aided Nicaraguan insurgents based in Costa Rica face a cutoff of aid if
they fail to pursue the Central Intelligence Agency's objectives, according to
guerrilla officers, Government officials and diplomats in San Jose, Costa Rica's
capial. The C.I.A. has suspended aid to the Costa Rican- based group more than
once, the officers and officials say. Only recently has the C.I.A. begun using
the threat of reduced aid to prompt military actions, they say. (1:4.)

A Vietnam war veterans group has been asked to visit Hanoi periodically for
talks with the Vietnamese Government, which has no formal diplomatic ties to the
United States. The Reagan Administration says it opposes the plan, but a State
Department official indicated that officials would probably not seek to prevent
the veterans group, the Vietnam Veterans of America, from talking to the
Vietnamese. (3:1.) National

A law linking Federal student aid to draft registration appears to have achieved
most of the objectives sought by its proponents, but the Supreme Court is still
considering its constitutionality. Campus financial aid officers report that
most students have complied with the law, which requires students seeking
Federal aid to certify that they have registered for a possible military draft
or, in the case of women or men under 18 years old, to certify that they are not
required to do so. (1:2.)

The discovery of the cause of AIDS might have been made at the Pasteur Institute
in Paris. Dr. James O. Mason, head of the Federal Centers for Disease Control in
Atlanta, said he believes a virus discovered by French researchers is the cause
of the acquired immune dificiency syndrome called AIDS. (1:1.)

Proposed immigration law revisions have deeply divided the Democratic Party. As
the House nears debate on the potent election-year issue, Hispanic groups are
pitted against organized labor. The A.F.L.-C.I.O. wants a statutory ban on
employment of illegal aliens, contending that they depress wages and working
conditions for American citizens. Hispanic groups say the revised law would
increase the likelihood of discrimination against Americans of Hispanic descent.
(1:3.) Metropolitan

Federal rescue of the Shoreham nuclear plant is being sought in intensive
negotiations by the Department of Energy. The department, according to documents
obtained by a House subcommittee, is seeking a way in which the Government could
lend its legal authority to the Long Island Lighting Company's plan to cope with
a nuclear accident so that the plant's emergency planning requirement could be
met despite the objections of Suffolk County. It hopes to find a solution by
Friday, when Lilco faces a major financial hurdle. (1:1.)

Money for 329 more park workers will be provided by next year's budget, Mayor
Koch said. The announcement was one of several about planned public improvements
from the Mayor last week. The additional park money was the first significant
increase in the Parks Department budget since Mr. Koch became Mayor in 1978,
park officials said. (20:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT IS HOLLYWOOD SAYING ABOUT THE TEEN-AGE WORLD TODAY?

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 2; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2728 words


Half-way through the hit new movie ''Footloose,'' the heroine's puritanical
father warns her to stay away from Ren, the new boy in town, played by Kevin
Bacon. ''He's a troublemaker,'' he says ominously.

The audience, of course, already knows that Ren's supposed to be a rebel, one of
those sinister outsiders: you can tell because he's wearing full rebel regalia -
a leather jacket, jeans, and a sort of punkish pompadour - and displays those
sullen and now terribly familiar mannerisms patented by Marlon Brando and
popularized by James Dean.

What exactly, though, does Ren's rebellion consist of? Well, mainly, there's the
matter of dancing. Though music has been banned in the town of Bomont -
according to the local preacher, ''the evil gospel of rock-and-roll'' leads to
''sexual irresponsibility'' - Ren has daringly vowed to put on a senior dance.
In the end, he wins out, and his classmates - the boys in dinner jackets and
ruffled shirts, the girls in fluffy ball gowns with corsages - realize their
dream. They get their prom.

Although it blatantly appropriates story- lines, scenes and imagery from such
50's films as ''Rebel Without a Cause'' and ''East of Eden,'' ''Footloose''
waters down those elements, turning a portrait of adolescent alienation into one
of high-spirited teen-age fun. Indeed under their hip veneer of liberated sex
and racy language, a startling number of recent teen-age movies use conventions
borrowed from pictures made in an earlier era. The ''restless youth'' movies of
Dean and Brando, Mickey Rooney's Andy Hardy movies, vintage ''I want to be in
show business'' movies, and old Annette Funicello-Frankie Avalon beach party
movies - these are the models that inform many recent pictures directed at
today's huge teen-age market; and frequently, they are models employed in ways
that purvey attitudes more conservative than those in the original films. In the
process, our sense of the past - and in this case, of teenagers in earlier eras
- also undergoes a revision. As the well- known historian Robert J. Lifton
observes of such films, ''They could be less about the 50's than about some of
the perceptions and longings of contemporary young people. Historians do the
same thing - each generation of historians recreates previous eras in its own
image.''




Clearly a mythologizing of the 50's - and to a lesser degree, the 40's (''Summer
of 42,'' ''Racing With the Moon'') - has been going on in the movies for quite
some time. The car culture of the day, with its drive-in theaters and fast-food
joints; class tensions between greasers and their social betters; and romances
between ''nice'' girls and more disreputable boys have become insistently
regular features on the screen.

In the case of some youth films, the allusions to the 50's and early 60's are
more overtly cinematic. In ''The Outsiders,'' the characters go to movies like
''Beach Blanket Bingo'' and ''Muscle Beach Party''; and in ''The Last Picture
Show,'' they watch ''Red River'' and ''Father of the Bride.'' ''The Loveless''
pays a heavy-handed homage to ''The Wild One'' by re- enacting the story of a
motorcycle gang that comes cruising into a small town. And ''September 30,
1955,'' which has the texture of a 50's film, examines the impact that the death
of James Dean has on a boy, who sees ''East of Eden'' as a parable for his life.
While such films - like such self- reflexive works as ''Raiders of the Lost
Ark'' and ''Body Heat'' - attempt to employ the form of earlier genres in order
to comment upon those very forms, other teen-age movies, like the crude new
remake of ''Where the Boys Are,'' simply exploit aspects of older films as an
excuse for pandering to teen-age prurience.

Indeed, the formula patented by American International Pictures - the people who
made such classics as ''Bikini Beach,'' ''Muscle Beach Party'' and ''Beach
Blanket Bingo'' - remains very much alive in such recent products as ''Spring
Fever,'' ''Spring Break'' and ''Summer Lovers.'' In both the original films and
their more recent imitations, there are lots of scenes featuring attractive and
scantily clad young people frolicking in the sun, thin or preposterous
story-lines and often a loud sound-track of rock-and-roll. Perhaps the greatest
difference is that while Annette Funicello played a bouncy, youthful version of
Doris Day - flirtatious but determinedly chaste - today's heroines tend to be
considerably more willing. In ''Blame It on Rio,'' a cheerless bastardization of
the genre, the teen-age heroine goes so far as to seduce her best friend's
father.



Why do so so many of today's youth movies either take place in the 50's or seek
cinematic antecedants in that era? For one thing, the 50's were the decade in
which the baby boom generation started to come of age - the decade, as the
historian William Manchester notes, in which teen-age subculture began ''to
develop its separate identity,'' ''with its own customs, status symbols,
stigmata, rites and fads.'' By the 50's, teen-agers accounted for more than half
of all movie ticket sales, and to cash in on this market, Hollywood began making
a string of ''youth pictures'': besides the beach party movies, there were
assorted vehicles for Elvis Presley, horror products like ''I Was a Teen-Age
Werewolf,'' and a succession of ''restless youth'' films. Many filmmakers
working today not only grew up watching these movies, but having spent their own
adolescence in the 50's, naturally tend to draw upon their own memories of that
decade.

Enough time has passed for us to have a certain distance on the 50's - always a
requirement for artistic interpretation - and in retrospect, that era has taken
on a hazy, romantic glow, as a period of irretrievable political and social
innocence, innocence that perfectly mirrors the idealistic interlude of youth. A
number of filmmakers, in fact, have used the coming-of-age movie, set in or
around the 50's, as a means of creating a portrait of America poised on the
verge of maturity.

Peter Bogdanovich's ''The Last Picture Show'' drew an analogy between the
closing of a small-town movie theater and the passing of a way of life. And
''American Graffiti,'' as George Lucas once pointed out, was also about ''the
end of a political era, a sociological era and a rock era.'' ''You have three
eras coming to an end,'' he said. ''You have to go from a warm, secure
uninvolved life into the later 60's, which was involvement, anti-war stuff,
revolution, and a different kind of rock-and-roll.''



Because of its emphasis on the importance of the personal life, the 50's seem
particularly accessible to cinematic examinations of growing up. It is easier,
in certain respects, to look at the unchanging primal preoccupations of youth -
sex, popularity, identity - against such a neutral backdrop than against the
more heightened tableau of the late 60's, when ideology, combined with highly
colored language and gestures, complicated the motives and consequences of
youthful rebellion.

Indeed the late 60's have proven especially resistant to cinematic
interpretation - one of the finest films about that period, ''The Big Chill,''
actually takes place some 15 years later and views the events of the time
through the lens of memory. Major studio films about student protest, which were
made in the wake of campus uprisings, now seem strangely antagonistic toward the
young people they attempted to portray. ''Getting Straight'' suggested that its
hero has become a radical because ''demonstrations are sexy,'' and ''More
American Graffiti'' treated the Vietnam demonstrations as just another form of
hedonistic campus prank - youthful hi-jinks not unlike the slap- stick antics in
''Animal House'' and ''Police Academy.''

Some of the most serious and, in a sense, radical films to emerge from the late
60's and early 70's were films like ''Easy Rider'' and ''Five Easy Pieces,''
which focused not on campus radicals, but on young, rootless outsiders,
alienated from the values of mainstream, ''straight'' society. The Jack Nicolson
characters in those two movies - like Benjamin played by Dustin Hoffman in ''The
Graduate'' - rejected the comforts and values of the upper-middle class and
tried to find new terms of self- definition. In this sense, these characters are
direct descendants of the rebels once played by James Dean and Marlon Brando -
descendants who may eschew the period mannerisms of those earlier rebels, but
who are far truer in spirit to them than the posturing heroes of such current
movies as ''Footloose,'' ''Reckless'' and ''The Outsiders.''

For their youthful audiences, remember, Dean and Brando symbolized all the vague
feelings of alienation that lay beneath the 50's surface of moral and political
conformity. After all, it is reductive - as such recent movies as ''Grease,''
''Porky's'' and even ''Diner'' suggest - to regard the 50's as an entirely
insular decade, in which there was little to care about except cars and girls
and booze. In many ways, in fact, such 50's phenomena as the Beat movement and
growing juvenile delinquency anticipated the noisier rebellions of the 60's.

Despite an ambivalent ending, ''Rebel Without a Cause'' is told from the point
of view of the idealistic character portrayed by Dean; and it exposes the values
of the older generation as hypocritical and misguided. The big confrontation
between Dean and his parents stems from their insistence that he not tell the
police about his involvement in a classmate's death; and when Dean, Natalie Wood
and Sal Mineo later seek refuge in an abandoned house, it is implied that they
might be better off creating a brave new world of their own, outside the
compromised one of their parents.



Few of today's teen-age movies posit any such idealistic vision. Although they
appropriate imagery from the old rebel films, these movies associate rebellion
less with social issues or moral principles, than with the ''me generation''
concerns of ambition and self-fulfillment. Often, the heroes are simply skilled
at making gestures of discontent - the Dean-like hero of ''Reckless,'' for
instance, gives his girlfriend a black carnation - which make them appear
dangerously attractive, in the dime-store romance tradition, to the heroine and
to the audience.

Ren, the hero of ''Footloose,'' may be labeled a troublemaker, he may have a
showdown with another boy reminiscent of Dean's in ''Rebel Without a Cause,''
but he's really just a nice kid who, as new boy in town, desperately wants to
fit in. As for his headstrong girlfriend, she plans to get back at her
puritanical father by going away to school. ''I've already applied to
colleges,'' she declares. ''He'll come after me, but I'll be gone.''

If parents are still cast in the role of antagonists in these films, their
failings tend to be personal: they're alcoholic womanizers (''Reckless''),
they've abandoned the kids (''Angel,'' ''The Outsiders,'' ''Tex''), they've
sexually abused their children (''Suburbia'') or they're simply superficial
idiots (''Risky Business''). Such parental faults, it is implied, may have a
psychological effect on kids - i.e., lack of love and understanding breeds
problems - but they're rarely taken as indeitments of society at large.

Indeed, most of the young people in today's films not only share their elders's
expectations, but also suffer few confusions over who they are. They know what
they want, and what they want is usually pretty much in line with the status
quo. If these kids are dissatisfied with their parents' generation, it's only
because they want more out of life - more fun, more fame, more gratification.
The characters in ''Reckless,'' ''Flashdance'' and ''All the Right Moves,'' for
instance, don't want to spend the rest of their lives working in a steel- mill
town; they envision something more glamorous and fulfilling.

The same is true of Tony in ''Saturday Night Fever,'' who aspires to leave Bay
Ridge for the glittering island of Manhattan. Though John Travolta plays him
with an inarticulate sensitivity reminiscent of the early Brando, his character
harbors no anti-social impulses; his heroes are movie stars - Al Pacino and
Farrah Fawcett - and he fantasizes about achieving show-business success, which
of course he goes on to do in the abortive sequel, ''Staying Alive.'' Indeed the
renewed popularity of ''let's break into showbusiness'' movies - ''Flashdance,''
''Saturday Night Fever,'' ''Starstruck'' and ''Smithereens'' are not so
different, really, from such old Judy Garland pictures as ''Presenting Lily
Mars'' - highlights just how concerned contemporary teen-agers are with the
matters of artistic self-expression and professional achievement.

No doubt this attitude is partly a reaction to the excesses of the 60's, and
partly, as the sociologist Robert Coles observes, a reaction to today's bleak
economic climate. ''During the 50's and 60's, there were rising expectations,''
he says, ''and kids felt they had a leeway for revolt. Now they're frightened
about unemployment, and they don't have the freedom to revolt in any significant
way. It's expensive to revolt - in terms of time, energy and future prospects -
and it could mean losing out. So if you do revolt today, you do it in more
subtle ways, calculated to be minimally expensive - sort of revolt on the
cheap.''

Indeed, to appeal to the more anarchic impulses of youth and fulfill basic
demands of narrative tension, filmmakers still cast their heroes in vaguely
adversarial positions, but they do so while upholding conventional values.
Sometimes, the ''rebellious'' kids even emerge as guardians of tradition. The
insurgent cadets in ''Taps,'' for instance, have seized control of Bunker Hill
Academy in order to prevent the trustees from turning the school into a
condominium complex. And in ''Valley Girl,'' the 60's conflict between
middle-class parents and their counter-culture kids is turned inside out: the
fashion- conscious young heroine's expensive shopping habits are threatened by
her hippie-like parents, who run a health- food store.

There are lots of shots in ''Valley Girl'' of credit cards and racks of trendy
clothing, and other recent youth movies also celebrate the pleasures of the good
consumer life. ''Angel,'' which was advertised with the titillating subtitle of
''Student by Day, Hooker by Night,'' features a teen-age heroine who has been
working as a prostitute in order to earn enough money - her parents have
abandoned her - to attend a ritzy private school. Presumably, the school's
cachet will help her win a scholarship to a good college, and she can then go on
to lead a perfectly respectable life.



''Risky Business,'' Paul Brickman's fast, funny portrait of growing up in
Chicago, also sounds, on the surface, like a film about a teen-ager gone astray:
while his parents are out of town, Joel manages to wreck his father's $40,000
Porsche, get tangled up with a pimp named Guido and turn his family's swank
North Shore home into a brothel. It turns out, however, that Joel is only being
a good capitalist. Unlike the upper-middle class characters in ''The Graduate''
and ''Five Easy Pieces,'' he embraces his family's style of life, and admires
his call-girl's ''shameless pursuit of immediate material gratification.'' He
and his friends belong to something called ''Future Enterprisers of America,''
and their avowed aim in life is to make ''lots of money.''

In the end, his brothel rakes in some $8,000, and Joel gets accepted to
Princeton. Needless to say, it's an outcome that makes both him and his parents
very happy and proud.

It would be simplistic to extrapolate too much about today's teen- agers from
such popular recent movies as ''Risky Business,'' ''Saturday Night Fever'' and
''Footloose,'' but it remains a fact that while Hollywood tends to reinforce
mainstream values, it also attempts, at the same time, to exploit contemporary
social currents. In the 50's, the popularity of the rebel films - and the
apotheosis of Dean and Brando - underlined the nationwide proportions of
adolescent disaffection. Similarly, today's youth films imply that the 80's,
rather than resembling that earlier era, may well turn out to be far more
conformity- conscious and success-oriented than the Eisenhower era ever was.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Tom Cruise and Rebecca De Mornay (page 22); photo of James
Dean (page 22); photo of Kevin Bacon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE EASTER STORY

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 15, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 21


There was a lot of talk around here this Holy Week about politics and prayer,
but not much about the suffering of the human race or what we should be praying
for.

It's a little confusing. The White House bully-pulpit is more bully than pulpit.
The politicians argue endlessly here about abortion, contraception and the
sanctity of human life one day, and then pay little attention to the ''sanctity
of life'' the next day when they're sending troops into the Middle East or
Central America, where children are being killed even before they know the
meaning of prayer.

The question of power, of course, is an old American dilemma. This continent was
conquered by men who had the Bible in one hand and a long rifle in the other.
Nobody argues now that you can throw a Bible at a tank, but there is a very
serious argument about the power of ideas versus the power of guns and missiles.
And at least once a year at Easter and the Passover time we should consider the
power of faith and hope.  We are engaged now, and for over half a century have
been engaged, in a dispute with the Soviet Union over the philosophy of the
American Revolution of 1776 and that of the Russian Revolution of 1917. Even in
this secular age, we should not forget what it is that divides us from the
Russians and remember the religious roots and convictions of the Founders of the
Republic.  They insisted that the individual did not belong to the state, but
had a personal and immortal soul that should be beyond the dictates of any
totalitarian regime.  On that principle, the Founding Fathers established a
constitutional government that was under and not above the law. This was then,
and is still now, the most powerful and popular political idea in the world,
from Poland to Central America - and sometimes the forgotten principle in
Washington.

Why do we allow the Russians to set the terms of the international debate and do
so on the question of missiles, which is the only thing they seem to know
anything about? Especially when we have enough on both sides to blow up the
world? Why not pay more respect to our own history and political and religious
convictions?

President Lincoln worried about this long ago. We were, he said, ''destitute of
faith but terrified of skepticism.'' He was concerned that we paid too much
attention to our fears.

''At what point,'' he asked in Springfield, Ill., on Jan. 27, 1837, ''shall we
Americans expect the approach of danger?  ''By what means shall we fortify
against it? Shall we expect some trans-Atlantic military giant to step the
ocean, and crush us at a blow? Never! . . . At what point then is the approach
of danger to be expected? I answer: If it ever reachs us, it must spring up
amongst us; it cannot come from abroad . . .'' Of course, this was before Pearl
Harbor and the age of intercontinental nuclear missiles, but still Lincoln had a
point. I have been gathering quotes like this for over 40 years because they
reveal what has been my experience: that many of the things we have feared the
most have never happened. All of these were regarded as potential disasters:
automation, uncontrolled immigration, Chinese- Soviet domination and Uncle Sam
as ''a helpless, pitiful giant,'' which Nixon supposed would be the result of
the Korean and Vietnam Wars.

We have seen Watergate, Teheran, Beirut, Nicaragua, El Salvador, all the
disasters on the evening television news and in the morning headlines - but
somehow the old democratic fog and the Atlantic alliance have held together for
over two generations.

For us on The New York Times, the meaning of Easter and its relation to the
political world was best defined by that saintly woman, the former Times
columnist Anne O'Hare McCormick, who wrote just before she died:

''Whatever happens, the earth will continue to renew itself and mankind will
find reasons for living in the constants that survive wars, government,
revolution and all historic changes. Everywhere, the things that last are more
astonishing than the things that pass . . .''

Even former Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, who invented the theory of
''massive nuclear retaliation'' as a means to a balance of terror and peace,
wrote before he died:

''As a nation, although still religious, we have lost the connection between our
religious faith and our practices. We are in a dilemma, and it is a grave
dilemma. Because we have not resolved it, our spiritual influence in the world
has waned and we are tied down to the area we can reach by material things -
guns and goods.''

On his way to China, where the missionaries of the West are best remembered,
President Reagan might have time to read Dulles on what Walter Lippmann called
''the forgotten foundation'' of democracy and the ''courtesy of the American
spirit.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Caging the Chemical Monster With an election in the offing and no progress to
report on arms control, the White House has flamboyantly proposed a treaty on
chemical weapons that the Russians denounced before they even read it. But the
treaty is an important step forward, and the prospects for controlling this
abhorrent form of warfare may not be as bleak as they seem.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 474 words


The drawn-out negotiations at Geneva have gained new impetus from Iraq's use of
mustard and nerve gas in its war with Iran. President Reagan and his top aides
also suspect, more dubiously, that chemical agents of some kind have been used
by Vietnam. In any case, if other third-world countries resort to these easily
made poisons, chemicals might quickly proliferate.

The 1925 Geneva convention, which Iraq signed, prohibits only the ''first use''
of chemical weapons. Few nations are likely to accept an outright ban on
production and even possession until the United States and the Soviet Union lead
the way.

The treaty that Vice President Bush carried to Geneva would require the
destruction of all chemical weapon stockpiles and production facilities, and
would arrange for stringent inspection. The Soviet Union said in February it
would permit inspection of stockpile destruction. That doesn't go nearly far
enough, but given the Russians' historic aversion to on-site inspectors, it's an
important beginning.


The critical issue is how much inspection is needed to support confidence in a
treaty. Every chemical factory is a potential violator, but every factory does
not need to be under constant surveil- lance. The Reagan Administration
prudently calls for some regular inspections and also for the right to mount ad
hoc visits. Too many such visits would probably strike the Russians as
provocative, but some are probably essential.  There's much to be said for
weaning the Russians from their habits of secrecy and, for the sake of other
arms agreements, teaching them that foreign intrusions can be benign. But the
vexed history of the 1975 treaty banning biological weapons offers an argument
against being too flexible.  That treaty failed to provide for on-site
inspection. When a mysterious outbreak of anthrax occurred in the Urals city of
Sverdlovsk in 1979, the Carter Administration suspected an escape of anthrax
germs from a presumed biological warfare plant. The Russians insisted the
disease was caused by tainted meat. On-site inspection would have resolved the
suspicions that linger to this day.  For the moment, the Russians seem trapped
between propaganda and policy. Eager to deny the merits of any Reagan
initiative, they began by having their Tass news service denounce the draft
treaty as ''obviously unacceptable.'' But their delegate to the Geneva talks
said it would be given ''serious study.'' When they look again, and reflect on
how they might recast the proposition as their initiative, the Russians should
look hard at their own state interest in expanding their February proposal into
a reasonable degree of verification. Between a world free of chemical weapons
and one with Tabun in every arsenal, the choice should be as clear in Moscow as
in Washington.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE STATE OF THINGS AS SEEN FROM STATE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1835 words


L AWRENCE

S. Eagleburger is retiring next week as Under Secretary of State for Political
Affairs, the top career position in the State Department. Michael H. Armacoast,
former Ambassador to the Philippines, will succeed him. Mr. Eagleburger, a
27-year Foreign Service veteran, discussed Washington's major foreign policy
concerns last week with David Binder and Bernard Gwertzman of The New York Times
Washington bureau. Excerpts follow.




QUESTION. You have talked about an increasing focus on the Pacific and declining
attention to Europe. Is there a growing rift with Western Europe?

Answer.  American attention to the Pacific Basin will continue to increase. Our
trade with the Pacific is now greater than with Europe. But I was not arguing
that we ought to be giving away Europe and moving to the Pacific. The U. S. has
an obligation to try to understand what's going on and, working with the
Europeans, to try to make sure that as events change over the next two decades,
and as we increase our ties with the Pacific, we don't do that at the cost of
ties with Europe.

Q. You've said privately that you were worried about the lack of real
communication between Moscow and Washington. Is it all the Russians' fault?

A.  The problem is essentially a Soviet problem. President Reagan, in his three
years in office, has had to deal with three different Soviet leaders. That
hadn't happened since Eisenhower. There has been a transition problem. Brezhnev
was ill and everybody knew he wasn't going to last, so they were positioning
themselves for the transition. Andropov came in; under the best of circumstances
it would have taken him some time to get thoroughly on top of the bureaucracy
and in charge. Then he got sick and people began again to look toward a
transition. Now we have Chernenko. Nobody can predict how long it will take for
him to gain thorough control. We've had a Soviet decision- making process that
hasn't really been run from the center; you had coalitions coming together over
issues. In most cases, when there's been a debate in the Politburo, the decision
has been a hard-line decision - in part, I suspect, because that's always the
easiest to defend in a time of flux.

We've found it very difficult to communicate with the Soviets. The response,
time and again, has been less than imaginative and usually pretty sterile. It
may be that as Chernenko gets on top of things, we will begin to see
flexibility. I'm fairly pessimistic.

Q. The Reagan Administration seems to have made an extroardinary departure from
traditional policy in this hemisphere. What had been viewed as a North-South
relationship, or a strictly hemispheric approach, has been put into the
East-West context. Is this a useful way to look at Central America?

A.  We have always felt that hemispheric problems ought to be solved by the
hemisphere. But I don't think anybody could argue that our Cuban problem,
certainly since 1962, has not been, as well, a problem of the Cuban relationship
with the Soviet Union. The Soviets have been directly and intimately involved in
the Cuban problem.

In the Administration, we feel strongly that the Central American (threat) and
the activities of Nicaragua would be impossible were it not for the support the
Sandinistas get from Cuba, from the Soviet Union, from Eastern Europe, from
Libya. We don't believe the Salvadorans can be asked to deal with their social
and economic and political problems without a solid military base. But we also
are prepared to concede that the problems in Central America go beyond the
Soviet question. There are serious social, economic and political questions;
reform is clearly necessary.

Q. Why is the public so unenthusiastic about the military aspects of your
policies?

A.  There is a lot left of the Vietnam syndrome, the concern that we will become
directly involved militarily and that it's a bottomless pit. Also the Salvadoran
right and left have an often much-deserved unsavory reputation - the nuns'
(murder) case, the death squads, grate on the conscience. There is this vision
that we are supporting reaction, murder and corruption; that is massively
incorrect. All you have to do is look at Mr. (Napoleon) Duarte, who is one of
the (presidential) candidates, a man who went to jail for his beliefs in
democracy and suffered torture. There is substantial movement toward a much
freer, more democratic society in Salvador that will have much greater respect
for human rights.

There is a real national interest in terms of what the United States might have
to face, should people like the Sandinistas succeed. We have to talk more about
what we may be called upon to do if we fail to achieve our objectives now
through a limited involvement.

 Q. Are you suggesting we might have to send in troops?

A.  No. (But) I don't care what anybody says about the domino theory having been
discredited in Southeast Asia - No. 1, if you were a Cambodian or a Laotian you
might argue that there was something to the theory. Secondly, if the Sandinistas
and the Salvadoran guerrillas are successful in overthrowing the Government in
El Salvador, that's the beginning, not the end, of the problem. The Costa
Ricans, the Hondurans and the Guatemalans are certainly going to face the same
sort of threat. I can't even say that the Mexicans wouldn't have a problem.

I deeply believe that the Sandinistas do not wish the U. S. well, that they are
intellectually and emotionally very much of a piece with the attitudes of
regimes in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. To have them in control would
mean that the U. S. some years from now would have to pay far more attention to
problems to its south than ever in our history. That could have substantial
impact on the way we look at the world, including our willingness to continue to
be involved as we must in Europe and the Pacific.

 Q. The public and Congress seem to be unhappy with supporting covert actions
that become public. Is there a lesson here?

A.  We are dealing, whether it's Central America or any number of other areas,
with regimes that pay no attention whatsoever to the norms of international law.
That is not to say that the United States does not have an obligation to stay
within the bounds of international law. (But) we are dealing with major
challenges to our own security. The United States cannot lightly walk away from
trying to deal with those situations. On occasion, it is necessary for the
United States to act through covert means.

The Congress, the Administration and the American people are going to have to
accept the necessity for an ability for this Government, as with any number of
other governments, to deal with some issues and some problems with less than a
totally up-front public posture. If everything we do is public and up front, we
run the risk of escalating the problem and getting ourselves on the edge of a
war.

There are those who would argue that there should be no covert operations. To me
they are in effect saying (that) the United States must put itself in a position
where either it deals publicly with a problem or it doesn't deal with it at all.
Sometimes dealing publicly means that you escalate the danger of a
confrontation. . . .

In my view, the decision to walk away from the Angola problem in 1975 was the
beginning of our real difficulties with the Soviet Union. That gave the Soviet
leadership an impression that they could do a number of things covertly that the
United States would not be prepared to respond to. A lot of people are going to
disagree with me violently, but our inability to respond semi-covertly, if you
will, with support in Angola gave the Soviets a signal which we have all lived
to regret.

 Q. Ten years ago, Washington viewed Angola in the East-West context but this
Administration's policy is to remove it from that context. In the negotiations
about Namibia, the Russians aren't involved.

A.  In the negotiations, no. But it's similar to Central America. Given the
international competition between the Soviet Union and the United States, and
the character of the Soviet system, they are engaged in a number of areas - in
their mind at least - to our detriment. That does not mean that the issue is
solely an East-West issue. In the Angola-Southern Africa-Namibia case, there is
an element of the East-West conflict because of support from the Soviets; there
are over 20,000 Cuban troops in Angola.

This Administration has tried to bring the participants to remove themselves
from the East-West conflict, to try to deal with the specific causes of the
conflict. We have not yet solved the problem but we are well on the way, because
we have tried to insulate the issues from the East-West conflict.

 Q. Shouldn't that be the recipe for Central America?

A.  When you can do it. In Angola we have, by working with the Angolans and
their neighbors, been able to demonstrate to a number of them that there are
ways to solve that problem without relying totally on support from Cuba and the
Soviet Union. It may be that 20 years from now the Sandinistas would come to the
same conclusion. (Now) the Nicaraguans are spending a great deal of time
intervening in the internal affairs of their neighbors.

 Q. Is there anything a democracy can do about terrorism, other than just
beefing up security?

A.  If I had to name the five foreign policy problems that are going to be most
difficult, I'd have to name terrorism. We're only beginning to see the
manifestations. I don't think anybody would argue that we have the answers yet.
One question that obviously has to be thought about is pre-emption. And that
runs into all sorts of legal and ideological problems and legitimate concerns.
You have to ask whether, when you know (a terrorist act) is going to be done,
you don't have an obligation, not just a right, to act to prevent it.

 Q. What are the other tough problems ahead?

A.  The whole North-South complex of issues, which includes debt problems. I
deeply believe that throughout an awful lot of the third world, the glow has
gone off the Soviet reputation. Many of these countries (are) turning again to
the West. That's one area where the trans-Atlantic relationship could get a real
boost - if we and the Western European countries and Japan could come together
to deal more imaginatively with these development problems.

The Iran-Iraq war, the Gulf, the Middle East, against the background of a clear
understanding that the U. S.-Israeli relationship is fundamental.

We want to do everything we can to further the peace process (and) to help
moderate Arab states. But we can't do that successfully if we don't have a good
and solid relationship with Israel. . . .Without that Israel - as with any
country surrounded by countries most of whom still are at war with it - is going
to be very cautious, if not totally opposed to compromise.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lawrence S. Eagleburger

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS ;
The Law and

BYLINE: By Margot Slade and Katherine Roberts

Margot Slade and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 272 words


Agent Orange



For the moment, at least, the Federal courts still consider the Government a
defendant in the lawsuit by Vietnam veterans against manufacturers of the
herbicide Agent Orange. The five-year-old lawsuit, which involves thousands of
veterans and billions of dollars, is scheduled for jury trial May 7 in Federal
District Court in Brooklyn. Just over a week ago, a Federal appeals court
refused to remove the Government from the case, though the court said that an
exemption might be won in a post-trial appeal. The trial can now proceed as
scheduled.

Several lawyers said last week that if the Government is held liable in the case
an appeal would be inevitable; inaction, they said, would set a precedent for
suits involving families of veterans exposed to radiation in atomic tests or to
asbestos in Navy shipyards during the war.

The Agent Orange veterans have no argument with the military. Their claim is
against the companies that manufactured Agent Orange, a mixture of the
herbicides 2,4-D and 2,4,5- T that is invariably contaminated with the toxic
substance dioxin. ''Our claim,'' said their chief counsel, David J. Dean, ''is
based on the fact that (the companies) failed to inform the Government that
there was a toxic contaminant in Agent Orange, which caused many veterans to
have serious injuries.''

The chemical companies, including Dow Chemical Company and Monsanto Company,
insist that ''the trace amounts of dioxin'' in the Agent Orange caused no
injuries. They also argue that the Government was informed about Agent Orange
and that their products met Government standards.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A LIFETIME OF RUNNING TOWARD THE OLYMPICS

BYLINE: By PETER ALFANO

SECTION: Section 5; Page 1, Column 1; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1799 words


PRINCETON, N.J.

IT was usually about 6:30 A.M.

when he finished work and

headed for the bus stop. Larry Ellis, then a teen-ager, would take the bus to
his family's apartment, and soon afterward, leave again for school. He had
finished his rounds as a part-time milkman, accompanying a neighbor who had
given him the job on his Bronx route in the days when milk was delivered by
horse and wagon. ''A nice horse,'' Ellis remembers.

Sometimes, the neighbor would even let Ellis ride on the horse's back as the
trusty steed clippety-clopped down the quiet streets in the predawn hours, past
the apartments and one- family homes where the workingmen and women were still
asleep.

Slow rides on a nice horse were enjoyable but Ellis did not particularly like
waiting for the bus. So one day, he decided to run home - a distance of about
two-and-a-half miles - to see if he could arrive before the bus did.

''I did,'' Ellis said. ''Then, I decided to wait for the bus and race it home.
The driver used to wave to me. I would beat the bus because it had to stop for
lights and to pick up passengers. I also saved a nickle a day, 25 cents a week,
and back then, it meant a lot.'' It was the mid-1940's, and for a young man in a
hurry, running was the most ex pedient means of transportation - The Ellis
rapid- transit system. But what he did not know at the time was that he was also
putting in the roadwork that would lead to a career, one that will reach a
milestone in late July when Ellis - Coach Ellis now - leads the United States
men's track and field team into Los Angeles for the 1984 Olympic Summer Games.

''I remember when I was graduated from DeWitt Clinton High School in February
1947, I had written in the yearbook that I hoped to have a chance to compete in
the Olympics,'' Ellis said.

Thirty-seven years later, at age 55, the coach of the Princeton University track
and field team will realize his goal.



Unlike previous Olympic track coaches, Ellis and his counterpart, Brooks
Johnson, the women's track and field coach, were selected well in advance of the
Games, not a few months before, a practice that Ellis diplomatically called
hectic and might better be described as bordering on chaotic.

In order to give the coaches ample opportunity to organize, to develop a working
relationship with their assistants and properly evaluate many of the elite
American athletes, The Athletics Congress, in conjunction with the United States
Olympic Committee, selected the track coaches in December 1981.

Ellis had served on the United States Olympic Committee, the T.A.C.
developmental committee for the 800-meter run, and had coached various American
teams in international competition, among them the World University Games and a
dual meet against the Soviet Union in 1978.

But the selection process can be extremely political. There were 49 coaches
nominated initially. Ellis said that although he wanted the job, he refrained
from campaigning for the job or soliciting testimonials. ''Some coaches did and
I think it hurt them,'' he said.

His typical low key manner belied the enthusiasm he said he felt upon being
selected.

''I didn't jump up and down when I was picked,'' Ellis said, ''but a little guy
inside me jumped up and down. I was so proud and happy. Track and field is the
flagship of our Olympic team.''

For the past two-and-a-half years, Ellis has laid the groundwork, going to
meetings, attending to the most minute administrative detail, and getting to
know his assistants and America's finest track and field athletes. He is
soft-spoken, with a receding hairline and graying muttonchop sideburns. It gives
him a distinguished appearance.

Ellis said that he is on a first-name basis with most of the athletes who will
be on the Olympic team or have a chance to earn a place when the trials are
held, in mid-June in Los Angeles.

He said that he can feel the rush of excitement and anticipation like the rumble
of an oncoming train. Because the United States boycotted the 1980 Games in
Moscow, it has been eight years since the Americans participated in the Summer
Olympics.

''Because of the boycott, I think athletes in the U.S. more than ever are
looking forward to the Olympics,'' Ellis said. ''I can feel the intensity
building.''

The Olympic responsibilities have added to his workload and caused him, on
occasion, to miss a Princeton meet. Next weekend, he will take the Tigers to the
tradition-rich Penn Relays in Philadelphia, where he and Johnson will serve as
honorary referees. But perhaps more importantly, it will be another opportunity
to evaluate the performances of potential Olympians.

For Ellis, the Penn Relays are like pages from his scrapbook. As a schoolboy at
Clinton High, he was on the relay team that won the distance medley. While at
New York University, he led his team to victory in the sprint medley.



Like many high school kids, he said he tried out for the football team but was
not big enough to take the pounding. He then was invited to a cross- country
team tryout. It was the first time he had ever been clocked in the mile run.

''I finished in 5:15,'' he said. ''The coach was ecstatic. I had outrun the
older kids.'' All those miles racing the bus home had served him well.

It was while attending N.Y.U. that Ellis decided that he wanted to teach and
coach after graduation. He did both for 13 years at Jamaica High School in
Queens where he had become dean of boys and an assistant principal in summer
school. He was beginning to direct his career toward administration and he said
he envisioned giving up coaching.

''At the time, there weren't too many opportunities for blacks to coach at
predominantly white institutions,'' he said. ''And some of the college
situations that did exist, did not excite me.'' It was the late 1960's, the
Vietnam War years, a time of social upheavel and unrest in this country. In
1968, at the Summer Olympics in Mexico City, track stars John Carlos and Tommie
Smith stirred passions and created a furor when they gave the black power salute
on the victory stand during the medals presentation.

''John Carlos grew up in New York and I knew him well,'' Ellis said. ''I said to
myself then, 'Hey, he's got guts.' But what bothered me was how they were
ostracized for doing something in a manner that wasn't violent. I was sick and
hurt by the reaction.''

Ellis credits Carlos and Smith for helping to focus attention on the American
civil rights movement. They had the courage of their convictions, he said, to
say that everything wasn't all right in the United States. It was their gesture
and the work of leaders such as Martin Luther King, he said, that ultimately
opened doors for blacks.

''I'm not naive,'' Ellis said. ''Despite our problems, the potential for this
country is better than anywhere else.''



In 1969, a friend told him that the Princeton track job was open. ''So I
applied,'' Ellis said.

The job actually did not become available until the following year but Ellis
said he was encouraged by the Princeton administration to apply again. In 1970,
he did and was hired, becoming the first black coach in any sport in the history
of the Ivy League.

It is a distinction that he says he is proud of, yet does not wish to wear like
a label. ''I think I have a reputation for being able to get along and work with
athletes,'' Ellis said. ''I can relate and I don't think any of them notice
color.''

It is a willingess on the part of Ellis and Johnson to include their fellow
coaches - even non-staff members - in the Olympic experience that has pleased
the T.A.C. and the U.S.O.C. with the track team's preparation. Coaches have been
encouraged to accompany their athletes to the trials and training camp preceding
the Games. Ellis and Johnson are not threatened by what others might call
outside interference.

''Coach is really a misnomer in track and field,'' Ellis said. ''The athletes
who will make our team have personal coaches. It is ludicrous to think that we
will change them.

''I will serve mostly as an administrator and be there to give them advice if
they ask for it. We will have a bearing, though, on the relay teams where we
will have to get unfamiliar athletes to work together.''

''We're like the bass fiddle in a band,'' Johnson said. ''We're there to keep
the tempo but not too loud. If you hear us and feel us, something's wrong.''

Based on their times and performances in international competition during the
last year or two, Ellis said he envisions that the Americans will do well. But
he warned that the days when the Americans dominated track and field are over.

''For a long time we were the best- fed country and dominated,'' Ellis said.
''But the Europeans made scientific advances and then the Africans emerged as
distance runners. Now, everyone has caught up.''

''It's only a reflection of the rest of society,'' Ellis added. ''Others make
better cars and electronics. And professional sports here draws so many of our
athletes away.''

Still, he envisions the United States doing well in the sprints and hurdles and
in field events such as the long jump and javelin. ''But no guarantees,'' he
said.



It is a pragmatic approach intended to alleviate the pressure that will build on
the athletes and coaches as the Olympics approach. But these are only games, and
Ellis understands that he experienced greater challenges during his childhood,
growing up on a street that he said was notorious for its gangs - Jennings
Street and Prospect Avenue in the Bronx.

''My parents were separated and I tried to help by working part-time jobs,''
Ellis said. ''I had two older sisters. I prided myself on having bought all my
own clothes from the time I was a teen-ager.''

He credits his mother and the late Rev. Edler Hawkins, a Presbyterian minister,
for being positive influences.

''Basically, I was a good kid,'' he said. ''I joined the Boy Scouts. I played
ball in the street, touch football and stickball. We used a Spaldeen. I was a
two-sewer man.''

The once famous high-bouncing pink rubber ball is no longer made and Ellis and
his wife, Shirley, a teacher, now live in suburban New Jersey, just a few miles
from the Princeton campus. They have three daughters - two of whom are married -
and a son, Larry Jr., a Rhodes Scholar who is attending Oxford University. Ellis
is a grandfather.

It is his family, he said, and his job at Princeton, that give him a feeling of
security in what could be an extremely successful or disappointing two weeks at
the Olympics.

''It's just a chapter in my life,'' he said. ''I've got a lot I want to do
afterward, for instance, keeping Princeton strong in track. This job at
Princeton, you know, is the one that pays the bills.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Larry Ellis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3544 words


NONFICTION

* DEMOGRAPHIC VISTAS: Television in American Culture. By David Marc. (University
of Pennsylvani| evisa, Cloth, $22.50. Paper, $9.95.) In what is probably the
most spirited defense of American television ever written, David Marc, who
teaches American civilization at Brown University, writes, ''The self-proclaimed
champions of 'high art' who dismiss TV shows as barren imitations of the real
article simply do not know how to watch.'' The way to watch, he says, is with
irony, a fan's knowledge of television history and an awareness that commercial
television, like it or not, is our cultural currency. However gross the aims of
the industry, he writes, ''it is ludicrous to crucify 'Sgt. Bilko' for the sins
of General Sarnoff.'' Television, he maintains, is (always?) funny. As if
accepting a dare, he puckishly finds a golden age not in Chayefskyan live drama,
not in Norman Lear's high-minded situation comedies, but in ''The Beverly
Hillbillies'' of the ''auteur'' Paul Henning. Mr. Marc rhapsodizes more
persuasively about Jackie Gleason's career, but when he celebrates police shows
as comedies, he forces the point, perhaps because he doesn't realize most
viewers don't watch with the irony he recommends. Against ''doomsday critics,''
he usefully reminds us that viewers are also de facto critics and television
shows are worth analyzing. He wants to find ''artful uses for this cultural
heritage'' and finds it in the heydays of ''Saturday Night Live,'' ''Second City
Television'' and chatty comedy-variety. Mr. Marc writes with verve. He wants to
be the Walt Whitman of the ''Saturday Night Live'' generation, to hear America
watching. In the end, though, he veers dangerously close to a perverse sort of
pietism - the premise that anything ubiquitous is good, anything worth analyzing
is worth admiring. When the fan in Mr. Marc takes over, he risks becoming
television's most elegant court jester yet. - Todd Gitlin

* THE MIND. By Anthony Smith. (Viking, $17.95.)By Paul Theroux. Illustrated by
Patrick Procktor. (Houghton Mifflin, $12.95.)By Nicholas Wapshott. (Beaufort,
$14.95.) By Jon Franklin and John Sutherland. (Morrow, $17.95.)

The best thing in these rugged, tell-it-like-it-is stories of Italian-American
families in urban New Jersey is the pithy, working-class vernacular. In ''The
Grape's Vine, The Horse's Mouth,'' the ''horse'' whose mouth you hear from is a
grandmother disgruntled by the crass, assimilated generation that divides her
from her adored and adoring grandson. She tells him ''they are.

FICTION

* THE SLUGGER HEART & OTHER STORIES. By Joseph Campos-De Metro's Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich $12.95.) The best thing in these rugged, tell-it-like-it-is stories
of Italian-American families is urban New Jersey is the pithy, working-class
vernacular. In ''The Grape's Vine, The Horse's Mouth,'' the h''horse'' whose
mouth you hear from is a grandmother disgruntled by the crass, assimilated
generation that divides her from her adored and adoring grandson. She tells him
''they are plenty disgusting.'' Also touching and truthful is the voice of an
old man in ''The Feather'' who writes to the ''Dr. Plaxtum'' of a newspaper
column about his physical pains and, inevitably, the less curable pains of
disappointment and regret. All the stories address loss in one way or another;
there is a plethora of widowed spouses and bereaved parents. There is also an
overabundance of eating - braciole, grilled goat, government-surplus cheese -
and of shouting. While the histrionic reactions of these characters ward off
sentimentality, the stories teeter dangerously toward melodrama. In general, the
naturalness of the characters is marred by Joseph Campos-De Metro's excessive
zeal in their behalf, as if he were a self-appointed crusader for the common
man. He describes the possessor of ''The Slugger Heart,'' for instance, as
having grief ''hitting her gut so hard so hard; no let up; she was near beat.''
He would better let his characters' humanity speak for itself. Narrative excess
and a journalistic expositional style reduce these stories to something smaller
than their parts, even though those parts are quite lively in themselves. -Anna
Shapiro

* THE LOST TRAVELLER'S DREAM.

In his introduction to ''The Mind,'' Anthony Smith writes that when he finished
''The Body'' (1968), it was ''almost inevitable that I should think of its
corollary.'' Like the earlier book, ''The Mind'' is written for general readers,
but it is surely for those who already know enough about the mind - the brain
and its myriad activities - to be interested in learning more. It is not a book
to be picked up idly. Mr. Smith is fascinated by the brain and everything it
does - from smelling to writing sonnets - and for the most part he interests the
reader too. But sometimes the book seems exhaustive to the point of exhaustion.
Mr. Smith breaks his study into broad chapters on such topics as evolution and
anatomy and the areas of brain function - consciousness, ability, memory and so
on. Another major section covers abnormal mental abilities, malformations of the
brain and brain damage. It is the least illuminating part of the book, often
reading like a magazine article that tells everything you ever wanted to know
about genius and Down's syndrome, migraine and schizophrenia. Perhaps because
these subjects have been explored in print so often, Mr. Smith seems to have
little to contribute. Yet considering the complexity of the subject, his prose
is admirably lucid, although some diagrams of the brain and a short glossary
would have been useful. The human mind, Mr. Smith writes, is ''the most
important thing on Earth, for good and ill,'' and he demonstrates what makes it
so. - Linda Charlton

* SAILING THROUGH CHINA.

The novelist and travel writer Paul Theroux sailed 1,500 miles down the Yangtze
River, and he brings the experience to life in this short and highly anecdotal
account. He has done his homework well, and his observations gain much from the
accounts he has included by two former river captains. The highlight of any
Yangtze trip is the 110-mile stretch through the gorges above Yichang. ''It is
not only the height of the gorges,'' Mr. Theroux writes, ''but the narrowness of
the river - less than a hundred yards in places - which makes it swift, sixty
metres per second in the narrower places. The scale gives it this look of
strangeness, and fills it with an atmosphere of ominous splendour - the majestic
cliffs, the thousand-foot gorge walls, the dagger-like pinnacles, and the dark,
foaming river below, and the skinny boatmen on their vessels of splinters and
rags.'' Those vessels, Mr. Theroux says, have the same rigging and rudders as
ones he saw in a thousand-year-old painting. His descriptions of his traveling
companions - most of them American millionaires - are devastating. Watching the
Chinese pulling junks upstream, one comments, ''They don't care about television
- couldn't care less if the Rams are playing tomorrow.'' Another, looking across
the river at the sunlight on the steep cliffs, exclaims, ''What a place for a
condominium!'' The Chinese are depicted as drab, tired, practical,
materialistic, baffled and hungry, and Mr. Theroux sees little hope for their
future. He cheers up slightly when he can talk to a few in English. But he
presents both the Chinese and the rich Americans as without imagination.
''Sailing Through China'' is both informative and amusing, though its price
seems a bit steep for 64 pages. - W. Scott Morton

* TROUBLED SKIES, TROUBLED WATERS: The Story of Acid Rain. By Jon R. Luoma.
(Viking, $12.95.) In the 1970's only a handful of environmentalists were
concerned about acid rain. Now, according to Jon R. Luoma, a journalist, acid
rain has found its way into the public's vocabulary - and hundreds of North
American lakes. According to the evidence he marshals, there is reason for
alarm. Today ''the rain and snow falling over most of North America is 10 to 100
times the mild acidity'' of normal rain. Canada and the United States produce 35
percent of the world's sulfur dioxide, a primary ingredient of acid rain. Ohio
alone produces 64 tons of sulfur dioxide per square mile annually. Mr. Luoma is
good at analyzing the political impasse between regulators and industries, and
his scientific account, if not complete, is adequate. He is best when he
graphically depicts the insidious effects of acid rain in such regions as the
Adirondacks. Fish eggs become contaminated, young fish grow deformed, and there
is a risk the entire food chain will be poisoned. Eventually all but the most
acid-tolerant species disappear. The most effective, albeit expensive, cure for
acid rain is ''scrubbing'' the gases before they are emitted. Unfortunately,
Federal law does not require scrubbers on pre-1971 smokestacks, and from these
will come almost 75 percent of the 20.5 million tons of pollution that utilities
and industries will spew forth in 1995. The crowning irony of Mr. Luoma's tale
is the Environmental Protection Agency's unwitting exacerbation of the problem.
The regulators have encouraged polluters to build higher smokestacks to reduce
local sulfur dioxide levels, but now they realize this practice increases the
chances of acid rain's reaching remote parts of Canada.  - Linda Robinson

* PETER O'TOOLE.

When Peter O'Toole summoned Nicholas Wapshott to his handsome 18th-century house
in Hampstead, the British journalist found the actor wearing an ivory
double-breasted suit with wide lapels, a green and pink striped club tie, green
socks, plum velvet slippers embroidered with gold crowns, and a generally
disheveled air. Of the biography Mr. Wapshott was writing, Mr. O'Toole said, ''I
do not wish you to carry on.'' Mr. Wapshott carried on regardless. Peter O'Toole
is a leading actor manque of his generation. He began splendidly, after an
impoverished childhood as an Irish immigrant in Leeds, a stint in the navy and
an undistinguished time at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art.  His perfomances
with the nascent Royal Shakespeare Company in 1960 seemed to promise a stellar
career. Then came ''Lawrence of Arabia.'' He changed himself totally for the
role, fixing his nose and dying his hair, and his Lawrence determined his image
for at least 15 years. But in 1978, stricken by illness and separation from his
first wife, Mr. O'Toole returned to the stage. Mr. Wapshott does not do justice
to the occasion. Mr. O'Toole made himself artistic director of a two-play
venture in Toronto, beginning with an ''Uncle Vanya'' translated into what could
only be called the ''blarnacular.'' Two years later, a ''Macbeth'' of similar
eccentricity was howled down in London. In the past few years, the movies ''The
Stuntman'' and ''My Favorite Year'' have given him the image of a John
Barrymore- like figure of genius corrupted by self-indulgence, or at least of a
searching intelligence stalled in trivia. But anyone with his gift of gab should
be writing his own story. - Gina Mallet

* GUINEA PIG DOCTORS: The Drama of Medical Research Through
Self-Experimentation.

It may be small consolation to anyone who has spent a morning in a crowded
doctor's office, but physicians themselves are kept waiting by a medical
establishment that is sometimes bureaucratic and closed-minded. ''Guinea Pig
Doctors'' is about eight researchers whose curiosity, ego and courage drove them
to experiment on themselves. Jon Franklin, a Pulitzer Prize-winning reporter,
and John Sutherland, a pathologist and oncologist at the University of Maryland
Cancer Research Center, have chosen an eclectic band. Here are, among others,
John Hunter, an 18th-century English surgeon who studied ''the pox'' (venereal
disease) by giving himself a case; Werner Forssmann, a German doctor who won a
Nobel Prize and ushered in modern cardiac surgery in the 1920's by snaking a
catheter into his own heart; and John Paul Stapp, an Air Force flight surgeon
who figured out how many G's a person could withstand by strapping himself onto
a rocket sled, paving the way for seat belts and aircraft ejection seats. That
the authors somehow don't quite explain how one of the most respected
researchers of the 19th century could stand before his favorite students in a
Munich classroom and drink a vial containing cholera bacteria, as Max von
Pettenkofer did, may not entirely be their fault. (Pettenkofer, incidentally,
survived the germs only to take his own life when his theory about cholera
didn't pan out.) Still, one wishes these chatty naratives were a little heavier
on science and the implications of circumventing conventions of research that,
for the most part, have served physicians and patients well.  - Richard Levine

A Time Like No Other After its ignominious defeat in 1918, Germany was in ruins.
But the nation's first representative government, the Weimar Republic, was
founded on the rubble, triggering one of Europe's most tumultuous cultural
revolutions. Influenced by concurrent modernist movements in Russia, Hungary and
France, Weimar culture pervaded all aspects of urban life and encompassed
Cubism, Expressionism, Dada and other movements. Weimar culture was concentrated
in a 15-year period (1918-1933) and revolutionized the fine and applied arts,
movies and theater, dance and cabaret, interior and industrial design,
architecture, literature and journalism. Socialist ideology was at the root of
the new functionalism, epitomized by the Bauhaus. Despite destructive factional
disputes among the members of the artistic left, this was a period like no
other; the artist's ego was secondary to the political and esthetic cause.

* THE WEIMAR YEARS: A Culture Cut Short, by John Willett (Abbeville, Cloth, $35.
Paper, $19.95), is a profusely illustrated exhibition between boards showing the
results of this brief period of creative exhuberance. Using art, news
photographs, film stills, architectural renderings and ephemera (newspapers,
magazine covers, pamphlets, product labels, posters) explained by extended
captions, Mr. Willett illustrates a vital culture. Designed to look like art
catalogues and political pamphlets of the period, this is an excellent, concise
pictorial history.  - Steven Heller

THE LOST TRAVELLER'S DREAM. By Kelly Cherry. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
$13.95.) Kelly Cherry is a talented poet and novelist; her first two novels,
''Sick and Full of Burning'' and ''Augusta Played,'' were widely praised. But
''The Lost Traveller's Dream,'' her fourth novel, intrigues and disappoints and
recalls Paul Valery's remark, ''Everything changes except the avant-garde.'' The
characters whose concerns we are invited to share are Kate, a young writer in
frantic search of love and salvation, Lindy, a restless young photographer and
poet whose urges lead her away from twosomes to new forms of triangles, and,
finally, Nan, an author-puppeteer. But it is impossible to be sympathetic to
their tale because of the author's manipulation and self-indulgence. Part One
finds Kate in the mid- 1960's and involves her dissolving marriage, exploration
of religion, and several lovers. There is much made of smoking grass and not
going to analysts. In Part Two, Lindy encounters a young man named Jakob in
Amsterdam. Their irritable, unsatisfying affair is haunted by Jakob's friend, a
lesbian named Anna. Lindy's ''greatest test'' comes when Jakob maneuvers her
into a sexual threesome with Anna. In Part Three we are told, with an
astonishing na"ivete, that the notebooks of Nan are the workbooks in which all
these characters are being formed as a work of fiction. This device - presented
as if it had just been discovered - is about as fresh as the ''greatest test''
of the sexual threesome. Kelly Cherry is capable of sharp observation but most
often contents herself with a kind of sentimental ''significant'' exchange. ''
'I'm wiser than you,' he said. 'I've lived longer. . . . I'll mold you. I'll
teach you true things.' '' '' 'Jakob, Jakob,' I said.'' Later the presumed
author, Nan, writes: ''My character Kate may be viewed as a kind of code. The
world codified in Kate sheds a literary back-light on the world as I read it.''
Such statements, presented without irony, are as unconvincing as most of this
ambitious novel. - Daniel Stern

* THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION. By Robert Ludlum (Random House, $17.95.) Robert
Ludlum's latest Goliath of a novel features five present or former generals from
five different countries who mean to take over the world. They have decided to
put an end to the quagmire of Western politics and set up a super-fascist state
with themselves in control. The hub of this enterprise is Gen. George Marcus
Delavane, a fanatic who makes Genghis Khan look like a Peace Corps volunteer.
Joel Converse, an international lawyer, has reason to know and hate Delavane. It
was Delavane who insisted on an Air Force mission in Vietnam that resulted in
Converse's capture and subsequent agonies at the hands of the enemy. While in
Geneva working on a case for his New York law firm, Converse is contacted by one
A. Preston Halliday, who gives him information he finds hard to believe. But
there follows a series of entanglements and murders that clearly prove
Halliday's assertions. Spy thrillers thrive on improbabilities, latencies and
concealments, but the rules of the game require that the massive suspension of
disbelief asked of the reader be justified by a commensurate deftness on the
part of the author. Here Mr. Ludlum disappoints. He plays with far too heavy a
hand, or with none at all. First of all, it is impossible to take seriously the
frothing lunatics who are supposed to lead this conspiracy. Secondly, great
turmoil is supposed to be instigated in nations, but the armies that will take
over impotent governments are nowhere in sight. Democracy stands in great
danger, no doubt, but it has nothing to fear from the blueprint of destruction
laid out in ''The Aquitaine Progression.'' - Seymour Epstein

* THE SLOW TRAIN TO MILAN. By Lisa St. Aubin de Teran. (Harper & Row, $14.95. )
''The Slow Train to Milan'' is a rambling travelogue with little in the way of a
destination. Lisaveta, a 16-year-old British schoolgirl, falls in with Cesar, an
aristocratic 35-year-old Venezuelan exile she meets in London. For no expressed
reason she marries Cesar and spends the next couple of years drifting around
Italy with him and his two eccentric South American friends Otto and Elias,
going nowhere and doing not much. Cesar seems to be a fugitive in the same vague
way that Otto and Elias seem to be terrorists. Their motives are most unclear,
and Lisaveta's lack of curiosity about them at first astounds and finally
irritates, for nothing is ever explained. With apparent insouciance she consents
to a penurious gypsy existence (sometimes relieved by the arrival of mysterious
checks) and to peripheral association with various obscure crimes, never daring
to ask a question. Matters seem to take a more serious turn when Elias is
arrested and tortured, but this plot line trails off into oblivion after his
release, as do all the others. At the end of the novel we are informed in a
single paragraph that Lisaveta accompanies Cesar to Venezuela and spends seven
years raising avocados; why she should do so remains inexplicable. This blend of
fiction and memoir has its charms, but its unrelieved ambiguities ultimately
fail to intrigue.- Madison Bell

* WARDAY: And the Journey Onward. By Whitley Strieber and James W. Kunetka.
(Holt, Rinehart & Winston, $15.95.) On Oct. 28, 1988, the Soviet Union launches
a surprise attack on the United States. Ten-megaton atomic bombs detonate over
Washington, San Antonio and the eastern edge of Queens. Smaller bombs strike the
Minuteman and MX missile fields spread out across the northern plains.
Washington and San Antonio are ''instantly vaporized.'' Manhattan escapes
destruction but is abandoned. Five years later, two writers brave the hazards of
post-Warday travel to report back to us on how surviving America ''feels and
tastes and smells.'' Whitley Strieber's and James W. Kunetka's long novel is an
attempt not only to imagine but to document the world after a ''limited''
nuclear exchange. It exhaustively details the consequences of nuclear war upon
money, travel, agriculture, radical dissent, electronics, law, health and
popular culture. Complete with declassified Government memos, surveys, fallout
maps and the transcripts of interviews with doctors, economists, elected
officials, faith healers, military men and simple survivors, ''Warday'' is an
example of what E. L. Doctorow called a ''false document'' - fiction dressed in
the workaday garments of fact. Mr. Strieber, who describes himself as a
''middle-range novelist,'' and Mr. Kunetka, who allows that he is a ''decent
enough reporter,'' combine a talent for research with a sense of urgency. The
resulting novel would be a marvelously detailed spoof if the co-authors shared a
sense of humor. Instead, the book is a ceaseless alarm. Walter M. Miller Jr.'s
''Canticle for Leibowitz'' remains the best novel about the aftermath of nuclear
war. -D. G. Myers

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TURBULENT TENURE OF ALEXANDER HAIG

BYLINE: By James Chace

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 4176 words


CAVEAT

Realism, Reagan, and Foreign Policy.  By Alexander M. Haig Jr.  Illustrated. 367
pp. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co. $17.95.

IN his engrossing tale of his 18 months as Secretary

of State and self-styled ''vicar'' of American foreign

policy, Alexander Haig compares Ronald Reagan's

White House to ''a ghost ship.'' ''You heard the creak of the rigging and the
groan of the timbers and sometimes even glimpsed the crew on deck. But which of
the crew had the helm?'' he asks plaintively. As General Haig tells it, at times
it seems to have been Edwin Meese, then counsel to President Reagan, or James
Baker, the White House chief of staff, or Michael Deaver, his deputy, or William
P. (''Judge'') Clark, later the National Security Adviser. It certainly wasn't
the President. This is hardly a situation to give much comfort to the rest of us
who are presumably following in the wake of this haunted vessel. As for the
conduct of foreign policy, reading ''Caveat'' (written with the acknowledged
''literary and editorial'' assistance of Charles McCarry) gives one the
sensation that the ship of state may run aground at any moment. All this might
have been quite different, we are led to believe, if the President had really
entrusted the making and execution of foreign policy to Mr. Haig, who had, as he
puts it, ''been in training for it, in a sense, for 31 years.''

''I'll look to you, Al,'' President Reagan told his newly designated Secretary
of State - and he doubtless meant it. But the President backed away from this
commitment, and the reason eludes Mr. Haig. He sees rivals everywhere. He never
perceives that it was his behavior that caused the President to lose confidence
in him.  The fact is that the general was never able to discipline himself into
becoming a cooperative member of the crew. What finally doomed the vicar was
more a matter of behavior than of substance.

Mr. Haig is quite right to observe of his foreign policy: ''Where prior to my
departure (the President) abandoned or modified critical portions of it, he has
tended as time went by to return to the original concepts.'' In at least one
respect Mr. Haig's original concepts have turned out to be productive: Relations
with China are excellent. In other areas, his concepts have proved to be gravely
flawed, even dangerous. Although our European allies have accepted the
medium-range nuclear missiles they originally requested and then regretted, and
are happily trading with the Soviet Union, they have grave doubts about the
quality of American leadership and are frankly hostile to the Administration's
willingness to incur massive budgetary deficits. Our relationship with Israel is
solid, but we have apparently moved away from seeking a homeland for the
Palestinians and have left Lebanon a shambles and Syria as the dominant power in
the region. The militarization of the Central American region has increased with
no end in sight. Finally, and most disturbing of all, arms control negotiations
have halted and our relations with Moscow are at their lowest ebb in over a
generation.

Though the irony of it eludes Mr. Haig, the Administration would probably not
have carried out his foreign policy had he remained Secretary of State. His
behavior so irritated the President's men that they often opposed his views
because they were personally antagonistic to him. Thus it is largely because of
the appointment of George Shultz to replace Mr. Haig as Secretary of State that
the Administration has swung over to a Haig foreign policy. As his memoir so
unwittingly reveals, Mr. Haig's only real complaint over American foreign policy
today is that he is not in charge of it.



There were signs of trouble from the outset. During the

James Chace is an editor of The New York Times Book Review and the author of
''Solvency: The Price of Survival.'' ''ordeal'' of his confirmation hearings,
Mr. Haig received no word of encouragement from the White House - neither from
the President nor from his staff. More ominous, in Mr. Haig's view, was the
handling of NSDD1, the National Security Decision Directive establishing ''the
structure of foreign policy.'' This document awarded State the chairmanship of
all the interagency groups dealing with foreign policy. On Inauguration Day, Mr.
Haig handed the document to Mr. Meese in his office at the White House; it never
left Mr. Meese's office for well over a year, and in its original form was never
signed by the President. Mr. Haig is convinced that without such a ''charter,''
there can be ''no other result than confusion.''

The President's aides doubtless wanted to prevent any repetition of the
accumulation of power Henry Kissinger had enjoyed under President Nixon. It was
therefore no wonder that the troika of Meese, Baker and Deaver was not disposed
to let the President sign such a document. As it happened, in one act of
insubordination, Mr. Haig bypassed the President by sending a directive to his
negotiator in the Middle East because the men in the White House (now including
Judge Clark as the new National Security Adviser) did not pass it along to the
President with the urgency Mr. Haig had requested.

As an example of confusion in the Government, Mr. Haig cites the discussion at
the White House the day after the inauguration of whether the United States
Government should honor the financial arrangements the Carter Administration had
concluded with Iran in return for the release of the American hostages. Mr. Haig
reports that he was ''appalled'' that ''such a cynical action could even be
considered.'' But a member of the party who was on the plane coming back from
West Germany, where Jimmy Carter had greeted the freed hostages, informed me
that Mr. Carter himself had speculated at the time on the desirability of
abrogating such an agreement obtained under duress. And according to one of the
participants, Mr. Haig also discussed the pros and cons of honoring the
agreement with his own advisers prior to the White House meeting. To imply, as
Mr. Haig does, that he was stunned at the troika's and President Reagan's
willingness to contemplate such an action is to distort the nature of the
decision taken.

If the White House staff so distrusted Alexander Haig, then why was he asked to
be Secretary of State? It seemed the President's men considered General Haig a
contender for the Presidency (which he had surely been in the early days of
1980) and thought it better to have him on the team rather than sniping from the
sidelines.  A former head of NATO, he could credibly present himself as
hard-line anti-Communist in foreign policy matters. Not least important may have
been ex-President Nixon's lobbying on his behalf.

Despite the setbacks Mr. Haig believes it received at the hands of the White
House aides, the foreign policy that emerged under Mr. Haig's vicariate is
largely what shapes American behavior in the world today. At the heart of this
policy is the belief, as President Reagan put it, that the ''Soviet Union
underlies all the unrest that is going on . . . in the world.'' The consequences
of this world view is that the United States must embark on a global crusade to
confront the Soviet Union ''throughout the world.'' Since the Soviet Union was
trying to extend its global reach primarily through ''wars of national
liberation,'' i.e., ''Marxist insurgencies inspired and equipped by Moscow,''
then, under Mr. Haig's schema, the only thing was to go to the source - which
meant approaching Moscow directly and showing no disposition to negotiate on
such issues as nuclear arms control until the Russians demonstrated by their
behavior that they would modify their ambitions in the third world. This is the
gist of what Mr. Haig told the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin at their first
meeting in 1981. Especially, Mr. Haig warned, ''Moscow must control its client,
Cuba, in this hemisphere.'' As for Central America, the Administration quickly
froze economic aid to Nicaragua.


BECAUSE of Mr. Haig's desire to treat the Sandinista regime in Nicaragua as a
tool of the Soviet Union and the guerrilla war in El Salvador as a global issue,
Washington showed little disposition to negotiate with Managua over security
guarantees for the region, or to use Mexico as an intermediary in searching for
a peaceful settlement in Salvador. The Secretary saw American behavior in
Central America as analagous to our behavior in Vietnam by claiming that the
United States ''refused to treat the Vietnam insurgency as anything other than a
local problem''; nor did we ''take the issue to the Soviet Union.'' (This is an
odd interpretation of the history of our involvement in Southeast Asia, where
Presidents Johnson and Nixon repeatedly tried to work through Moscow to reach a
settlement. Nor did either Dean Rusk or Henry Kissinger see the Vietnam
insurgency as merely ''a local issue.'')

In Mr. Haig's reading of the situation, the way to halt the Salvadoran
insurgency was to threaten Havana and Moscow and ''through the application of a
full range of economic, political, and security measures, convince them to put
an end to Havana's bloody activities in the hemisphere and elsewhere in the
world.'' He is never clear on exactly what this was supposed to mean, though he
does say he wanted to increase the levels of United States economic aid and
augment ''the U.S. military presence in the region.'' All this, of course, has
now been done. He also thought a carrier group or two, ''maneuvering between
Cuba and the Central American mainland,'' would usefully demonstrate our ability
to blockade Cuba - as though this were ever in doubt.

In this strategy he claims to have had the support of the President but not his
aides, who feared domestic opposition and a distraction from the main task of
the Administration, which was to promulgte its economic policies. Nor did he
find an ally in Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, who feared another
''unmanageable tropical war.'' It soon became clear that the plans Mr. Haig and
his associates had been preparing - to ''seal off the export of arms from Cuba
to Central America'' - was not going to be put into effect. Nonetheless, two
nuclear carriers with their battle groups, some 30 ships, were sent on maneuvers
around Cuba, and, according to Mr. Haig, the ''flow of arms into Nicaragua and
thence into El Salvador slackened.'' More pressure was not applied; the fleet
finally moved away.

President Reagan, however, thought ''some sort of direct contact with Castro''
might produce a favorable result. At one point in early 1981 the National
Security Council even tried to arrange a meeting with Fidel Castro through the
good offices of the columnist Jack Anderson. Naturally when Mr. Haig got word of
this, he was upset at seeing such a maneuver undermine his military efforts to
put ''fear into the hearts of the Cubans.'' Though he was reluctant to ease the
pressure at so early a date, Mr. Haig felt it necessary to follow up on a
suggestion from the Mexican President to mediate between Havana and Washington.
It is hard to see what Mr. Haig hoped to gain by this, since ''there could be no
talk about normalization, no relief of the pressure, no conversations on any
subject except the return to Havana of the Cuban criminals (in the United
States) and the termination of Cuba's interventionism.'' Indeed, he may well
have gone ahead because of the President's desire to see if Cuba would receive
the some 4,000 criminals who had left Cuba along with 120,000 other refugees in
the 1980 Mariel boatlift who were now in American prisons. Deciding to test the
waters, as he puts it, he met in November 1981 in Mexico City with Carlos Rafael
Rodriguez, the vice premier and the man who, after Fidel Castro, is the most
authoritative spokesman of Cuban foreign policy. The conversations were amiable.
The Cuban denied that Havana was sending arms to El Salvador but did not want a
confrontation with the United States.

Mr. Haig did not appear eager for another meeting, but, at the President's
request, he dispatched Gen. Vernon Walters to meet with Mr. Castro and Mr.
Rodriguez in March 1982. At this meeting, Mr. Castro said that the return of the
Cuban criminals was ''a solvable problem''; nor did he deny Cuban involvement in
Central America. Although the President continued to press for a solution to the
criminal question, Mr. Haig recommended that Mr. Castro be given an ultimatum to
receive the criminals or ''we would simply load them aboard an expendable ship,
sail it into a Cuban anchorage under escort of the U.S. Navy and inform Castro
that we had returned his citizens to him.'' At this point, Mr. Haig's report
over possible negotiations with Havana breaks off. Had he decided not to pursue
either the question of the criminals or some linkage between Havana's support of
the Central American Marxists and normalization of relations with Washington?
Were these two diplomatic demarches simply for show?

Carlos Rafael Rodriguez tells a somewhat different story. When I interviewed him
last October, he said that the Cubans were prepared to negotiate over the return
of the criminals if this issue were tied to the broader range of United
States-Cuban relations. He said he had been encouraged by his meeting with Mr.
Haig because at least it gave them a chance to exchange their views. But the
meeting between General Walters and Mr. Castro, which Mr. Rodriguez also
attended, got nowhere. As the deputy prime minister put it: ''It was not a
dialogue.'' Instead, it was a virtual monologue by General Walters, ''full of
anecdotes of a life which was rich in anecdotes, but which we knew.''


IN his relations with Israel, Mr. Haig also focused on

the Soviet danger. Broadly speaking, he wanted to

deepen Washington's relationship to Israel by promoting what he called a
''strategic partnership.'' It was to be directed against external threats to the
region - in effect, the Soviet Union and its allies. It was not until Nov. 30,
1981, that a Memorandum of Understanding, detailing Israeli-American cooperation
against threats to the Middle East by the Soviet Union or Soviet- controlled
forces, was signed; just three weeks later the White House canceled it when
Israel's Prime Minister Menachem Begin decided, without warning, on a de facto
annexation of the Golan Heights the day after martial law was imposed in Poland.

As Mr. Haig tells it, he had repeatedly warned Israel against any military moves
in Lebanon. It was at President Sadat's funeral in Egypt in October 1981 that
Mr. Begin first told him ''Israel had begun planning a move into Lebanon that
would not draw Syria into the conflict.'' To this, Mr. Haig replied, ''If you
move, you move alone. Unless there is a major, internationally recognized
provocation, the United States will not support such an action.'' Mr. Begin
maintained that the idea was to push the P.L.O. only back from the border so
that its guns with a 40-kilometer range could not shell Israeli territory. The
formulation that Mr. Haig gave Mr. Begin was to be repeated time and again by
both him and President Reagan over the weeks to come.

Despite these warnings, Israel invaded Lebanon in June 1982 and pushed well
beyond the 40-kilometer zone to the outskirts of Beirut, and in so doing
destroyed the P.L.O. military organization and Syrian air power while inflicting
signal defeats on Syrian ground forces. By this action, Israel provided an
opportunity for American diplomacy to restore the Lebanese state while ridding
that unhappy land of two foreign armies - the Syrian ''peacekeeping force'' and
the military arm of the P.L.O. The two Soviet proxies would have been dealt a
humiliating blow. This at least is the scenario the Secretary of State sketches
out in this memoir.

But there is another version that puts in doubt Mr. Haig's story. It involves
two crucial meetings in Washington, one between him and the director of Israeli
military intelligence, Gen. Yehoshua Saguy, and another between him and the
Israeli defense minister, Gen. Ariel Sharon. In his memoir Mr. Haig says little
about the Saguy meeting, although he does suggest that General Saguy told him
Israel was ''prepared to attack the P.L.O. in Lebanon . . . (and) would advance
from the Israeli border to the southern suburbs of Beirut.''

In a book published recently in Israel, Ze'ev Schiff, defense and military
editor of Haaretz, and Ehud Yaari, an Israeli commentator on Arab affairs,
maintain that Mr. Begin and General Sharon believed prior to General Saguy's
trip to Washington that Mr. Haig understood Israel's concerns - he had shown
some sympathy when the Israel air force had destroyed an Iraqi nuclear reactor
in the summer of 1981 and had argued against strong, punitive measures because
''our strategic interests would not be served by policies that humiliated and
weakened Israel.'' General Saguy was therefore dispatched to tell Mr. Haig that
Israel would no longer tolerate attacks by the P.L.O.; he even brought with him
maps showing arrows where the Israelis were planning to strike - well beyond the
40-kilometer line in southern Lebanon. Also present at this meeting, according
to the Israeli book, were General Walters and Morris Draper, the deputy to
Philip Habib, who was negotiating for the United States in the Middle East.

In this account, while General Saguy spoke in broad terms, Mr. Haig did not
speak out against such an Israeli plan; neither did he approve it. His silence
was thus interpreted by the Israelis as acquiescence. So alarmed was Mr. Draper
at this encounter that he told General Saguy on the way out that he mustn't
interpret Mr. Haig's silence as giving Israel the go-ahead. To which the general
responded that he had heard what the Secretary said and if he had wanted to say
something more, he would have said it.

Meanwhile, the Administration was increasingly divided over its policy toward
Israel. Mr. Haig writes that the ''foreign policy bureaucracy, overwhelmingly
Arabist in its approach to the Middle East and in its sympathies, saw the crisis
as an opportunity to open direct negotiations between the United States and the
PLO.'' In this atmosphere General Sharon came to Washington in May 1982 and, Mr.
Haig says, ''shocked a roomful of State Department bureaucrats by sketching out
two possible military campaigns: one that would pacify southern Lebanon, and a
second that would rewrite the political map of Beirut in favor of the Christian
Phalange.'' Mr. Haig maintains that he challenged these plans in front of his
staff and, later, privately told General Sharon that ''unless there was an
internationally recognized provocation and unless Israeli retaliation was
proportionate to any such provocation, an attack by Israel into Lebanon would
have a devastating effect in the United States.'' Not long afterward, the
''provocation'' the Israelis had been waiting for materialized: In London, Arab
terrorists shot the Israeli ambassador, the Israelis retaliated against P.L.O.
headquarters in Beirut and the invasion was on.  Here again, there is
conflicting testimony on what happened during the meeting between Mr. Haig and
General Sharon. According to the Schiff-Yaari testimony, General Sharon strongly
suggested that the Israelis would not confine their attack to southern Lebanon
but would push up to Beirut. ''We cannot live under the threat of Palestinian
terrorism from Beirut. We have a dilemma and we don't see any other way but to
enter and clean it up.'' Mr. Haig did not reply. Nor did he define what
constituted a ''substantial'' violation of a cease-fire. Since Mr. Haig did not
threaten Israel with any strong American action should Israel go into Lebanon,
General Sharon apparently concluded that Washington would not oppose an Israeli
invasion, especially if it was a light one - though he had warned Mr. Haig of
the strong likelihood that Israel would push on to Beirut. In this sense, he
interpreted Mr. Haig's response as a green light to invade Lebanon.

Concerned that Mr. Haig's words might not convey the official views of the
Israeli Government, General Sharon and Mr. Begin sought further clarification
from Washington. In a subsequent communication, Mr. Haig said he had indeed
informed the President of General Sharon's remarks and urged restraint on the
Israelis. But the letter contained no forthright warning, Messrs. Schiff and
Yaari report. After the receipt of such a mild response, General Sharon
convinced Mr. Begin that nothing serious stood in the way of Israeli actions.

What is the explanation for Mr. Haig's behavior? If he did not mean to give the
green light to the Israeli invasion - which he may have believed would not reach
as far as Beirut but which should not have surprised him when it did - then he
must have been either disingenuous or inept.

Certainly, Mr. Haig was sympathetic to Israel's aims of clearing out the
Soviet-backed P.L.O. and humiliating a Soviet client like Syria. He later
overruled the recommendation of the National Security Council to have the United
States vote in the United Nations to condemn Israel for its invasion. As things
turned out - with the Syrian air force badly defeated and the P.L.O. military
organization expelled from Beirut - Mr. Haig believed that active American
diplomacy could have brought about a settlement that would have preserved the
integrity of Lebanon and forced Israeli and Syrian withdrawal, as well as
putting in place an international peacekeeping force. Since the President had
asked Mr. Haig to stay on after his resignation on June 25,1982, until the new
Secretary was confirmed, Mr. Haig continued ''to manage the Middle East
crisis.'' Finally, the President apparently had enough of Mr. Haig's crisis
management, and he telephoned his erstwhile vicar on July 5 at the resort hotel
he was staying at while managing the crisis and told him he should relinquish
all command immediately. The next day, the President announced that American
troops would be committed to a peacekeeping force in Lebanon.

In Mr. Haig's view, this premature and ''ill- conceived announcement'' diverted
attention from the peace effort he had been making. Everyone reneged on agreeing
to withdraw, and the stage was set for the carnage that followed as well as the
superpower rivalry that emerged as the Soviet Union rearmed Syria. Yet by 1984,
ironically, the United States has drawn even closer to Israel than when
Alexander Haig was its best friend in court.

Regarding Europe, Mr. Haig finally prevailed over the sentiment in the White
House and the Defense Department that the West Europeans should be punished for
their desire not to abandon what was left of detente after the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan and the crackdown in Poland. He recognized the inconsistency of
having Washington lift the grain embargo against the Soviet Union while at the
same time taking sanctions against the West Europeans for selling technology and
extending financial credits to Moscow.

In pushing for warmer relations with China and downplaying the Administration's
desire for closer ties with Taiwan, Mr. Haig understood that ''national
interests are at least as reliable a guide to national behavior as ideology,''
and that American interests would be well served by arrangements with China that
would help contain the expansive ambitions of the Soviet Union. Here, too, Mr.
Haig's diplomacy has finally triumphed with the President's state visit to China
scheduled for the spring of 1984.

It was Mr. Haig's ill-fated experiment in mediation between Argentina and Great
Britain in the Falklands War that he believes caused his downfall. Doubtless,
the better relations the Administration was striving for with the Argentine
junta by downplaying our concern for human rights encouraged the Argentine
military to launch its March 1982 invasion of the Falklands. But what is
troubling in this narrative is why Mr. Haig did not understand from the outset
that his effort at mediation was doomed for the lack of reliable negotiating
partners on the Argentine side. Clearly, the Argentine foreign ministry did not
hold the key to any successful mediation. Nor, it appears, did the head of the
junta, Gen. Leopoldo Galtieri. It would seem axiomatic that any mediation is
doomed unless the mediator knows beforehand he is dealing with people who can
deliver.

But finally, it is hard to believe that Mr. Haig's performance in the Falklands
crisis cost him his job. Instead, any reader would be likely to conclude from
this memoir that his temperament made him unfit for the job. Far from being an
able player of bureaucratic politics, as might have been expected of such a
close pupil of Henry Kissinger, Mr. Haig was clumsy in his dealings with the
White House. While a successful mediation might have preserved his job for a
while longer, the real puzzle is why the President waited so long before getting
rid of him.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 22, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS April 22, 1984Fiction 117

SECTION: Section 7; Page 20, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 757 words


THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  226

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about the
nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  3112

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  363

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  564

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  697

LORD OF THE DANCE, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) In
seeking her long-lost cousin, a teen-ager probes the mysteries of life and
death.  7411

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  8325

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  9144

ONE MORE SUNDAY, by John D. MacDonald. (Knopf, $15.95.) Behind the scenes with a
charismatic television preacher.  10534

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?  created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  11811

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  121034

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.

13 5

UNTO THIS HOUR, by Tom Wicker. (Viking, $19.95.) Three days in August, 1862,
when a battle was fought at Manassas, Va.  141244

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  15 1

FLOODGATE, by Alistair MacLean. (Doubleday, $15.95.) Terrorists threaten to
flood the Netherlands unless Britain leaves Northern Ireland.


 Nonfiction 1110

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.

226

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W. Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.

367

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty. (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  4331

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  5425

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a California preacher.  6144

MAFIA PRINCESS, by Antoinette Giancana and Thomas C. Renner.  (Morrow, $15.95.)
Growing up in the family of the mobster Sam Giancana.  759

LINES AND SHADOWS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $15.95.) Adventures of
the San Diego police force that stalks bandits along the Mexican border.  8734

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.

9 2

FURTHER UP THE ORGANIZATION, by Robert Townsend. (Knopf, $15.95.) Business
strategies for the 1980's.  91367

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J. Peters and Robert H.  Waterman Jr. (Harper
& Row, $19.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.
11816

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  111011

PEOPLE OF THE LIE, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
psychiatrist's prescription for ''healing human evil.'' 13910

TOUGH-MINDED FAITH FOR TENDERHEARTED PEOPLE, by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $14.95.) More inspiration from a California preacher.  141532

THE BEST OF JAMES HERRIOT.  (St. Martin's, $19.95.) Selections from the writings
of the Yorkshire veterinarian.

151183

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. LATIN FORCE IN PLACE IF NEEDED, OFFICIALS REPORT

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3671 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 21


The Pentagon is now in a position to assume a combat role in Central America
should President Reagan give the order, in the view of military specialists and
members of Congress.

They say the Defense Department has achieved this state of readiness over the
last year through the coordinated buildup of United States forces in the region
and construction of new military installations.

''What has been set up is a forward base structure that enables the U.S. South
Command in Panama to act quickly if they have to,'' said Edward L. King, a
retired Army lieutenant colonel who formerly served as liaison for the Joint
Chiefs of Staff with the Inter-American Defense Board.



U.S. Involvement Deepened

''Now.'' he said, ''they can operate in Central America without having to
operate out of Panama, which goes against the political grain of the Panamanian
Government.''

The President and Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger have both said
repeatedly they had no plans to send United States soldiers to fight a war in El
Salvador or Nicaragua. But over the last year the guerrilla forces in El
Salvador have increased their strength and scale of operation, holding off the
Salvadoran Army and pushing the United States toward deeper involvement.

Last spring, when Mr. Reagan was appealing for public support for his policies
in Central America, he promised in a speech on March 10, 1983, not to
''Americanize the war'' by sending a lot of combat advisers or by committing
American soldiers to combat. He has kept his pledge not to send United States
fighting units into action.



New Bases in Honduras

But critics in Congress contend that the Administration is being drawn in that
direction. The last year has brought a dramatic expansion of the United States
presence and role in Central America. It has seen a gradual growth of United
States involvement in actual operations in El Salvador and Nicaragua, the first
reported incidents of Americans coming under hostile fire in the field and the
rapid development of a network of bases in Honduras.

A year ago, the Pentagon reported a total of about 150 American military
advisers in El Salvador and Honduras. Today, the number has increased more than
tenfold. By Government count, roughly 1,800 American military personnel are on
continuous duty in those two countries and 800 more on a temporary exercise.

Americans now fly regular tactical missions over El Salvador, man radar outposts
that scan Nicaraguan waters and airspace and work closely with Salvadoran
brigade commanders in contested provinces, where they must carry more arms than
last year because of their increased exposure.

The operations of the Central Intelligence Agency have grown, Administration and
Congressional sources say, to a point where the three Nicaraguan rebel forces it
arms and finances now total 15,000, nearly triple their size in early 1983.

Six airfields in Honduras have been built or improved by United States Army
engineers or Navy Seabees at a cost of more than $50 million; two more are now
being built. They serve as landing and jump-off points for thousands of United
States troops engaged in a stream of quick-notice military exercises or larger,
longer war games. They also serve as supply depots for Nicaraguan rebels,
officials say privately.

Major War Game Conducted by Navy

The Navy, which has also made a visible show of force, is now conducting its
most extensive exercise in the Caribbean this year. This maneuver, called Ocean
Venture I, began Friday and will eventually deploy 350 ships led by the aircraft
carrier America and involve 30,000 American servicemen.

''I don't think a year ago outside of the Administration we had any inkling all
of this was coming,'' said Representative Michael D. Barnes, a Maryland Democrat
and prominent critic of Administration policy. ''There is a constant continued
escalation of the war down there and since we're running it, there's been a
constant escalation of our activities.''

''We've been misled consistently about where we were headed,'' Mr. Barnes went
on. ''They do seem to want to keep the direct involvement of U.S. personnel out
of it, but the line they have drawn appears to be difficult to adhere to.''

Facing renewed questions about the Administration's intentions, Defense
Secretary Weinberger on April 8 reas serted the Administration's position that
there was ''no plan, no strategy, no thought of putting U.S. combat troops''
into Central America.

Significant Policy Shift Reported

He said the Pentagon had no contingency plans for using American combat forces,
but other high-ranking Pentagon officials said the Defense Department had
recently begun drafting contingency plans for possible use of combat troops. In
what they called a significant shift in Pentagon thinking, the Defense
Department, they said, has adopted the political policy of being prepared to use
combat troops if leftist forces cannot be defeated any other way.

Within the Administration and on Capitol Hill, the steady expansion of the
American military role is seen as a deliberate strategy promoted by some senior
military commanders with support from top civilian officials, outflanking the
slower-moving diplomacy of the State Department.

''I think American policy toward Central America is largely dictated by military
concerns,'' commented Senator Jeff Bingaman, a New Mexico Democrat, expressing a
view widely held on Capitol Hill.

''The military, mainly in the South Command, has a fairly well thought- out,
long-range plan,'' said Mr. Bingaman, a critic of Administration policy. ''The
Administration's lack of any real diplomatic strategy in the region has meant
that the military strategy of increasing our pressure has taken the place of a
foreign policy down there.''

Area Commander a Key Advocate

The most vigorous proponent of the military buildup, officials say, is General
Paul F. Gorman, commander of the Southern Command with headquarters in Panama,
an officer with a reputation as a hard-charging, vocal anti- Communist and with
command authority over all military operations in Central America.

Other important advocates of the buildup in the Administration are reported to
be Gen. Wallace T. Nutting, commander of the Readiness Command based in Tampa,
Fla., and Lieut. Gen. Robert L. Schweitzer, a former Reagan White House national
security aide who is now chairman of the Inter- American Defense Board
affiliated with the Organization of American States.

This policy approach is also said to have strong support among policy- making
officials like Robert C. McFarlane, national security adviser to the President;
William J. Casey, Director of Central Intelligence; Fred C. Ikle, Under
Secretary of Defense for Policy, and Vernon A. Walters, a retired general with
long experience and acquaintance in Latin America, who is now an ambasador at
large in the State Department.

State Department Role Said to Be Weakened

According to some State Department officials and Congressional specialists, the
expansion of C.I.A. paramilitary operations through the Nicaraguan rebel groups
has reinforced the general military cast of the Administration's strategy.

Last year, Secretary of State George P. Shultz won President Reagan's agreement
for the State Department to oversee and coordinate Central American policy
through an interagency group headed by Langhorne A. Motley, Assistant Secretary
of State for Inter- American Affairs. But in fact, Administration officials say,
the Defense Department often has the prevailing voice on policy toward Honduras
and El Salvador and the C.I.A. on policy toward Nicaragua. Officials say that
Mr. Shultz and some other State Department aides have more moderate objectives
and prefer more emphasis on diplomacy than the other two agencies.

Recently, for example, the opposition of Mr. Casey and the C.I.A. persuaded
President Reagan to reject Nicaragua's proposed Ambassador to the United States,
Nora Astorga, although Secretary Shultz recommended accepting her.

Morever, Administration official say, the State Department is generally
reluctant to oppose an increase of military involvement for fear of losing
influence by being out of step with the President's thinking and the dominant
mood in the Administration.

'Not Very Much Wallop'

''State does not have very much wallop on these things,'' said one longtime
diplomat. ''They have to look tough. If they wind up as naysayers all the time,
they lose clout. So people are careful when they buck the prevailing trend in
this area. Shultz has not stood up. He just floats along, particularly on
Nicaragua.''

The sharp debate in Congress this spring was kindled not only by unease about
the growing scope and depth of American involvement but the danger of American
casualties as the military effort gains momentum and, ultimately, the risk of
being drawn, perhaps unintentionally, into combat engagement.

This fear has been fed by disclosures that Americans working for the Central
Intelligence Agency directly supervised the mining of Nicaraguan ports this
spring and speedboat raids against Nicaraguan oil storage facilities last fall,
and by an incident in Honduras last Wednesday in which an unarmed American Army
helicopter carrying two United States Senators, Lawton Chiles of Florida and J.
Bennett Johnston Jr. of Louisiana, both Democrats, came under Salvadoran rebel
fire. The rebels said the craft had flown over guerrilla-held territory on a
reconnaissance mission.

Senators Escaped Injury

Although both Senators escaped injury, the incident was seen as a symbol of the
rising perils of the widening American role.

''The more people you have on the spot, the more chance you have of casualties
and the more chance you have of confrontation with Sandinista troops and their
Cuban advisers or the Salvadoran guerrillas,'' Senator Bingaman said.

''The risk-taking has increased,'' he said, ''and so have the chances of an
incident that would be used to justify direct American military involvement.''

Recently, for example, the Pentagon disclosed that American pilots at bases in
Honduras and Panama now provide regular tactical support for Salvadoran Army
units by flying reconnaissance missions over battle zones.

A military official in San Salvador said that he and other Americans based there
had flown with Salvadoran pilots on training missions on which they had
occasionally made bombing runs against leftist guerrilla units. Others have
reported that American military advisers are more regularly out in the provinces
with Salvadoran commanders than a year ago.

Exposure of Advisers To Fire Reported

During the Senate debate over emergency military aid for El Salvador in early
April, Senator Jim Sasser, Democrat of Tennessee reported that mobile American
military training teams had been exposed to hostile fire in three incidents in
recent months when Salvadoran military compounds they were visiting were
attacked by guerrillas.

Mr. Sasser and other Congressional sources have also reported incidents in which
an American marine at the Tiger Island radar station in Honduras suffered a
gunshot wound and American Special Forces troops operating nearby in Honduras
was fired upon.

In one instance last January, a Honduran officer told Congressional specialists,
a Honduran platoon with four American advisers stumbled into a fight with a
Salvadoran guerrilla column near Chiloteca, about two and a half miles inside
Honduras from El Salvador. But the Honduran reportedly said that the Americans
did not fire their weapons and were not hurt.

Pentagon spokesmen decline to comment on such reports. The Defense Department
has instructed American advisers in Honduras to stay at least 10 miles away from
the Salvadoran frontier, officials said.

Strategy Role Laid to C.I.A.

Congressional sources also reported not only that C.I.A. agents supplied and
closely supervised rebel units of the Nicaraguan Democratic Force operating from
Honduras, but also that some American agents had flown on missions over
Nicaragua on Honduran Air Force helicopters flown by Honduran pilots to supply
rebel forces. In addition, the C.I.A. is said to have been directing the
military strategies of Costa Rican-based insurgents, the Democratic
Revolutionary Alliance, by threatening to withhold aid if the insurgents did not
pursue the agency's objectives.  The most striking symbol of the changed
American presence in Central American since last year is the network of
refurbished bases in Honduras. The main impetus for the construction was the
large American military exercise known as Big Pine II, which began last August
and ended in February.

When that exercise ended, Secretary Weinberger said that about 800 American
servicemen would remain in Honduras to prepare for further exercises. Since
then, the Pentagon has increased that figure to 1,700, most of them at Palmerola
Air Base, the American military headquarters in Honduras.

The most expensive American-built installations in Honduras are Palmerola Air
Base, which cost $19 million, and a port, airfield and regional military
training center at Trujillo, which cost $28.6 million, according to the
Pentagon. Other airfields at San Lorenzo, Aguacate, San Pedro Cula and Puerto
Lempira and two radar stations at Tiger Island and Cerro La Mole cost a total of
$3.8 million, Pentagon officials said.

Ammunition Stockpiled

Large stocks of ammunition are being prepositioned for American troops at San
Lorenzo and Trujillo and 13 miles of concrete tank obstacles have been built on
the Honduran side of the border with Nicaragua south of Choluteca, according to
the Pentagon.

Since April 1, 800 troops from the 864th Army Engineer Battalion at Fort Lewis,
Wash., have been in Honduras improving airstrips at Jamastran and Cucuyagua as
part of an exercise called Granadero I. During a second phase of that exercise,
starting May 23, 1,000 American airborne troops will fly or parachute into
regions adjacent to the Salvadoran and Nicaraguan frontiers.  The President of
Honduras, Roberto Suazo Cordova, is urging the Administration to build a joint
naval base at Puerto Castilla on the Atlantic Coast that could cost over $100
million. The Reagan Administration has made no decision but General Gorman and
John D. Negroponte, the United States Ambassador to Honduras, have publicly
endorsed the project.

Funds for Airfield Held Up by Congress

Congress has already appropriated $8 million for another airfield at La Ceiba
but is blocking the funds as leverage to get the Pentagon to spell out the
Administration's strategy more fully.

Democrats like Senator Sasser, informed by military officers that the Pentagon
intends to hold military exercises in Honduras running into 1989, have charged
the Reagan Administration with developing a permanent military presence in that
country with wider objectives. ''We're not being told the whole story,'' Senator
Sasser declared.

The Administration and Republican backers like Senator Ted Stevens of Alaska and
John P. East of North Carolina reply that all the American-built facilities in
Honduras are temporary, not permanent, and that exercises are being conducted to
serve as a deterrrent to a potential Nicaraguan attack on Honduras.

''The U.S. has no bases in Honduras, nor are we seeking to establish any bases
there,'' said Col. Richard Lake, a Pentagon spokesman. ''The U.S. has access to
airfields in Honduras.''

Purpose of Exercise Explained

A Pentagon statement on Granadero I said that American participation in that
exercise ''reflects our resolve to reassure Central American nations of our
continuing support and cooperation in the improvement of regional defense
capabilities.''

In practice, the American buildup in Honduras has enabled the Administration to
get around its self-imposed limit of 55 American military trainers in El
Salvador. And within El Salvador, the number of American military personnel has
been modestly expanded to 97 by adding to the United States Embassy's defense
attache's office and stationing personnel in San Salvador temporarily.

In addition, the burden of training several thousand Salvadoran troops this year
has been carried by 160 to 170 Special Forces troops based at the Honduran
training center near Trujillo.

Perhaps more significant, the Pentagon has reported that since mid-February the
300-man 224th Military Intelligence Battalion based at Palmerola Air Base in
Honduras has been providing regular tactical support to Salvadoran Army units
fighting leftist guerillas in eastern El Salvador.

Guerrilla Formations Spotted

That unit is flying almost daily air reconnaissance missions over El Salvador
with 11 OV-1, twin-engine turboprop Mohawk aircraft, military officers say. The
planes, equipped with forward-looking infrared radar and sideward-looking radar,
can help spot guerrilla troop concentrations and movements in the dark and
provide the information instantly to Salvadoran field commanders.

In addition, military sources have disclosed that four C-130, four-engine
turboprop aircraft from the 24th Composite Air Wing based at Howard Air Base in
Panama have also been flying air reconnaissance missions over El Salvador and
radioing immediate intelligence to Salvadoran field commanders.

General Gorman was reported by Congressional sources to have proposed late last
year using heavily armed but unmarked American AC-130 gunships operating out of
Panama to attack Salvadoran guerrilla forces with their machine guns and
rapid-firing cannons. But on the advice of other officials that Americans should
not be firing weapons, President Reagan reportedly vetoed the plan.

Thomas R. Pickering, the United States Ambassador to El Salvador, has also
sought to discount the reconnaissance missions as not representing an increase
of the American involvement. ''These kinds of things have been part of the scene
for some time,'' he told reporters recently.

Envoy Denies Conflict With War Powers Act

But a former American adviser now back in the United States asserted that
''radio to radio'' contact between American aircraft and Salvadoran ground units
represented a ''step up'' by the United States in 1984. The missions have also
raised concern in Congress about the risks of American planes being shot down
and American pilots being killed or captured.

Asked about this risk, Mr. Pickering replied that he would say only ''that the
rules of engagement are set down in a way that avoids conflict with the War
Powers Resolution.'' That legislation, passed in 1973, requires Congressional
approval for American forces to be deployed abroad for more than 90 days in
conditions where they face likely hostilities.

The buildup in Honduras is intended to help the war effort in El Salvador in
other ways as well. About 100 marines are based at a radar station on Tiger
Island in the Gulf of Fonseca, bordered by Nicaraguan, Honduran and Salvadoran
frontiers. The radar station, reinforced by a Navy frigate off the Nicaraguan
coast, is intended to monitor Nicaraguan airspace and waters for movement of
supplies to El Salvador.

Similarly, military officers report that as many as 75 American Special Forces
troops have been training and operating with Honduran infantry battalions in the
land region around San Lorenzo and Choluteca, near the Gulf of Fonseca, to
disrupt land infiltration across Honduras into El Salvador.

Skepticism Voiced in Congress

But privately, both Republicans and Democrats in Congress voice skepticism that
interdiction is the primary purpose of the C.I.A.-organized sabotage raids and
mining operations against the Nicaraguan ports of Corinto and Puerto Sandino on
the Pacific Coast and El Bluff on the Atlantic Coast.

Privately, Administration officials acknowledge that operations against economic
targets like ports and oil storage facilities were aimed more at putting a crimp
into the Nicaraguan economy and thus putting pressure on the Sandinista
Government to give up its support of the Salvadoran guerrillas than at actually
intercepting arms shipments.

Some Administration officials say that the growing American military and
paramilitary presence and involvement in Central America was necessary because
of the intensification of the guerrilla wars in both El Salvador and Nicaragua
and because of continued Soviet, Cuban and Nicaraguan support for the leftist
guerrillas in El Salvador.

A year ago, American intelligence estimated that leftist guerrilla forces in El
Salvador included about 5,000 to 6,000 combat troops. That number has now
doubled to between 10,000 and 12,000, according to recent American estimates.

A Vietnam Parallel Seen

Similarly, the combined forces of the Nicaraguan rebel groups - the Nicaraguan
Democratic Force, the Democratic Revolutionary Alliance and the Miskito Indian
insurgents - numbered about 5,000 to 6,000 a year ago. Last week, Adolfo Calero
Portocarrero, president of the Democratic Force, said the combined Nicaraguan
rebel strength was now about 15,000.

It is the gradual intensification of combat and the growth of the forces on both
sides that prompted Democratic critics of the Administration like Senator Edward
M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut to warn that
the American military momentum in Central America bore increasing parallels to
the American buildup and involvement in Vietnam two decades ago.

But Administration officials respond that the Reagan strategy has so far avoided
direct combat involvement and has not cost casualties except for one American
helicopter pilot in Honduras shot by Nicaraguan soldiers across the border. They
contend that the Vietnam parallel is unfair and improperly weakens the American
ability to bolster friendly nations in Central America.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: chart of U.S. forces in Central America (page A8); map of Central
American (page A8)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN LEAVES ON TRIP TO CHINA; SEEKS TO EASE TENSION IN RELATIONS

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1353 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, April 22


President Reagan arrived here today from California on the start of what he
called ''a long journey for peace'' to China.

White House officials say the President's six-day visit will include talks on a
range of topics aimed at easing tensions that have arisen in America's relations
with China over the last two years. Officials also say the results of the trip
are likely to be a centerpiece of Mr. Reagan's re-election bid.

For the first time, Mr. Reagan will be visiting a country that is not a staunch
ally; China will be the second Communist country he has ever visited, after East
Germany, where he journeyed in 1978.



Wide Range of Issues

Much of the news coverage is likely to focus on Mr. Reagan's visits to the sites
of Peking, Shanghai and the ancient burial pits of Xian. But Administration
officials say the chief significance of the President's trip will lie in how
much understanding is achieved in discussions with the Chinese leaders on such
issues as relations with the Soviet Union and Taiwan, trade, American investment
in China and other matters.

In almost every area, China and the United States have struggled to overcome
disagreements.  ''It's clear that we've had a very up's-and-down's kind of
relationship with China,'' a senior Administration official said. He added,
however, that the progress in various areas had brought relations to ''a new
era'' marked by productive discussions on the issues dividing them.

Mr. Reagan arrived at Hickam Air Force Base this afternoon after spending the
weekend at his ranch in Santa Barbara, Calif. The President, greeted by a few
hundred cheering visitors to the base, declared that the trip would ''continue
the process of reconciliation'' with China begun by President Nixon.

The President, who is scheduled to arrive in Peking on Thursday after overnight
stops here and in Guam, plans more than seven hours of private discussions with
Chinese leaders. Administration aides said no major breakthroughs are expected,
but they expressed the hope for progress that can lay the groundwork for better
relations in the future.

Among the topics to be discussed are these:


- Continued American support for Taiwan, which Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang has
called the biggest obstacle to improvement in Chinese-American relations. Mr.
Zhao made his comment in the United States in January.


- Disagreements on a treaty for peaceful nuclear cooperation between the two
countries. The agreement is needed before American companies can sell China
reactors for its program to develop nuclear power.


- Impatience and frustration on a range of trade issues. China wants to sell
more textile products and buy more high-technology products than the United
States wants. The United States wants a new agreement commiting China to buy
more grain.


- Attitudes toward the Soviet Union.  After a period of blaming both Moscow and
Washington for world tensions, China has lately suggested publicly that the
Soviet Union is more to blame. While China and the United States share an
anti-Soviet stand, China resists being seen as a counterweight to the Soviet
Union.

Mr. Reagan is expected to sign a tax treaty in Peking that will eliminate double
taxation for American companies doing business in China. In addition, he plans
to sign a two-year Implementing Accord of a Cultural Agreement that was
originally signed in 1979. The previous accord was suspended by Peking last year
in protest after the United States granted asylum to a Chinese tennis player.

Taiwan Is Biggest Issue

Administration officials agree that the biggest irritant in the relationship
with China continues to be Taiwan. The Chinese remain concerned about Mr.
Reagan's longtime commitment to the Government there, despite his statements
that the United States wants a friendship with ''the people of Taiwan,'' and not
the Government.

Although American arms sales to Taiwan have declined slightly, Peking wants a
commitment for a cutoff date. The United States has said only that it expects a
gradual reduction in arms sales in response to China's intention to resolve its
differences with Taiwan without the use of force.

Although the history of modern China is marked by disappointment in the West at
the failure of markets to open up, United States officials now say that the
future of American investment in China is bright. American companies are eager
to provide technical help especially in the development of nuclear power,
offshore oil drilling, coal mining and hydroelectric dams in China.

Mr. Reagan has come to look on his trip to China as helping such enterprises.
''I go as something of a salesman,'' he told a group of trade officials in
Tacoma, Wash., on Thursday. ''And I'll do anything I can up to the limit of not
putting a 'Buy American' sticker on my bag.''

Administration officials nonetheless are disappointed that they have been unable
to conclude the terms of an investment treaty with China, which would establish
protection for American investments from nationalization and regulations that
favor domestic Chinese investment.

In addition, there had been hope that a nuclear cooperation treaty could be
signed when Mr. Reagan visited. But the talks have been unable to resolve
China's refusal to agree to the American demand that it get consent from the
United States for any special use of processed nuclear fuel.



Sovereignty Infringement

The demand, which is designed to prevent the spread of weapons-grade material,
is opposed by China as an infringement on its sovereignty.

The most important economic breakthrough with China occurred last year, when Mr.
Reagan moved China to a new trade category that permits it to receive a much
larger amount of high-technology products. High-technology exports subsequently
quadrupled, bringing big profits to American companies. But China is still upset
about controls that prevent it from receiving all it wants.

Another area of disagreement is in foreign assistance. China is seeking low-cost
loans from the United States for its development programs. American officials
say there are no programs that would permit such aid to China, and that in any
case China should rely on private investment for its development needs.

Mr. Reagan may also sign a scientific agreement with China permitting it to have
a Chinese astronaut, or at least a payload, aboard a space shuttle flight in the
next several years. Offers to have an astronaut join the American space program
have been extended to Brazil, France and West Germany - but not to a Communist
country.

Although China and the United States have similar views on some issues - both
oppose the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and Vietnam's actions in Cambodia
- there are major differences that are to be discussed.

China has been an outspoken critic of United States policies in Central America,
the Middle East and South Africa.

Top Reagan Administration officials have said that they welcomed the chance to
explain to China that they are acting to counter what the Administration
contends is Soviet aggression near the American border.

Mr. Reagan plans to make extensive use of television in China. His speech in the
Great Hall of the People, as well as a question session with Chinese students in
Shanghai and with Chinese journalists in Peking, will be televised.

Just what notes Mr. Reagan plans to sound, however, is unclear.



Military Assistance

Equally unclear is how much military assistance the United States will be
willing to provide China. Here again, American officials said that Mr. Reagan's
discussions will be important in measuring Chinese interest.

''We're not pushing our stuff on them,'' said an Administration official. He
said that up to now, the United States has only sold nonlethal items, such as
communications equipment. Discussions may begin on what American officials say
will be ''purely defensive'' equipment, such as antitank missiles or artillery
shell manufacturing capability.

Mr. Reagan plans to return from Shanghai May 1, after a six-day visit.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENTIAL FOREIGN POLICY POWER, LIMITED

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 462 words


To the Editor:


I think the issue of where the war and diplomacy powers are constitutionally
located goes deeper than even your April 8 editorial (''The Power to Make War'')
has penetrated.

In practice, what we have is working agreements between the executive and the
legislature; and this is certainly a great improvement over the Roosevelt-Nixon
practice of informing only the handful of legislators who will agree, collude
and say nothing. Neither system, however, is what the Framers and their
generation had in mind.

Their bogey was monarchy. Their villains were Charles I and Caesar. They
designed the Constitution of 1787 so as to permanently cripple what they saw as
the inevitable attempts of republican magistrates to become dictators through
misuse of what the English had called ''prerogative.''

The English Revolution of 1640-1660 was remembered here as a desperate but
successful attempt to defend the liberties of the legislature and the people
against tyranny. It was remembered as having begun when Charles I, like his
father James I, insisted on his sole and exclusive right to make foreign policy.
In giving the foreign policy power to the President, the Framers, I believe,
found a modus vivendi on one of their touchiest issues. It was a limited grant.
Some would not have voted for it if the President's term had been made longer.
Some would have eliminated the grant if the state militias had been eliminated.
Almost all considered it indispensable that any result of Presidential diplomacy
be debated at least by the Senate, preferably in public, before it went into
effect.  Those who rejected it were vehement in their rejection. They were
afraid of having a single rather than a plural executive in the first place; and
a single executive with discretion in foreign policy would be even more
dangerous.

In these times, the mind of the Framers would, I think, advise that more rather
than less be put in the President's way. Threats of war, like acts of war, must
be made in the name of the sovereign people of the United States. It is
outrageous even to consider leaving them out of the decision-making. To bring
them in, there must be open, vigorous, public debate between magistrates whose
responsibilities in this area are more or less equal.

The Framers were not democrats, but if a democracy must be defended by
democratic means, then that is all the more reason for defending a republic by
republican means.

The alternative is the sort of tyranny foreshadowed by the Nixon Administration,
wars like the one in Vietnam and possibly a nuclear war to which we have not
consented.

WILLIAM R. EVERDELL Brooklyn, April 8, 1984

The writer is co-chairman of the history department at St. Ann's School.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

EPISCOPAL BISHOP CALLS U.S. LATIN POLICY 'ILLEGAL AND IMMORAL'

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 754 words


Bishop Paul Moore Jr. of the Episcopal Diocese of New York denounced United
States policy in Central America yesterday as ''illegal, inconsistent, ill-
advised and immoral.''

The Bishop, in his annual Easter message from the pulpit of the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, said that in Central America ''we stand naked and ashamed
before the nations of the world.''

The Bishop's criticism added to a surge of protests in recent months from
American religious groups. Both individual leaders and governing bodies have
expressed their opposition to United States military involvement in the region.

Among the groups that have objected to Reagan Administration policies have been
the Episcopal Church, the United States Catholic Conference, the Union of
American Hebrew Congregations, the United Methodist Church, the American
Lutheran Church and the Presbyterian Church, USA.

More than 20 religious groups have registered official appeals for a nonmilitary
solution to the region's economic, political and social crises. For some
religious leaders, the scope and intensity of the protest resembles the joining
of spiritual forces against the Vietnam War.

Rising Level of Protest

In his Easter sermon, Bishop Moore noted the rising level of religious protest.
''At this moment in history,'' he said, ''the major Christian churches of the
United States, as well as many Jewish groups, in a rare moment of unity speak as
one about our military presence in Central America. Therefore, I speak not as a
solitary prophet, but as one who expresses the united voice of millions of
Christians and Jews in the United States.''

One factor adding to the level of protest has been the increasing flow of
visitors from religious groups to Central American countries. Reports on
conditions in El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua have become more visible in
several religious publications. Many assessments have been sharply at odds with
Reagan Administration strategies and goals.

Both the nation's Roman Catholic bishops and the National Council of Churches,
consisting of 31 major Protestant and Eastern Orthodox churches, have demanded
an end to United States military action in Central America and called for
negotiated settlements. Recent disclosures about the Central Intelligence
Agency's role in attacks on Nicaragua, including the mining of harbors, have
heightened their dismay and dissent.

The National Council, for example, in a statement from its governing board last
November, backed peace talks among the warring parties in El Salvador, between
Honduras and Nicaragua and between the United States and Nicaragua. It further
called for a ''cessation of any and all activities to destabilize the
governments of the region.'' In an April 12 letter to President Reagan, the
council assailed the mining of the Nicaraguan harbors.

'The Voice of Peace'

Bishop Moore said the church ''is no expert'' in the ''political, military,
economic and diplomatic implications of our policy.'' But he added: ''This
Easter morning, we speak to the immorality of our policy in Central America. The
churches speak the voice of peace, the voice of the Risen Christ against the
violence and terrorism we have brought to Central America.'' He singled out the
mining as ''one more step against international law.''

Bishop Moore, who visited Nicaragua a month ago as part of a religious group,
said United States actions there in supporting attacks on the Sandinista
Government were ''immoral because we commit murder without even the legal cloak
of a declared war.'' He added, ''We simply cannot go around the world shooting
and killing innocent men, women and children as part of our national policy.''

The Bishop blamed the Reagan Administration and Congress for failing to respond
adequately to the crisis in Central America. ''Congress has not had the
fortitude to rise up in anger against this obscene policy of ours until the last
few days,'' he said.

Drawing on the imagery of Holy Week and Easter, Bishop Moore compared the
suffering Jesus on the cross to ''the innocent people of Central America'' and
likened the United States to Pontius Pilate ''who could stop the slaughter but
who washed his hands of the whole event.''

Bishop Moore added, ''I am not saying that the Sandinistas are perfect, any more
than I am saying that the young United States of America was perfect after the
Revolutionary War. It took us 12 years to have an election and George Washington
was the only candidate.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Bishop Paul Moore Jr.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
A Success Is Reported For Cambodian Rebels

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 100 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 22


Cambodian rebels today drove Vietnamese forces out of a position the Vietnamese
forces had captured in recent fighting, a Thai Army general said.

The officer, Maj. Gen. Pichit Kulawanit, said about 500 rebels counterattacked
at dawn, pushing westward from their base at Ampil, 120 miles northeast of
Bangkok, toward heavily mined Vietnamese positions.

He said the Cambodian rebels ''have managed to push the Vietnamese troops from
Beoung Ampil.'' Beoung Ampil, a small lake two miles west of Ampil, the
Cambodian rebels' main military headquarters, was captured by Hanoi's troops
last Sunday.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

INDONESIAN AIDE SAYS SOVIET BACKS CAMBODIA PEACE PLAN

BYLINE: By ROBERT TRUMBULL

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 476 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, April 22


Indonesia's Foreign Minister says the Soviet Union has expressed support for an
Indonesian initiative for a political solution in Vietnamese-occupied Cambodia.

The Foreign Minister, Mochtar Kusumaatmadja, said that he discussed the subject
in Moscow this month with Foreign Minister Andrei A. Gromyko, and that Soviet
support for the Indonesian plan was ''very significant.''

In an interview here last week, Dr. Mochtar said the plan offered a formula that
would make Cambodia ''independent, neutral and nonaligned.''

The fighting in Cambodia is ''basically a conflict between powers bent on
domination,'' the Foreign Minister said, adding that ''the long-term ambition of
Vietnam, aided by Russia, is to control the whole of the former French
Indochina,'' keeping Cambodia and Laos subservient to Hanoi.

Chinese Have a Stake

This ambition, he said, is opposed by China, which backs the former Pol Pot
regime, the most powerful component of the resistance coalition headed by Prince
Norodom Sihanouk.

''Russia is not interested in how Kampuchea is run,'' Dr. Mochtar said, using
the Cambodians' name for their country.  ''They are interested in their bases,''
he went on, referring to the Soviet military facilities at the Vietnamese ports
of Da Nang and Cam Ranh Bay. ''As long as these are undisturbed,'' he said, the
Russians can ''live with'' a neutral Cambodia.

Dr. Mochtar has been prominent in efforts by the Association of South East Asian
Nations, or Asean, to make peace between the Cambodian Government of Heng
Samrin, which is supported by Vietnamese troops, and the coalition led by Prince
Sihanouk, the former chief of state. Asean is a grouping of six non-Communist
nations: Indonesia, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, the Philippines and Brunei.

Dr. Mochtar said he expected Asean to ''gradually accept'' the Indonesian
formula.

Asean Calls for Referendum

Asean has called for withdrawal of Vietnamese troops and a referendum on the
composition of a new Cambodian government, but Thailand and the Philippines,
military allies of the United States, have yet to endorse the Indonesian
proposal that the reconstructed Cambodian regime be neutral and nonaligned, Dr.
Mochtar said.

The standing committee of ASEAN, which Dr. Mochtar heads, issued a statement in
Jakarta condemning what it termed the ''inhuman'' Vietnamese attacks on
resistance encampments in Cambodia in recent days.

Dr. Mochtar's visit to Moscow, the first by an Indonesian foreign minister in 10
years, is seen by diplomats here as part of a newly assertive foreign policy
initiated by the Government of President Suharto in recent months. It follows a
long period devoted to establishing domestic political stability and upgrading
economic development, an area neglected by Mr. Suharto's predecessor, President
Sukarno.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THREE WILL BE TRIED FOR ACTORS' DEATHS IN FILMING OF MOVIE

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 304 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 23


The director of the movie ''Twilight Zone'' and two members of his crew were
ordered today to stand trial on charges of involuntary manslaughter stemming
from the deaths of three actors during the filming of the movie in 1982.

''The simple fact is that three persons died in the final filming of the final
segment,'' said Judge Brian Crahan of Municipal Court, ''and their deaths did
not occur by mere accident outside of the proximate scope of foreseeability of
these three principals.''

The judge ordered a trial in Los Angeles Superior Court for the director, John
Landis; Paul Stewart, the special effects coordinator, and Dorcey Wingo, the
pilot of the helicopter that crashed July 23, 1982, killing the actor Vic
Morrow, 53 years old, Myca Dinh Le, 6, and Renee Shin Chen, 7.

Judge Crahan dismissed charges of involuntary manslaughter against Dan
Allingham, the special production manager, and George Folsey Jr., the associate
producer.

The actors were killed while a mock Vietnam War scene was being filmed.  As a
helicopter fitted with cameras hovered overhead, Mr. Morrow carried the children
while dodging gunfire and special effects explosions.

One of the blasts damaged the helicopter's tail rotor, causing it to go out of
control and pitch into the river Mr.  Morrow and the children were crossing. The
main rotor struck the actors.

In testimony at a preliminary hearing, lawyers for the director and his
associates argued that heat from the blast caused the aluminum skin of the tail
rotor to peel off. They said such an accident was unprecedented and therefore
unforseeable.

Prosecutors argued that the crash came after debris from an explosion hit the
helicopter, adding that whether the accident was caused by heat or debris, the
potential for an accident should have been evident.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 24, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ADVERTISING;
;
Art Director Starts Agency, Looks Uptown

BYLINE: By Philip H. Dougherty

SECTION: Section D; Page 27, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 97 words

DATELINE: Bruce Alexander Margan, a 36


year-old art director, has opened an agency in a temporary office at 295 Park
Avenue South in Manhattan and is eager to move farther uptown.

He has got a couple of typical start- up accounts, the Printing House Health Spa
down in Wall Street, and Hubert's, a restaurant. Hardly the kind of clients he
was accustomed to working for at Leber Katz Partners, Cunningham & Walsh or
Benton & Bowles. And probably not even at Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos,
where he started in Boston.

All that came after he won the Bronze Star for service with the Army in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN LISTS HIS GOALS FOR CHINA TRIP

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 597 words

DATELINE: AGANA, Guam, Wednesday, April 25


President Reagan arrived here today on his way to Peking after declaring in
Honolulu that his trip to China was intended to strengthen Chinese-American
friendship, open new markets for American trade and establish a foundation for
''opposing expansionist aggression.''

This was apparently an allusion to expansionist policies of the Soviet Union.

''Together,'' the President said, speaking of Chinese-American cooperation, ''we
can go forward in a mighty enterprise to build dynamic growth economies, and
make the world safer, by working for peace and opposing expansionist
aggression.''

''And that's what our trip to China is all about,'' Mr. Reagan told a crowd of
about 300 at Hickam Air Force Base before boarding Air Force One for the
eight-hour flight to Guam. The President was due to spend Wednesday night in
Guam and to arrive in Peking at 2:05 P.M. Thursday (1:05 A.M. Thursday, New York
time).

''We journey to China in a spirit of peace and friendship, realistic about our
differences, but desiring to build upon our common interests,'' Mr. Reagan said.
''The American people have always held the achievements of Chinese civilization
in highest esteem.  And we have the warmest feelings of friendship for the
Chinese people.''

He said his goal was also ''to convey this respect and friendship directly to
the Chinese people, to hear their hopes and concerns, and to express our
readiness to cooperate with China in its ambitious efforts to modernize its
economy.''

The President's words seemed to carry special drama, since they came from a man
who spent much of his political life before becoming President denouncing the
Government in Peking as illegitimate. Since taking office, he has expanded the
policy of President Jimmy Carter, his predecessor, of lessening ties with Taiwan
and proclaiming Peking the legitimate Government of China.

In Guam, he concentrated on the importance of the South Pacific for American
security.

''We have a natural interest in the progress of all the island peoples of the
Pacific,'' Mr. Reagan said.  ''We want to help the development of their
economies and we will help keep the region free from tension and rivalries.
With our partnership, much can and will be accomplished.''

The President's comments appeared to be a conciliatory gesture to the requests
by Guam for Congressional action lifting trade and regulatory restrictions on
investment in Guam.

At each stop since leaving Washington last Wednesday Mr. Reagan has repeated his
theme that the United States must recognize its responsibilities as a power in
the Pacific.

White House aides have said Mr. Reagan's stops in the Pacific, while helping him
and his party rest and adjust to the time zones, are also intended to remind
Americans and China of his Administration's determination to assert its
prerogatives in the region.

A developing theme of the President's visit is that the United States is seeking
to enlist Peking's help in achieving stability in the Pacific. Administration
aides also make clear that the President hopes to echo the concern China feels
about Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, the Soviet military buildup along
China's border and Soviet backing of Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia.  American
officials say, however, that Mr. Reagan is not likely to mention the Soviet
Union by name in this regard until after he leaves China. Officials said Mr.
Reagan did not want to push his anti-Soviet message too hard out of concern for
Peking's sensibilities in not wanting to be seen simply as a counterweight to
Moscow.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of worker moving potted plant

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

JUSTICES HEAR CHALLENGE TO CURBS ON TRAVEL TO CUBA

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 815 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


The Supreme Court heard arguments today on the validity of the Reagan
Administration's restrictions on travel to Cuba.

A Federal appeals court ruled a year ago that there was no legal basis for the
currency control regulation the Administration imposed in 1982. The regulation,
making it illegal to spend American money on travel-related expenses in Cuba,
had the effect of cutting off all ordinary tourist travel to the island five
years after the Carter Administration lifted a long-standing travel embargo.

The Reagan Administration has defended the restraints as necessary to deny Cuba
the hard currency it wants to ''finance destabilizing activity in Central
America and the Caribbean region,'' as the Administration's Supreme Court brief
said.

But the argument today was almost completely devoid of the broad arguments of
foreign policy and constitutional law that have swirled around the issue for two
years. Instead, the argument focused almost entirely on the intent of Congress
when, in 1977, it revoked the President's broad authority to impose peacetime
embargoes.

Narrow Legal Question


The 1977 law, the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, contained a
clause that permitted the continuation of restrictions that were in effect on
July 1, 1977, for Cuba, North Korea, Vietnam and Cambodia. President Carter
revoked most of the Cuba travel restrictions several months before that date.

The narrow legal question for the Court is whether Congress meant to limit the
clause to restrictions that were actually being applied on July 1 or whether it
meant to preserve the underlying authority that the President could have
exercised on that date to restrict travel, whether or not he was exercising that
authority. The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston,
adopted the narrower reading of the clause and said the Reagan Administration
had no authority to impose new restrictions on Cuban travel without declaring a
new national emergency and consulting Congress.

The argument today brought together two experienced advocates before Supreme
Court Arguing the Administration's appeal was Paul M. Bator, a Deputy Soicitor
General who is on leave from Harvard Law School, where he is a professor. Mr.
Bator has argued a number of politically sensitive cases for the Administration.

On the other side was Leonard B. Boudin, one of the country's best known civil
rights lawyers, who has argued several important Supreme Court cases involving
the right to travel. He was representing the group of people who wanted to
travel to Cuba and who brought the successful lower court challenge.

Court Error Contended


Mr. Bator said the appeals court, in its reading of the clause, had
misunderstood the events of 1977. While President Carter did permit most travel
to Cuba, Mr. Bator said, he did so ''within an ongoing licensing system'' that
the clause was intended to preserve.

''Yes, the general license gave permission,'' Mr. Bator said, ''but that itself
was an act of regulation.'' He said Presidential authority to regulate travel to
Cuba ''was being exercised on July 1, 1977, and has been continuously asserted
since 1963.'' For the President to have to declare a new national emergency
would be ''undesirable and awkward,'' he said.

Mr. Boudin told the Justices that the ''dominant purpose'' of the 1977 law was
to ''restrict the President.'' Quoting from the legislative debates, he said
that there was ''no ambiguity'' about the desire of Congress to limit the clause
to ''existing uses, existing controls,'' and not to underlying authority that
was not actually being exercised.

''The question is,'' he said, ''was there an embargo on travel to Cuba on July
1, 1977, and the answer is no.''

Argument 'Far too Tenuous'

He said the Administration's argument that American tourist dollars would help
Cuba export revolution was ''far too tenuous'' for the Court to accept. ''If
this is an emergency,'' he said, ''then the President is supposed to go and
declare one. That's exactly what Congress had in mind.''

The Justices asked few questions. Their decision in the case, Regan v. Wald, No.
83- 436, is expected by early summer.

State JurisdictionIn a decision today, the Court ruled that the Texas courts do
not have jurisdiction to hear a lawsuit against a Colombian helicopter company
by survivors of four Americans who were killed in a helicopter crash in Peru.
Writing for the Court, Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun said the helicopter
company did not have ''the kind of continuous and systematic general business
contacts'' in the state of Texas necessary to give the state's courts
jurisdiction.

The decision, Helicopteros v. Hall, No. 82-1127, overturned a ruling by the
Supreme Court of Texas. The vote was 8 to 1, with Associate Justice William J.
Brennan dissenting.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HELPING THE HANDICAPPED UP THE LADDER OF SCOUTING

BYLINE: By DOROTHY J. GAITER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Living Desk

LENGTH: 1303 words


FIVE years ago the Greater New York Councils of the Boy Scouts of America began
an experiment with 2,000 handicapped children to see if they could become
scouts. The answer today is a resounding yes.

More than 21,000 of the 75,000 scouts in New York City have some disability.
Some are blind, some cannot hear, some are autistic; others are mentally
retarded or physically handicapped, and some are both. Scouting officials also
include in the program youngsters with learning disabilities, the neurologically
impaired and those who are hyperactive or emotionally disturbed.

But all are Boy Scouts, participants in the councils' Scouting for the
Handicapped program, the largest of its kind in the country and one of the
fastest-growing segments of scouting in the city.

Most of the so-called handicapped scouts - girls are sometimes included - are in
special education classes in 350 public schools across the city, and their
scouting activities are woven into their regular academic work during school
hours. Their teachers are trained to be volunteer troop leaders. Still other
handicapped scouts are in developmental centers.

Troop 887 met recently with its leader, Max Fuchs, who was in scouting garb and
was spinning an outdoor fantasy for 13 eager severely retarded scouts in his
classroom at Public School 19, on the Lower East Side.

It was dark, and the hot dogs and baked beans were heating up as the scouts
settled into a semicircle to eat. The food was cooked on a hotplate and the boys
sat at desks around a facsimile of a campfire - a mounted light that shone
brightly from the floor. About three times a year Mr. Fuchs's troop has real
cookouts, complete with insects, at the 135-acre William H. Pouch Scout Camp on
Staten Island. The boys in this troop have I.Q.'s under 50, Mr. Fuchs said. Most
are totally nonverbal, while a few communicate by signing. A couple are
additionally handicapped because they arrived recently from Vietnam and India
and are not familiar with English.

Most of the handicapped scouts are in special segregated troops, though in a few
cases physically handicapped youngsters are placed in regular troops. According
to scout officials, that is not done often enough.

''The ambition of all who work with the handicapped is to mainstream them,''
said Stephen Wells, a New York City scouting official, who developed the New
York program. However, he said, scouting officials cannot compel the schools
that sponsor the troops to do so. He added that the parents of nonhandicapped
scouts sometimes feared that the extra time that teachers must spend with the
handicapped might slow their children's progress.

Mr. Wells said that one group with which the program had lagged was the blind
because they are scattered throughout the school system. ''But we're working on
that,'' he said. Officials are also considering taking the program into
parochial schools.

Other states have used the New York program as a model, Mr. Wells said. Vivian
Harris, volunteer chairman of the Scouting for the Handicapped Committee,
recently went to Tokyo to advise Japanese scouting officials who are considering
a similar program.

The New York City Board of Education makes classrooms available for troop
meetings during the school day, and scouting professionals instruct teachers on
blending the scouting and academic programs into weekly one-hour sessions. The
New York City Youth Board, which administers youth-development and
delinquency-prevention programs, makes rooms available and pays for specially
trained teachers for troops that meet in the evening.

''We tell teachers that if we're not supporting what they're trying to do in the
classroom, then we don't belong there,'' Mr. Wells said.

By taking part in hikes, camping trips, crafts and community service work, the
handicapped youngsters improve their social awareness and daily-living and motor
skills, program officials say. There are also weeklong camping trips during the
summer and day trips through Project Ecole (Education and Camping Opportunities
Through Learning and Environment) to Pouch Camp, where handicappted and
nonhandicapped mix.

Ilene Brody leads Troop 500 at the School for Language and Hearing Impaired
Children, which is in Public School 158 in Manhattan. ''Scouting extends their
vocabulary,'' she said. ''Some who were shy become much more open and aware of
things around them.''

After 10 years in scouting Frank Brucato Jr., 21 years old, is assistant leader
of Troop 887 in the Bronx - a different troop from Max Fuch's 887 in Manhattan.
Mr. Brucato is blind and diabetic and walks with a limp after several leg
operations. With his Scout manual and other materials in Braille or on tape Mr.
Brucato has earned more than 15 merit badges - for reading, music, archery,
first aid and cooking, among others - without, he said, any concessions to his
handicaps. ''I went through them step by step, the same as anyone else,'' he
said. ''Scouting teaches you all kinds of things that you can do.''

Mr. Brucato said scouting officials had urged him to work for Eagle rank, but
his studies in communications at Fordham University are more important to him
now.

As the scouts filed into Mr. Fuchs's class, he and an aide, Larry Burgos, put
caps on each head and helped the youngsters into T-shirts, an alternative for
those who have difficulty with buttons, with the Boy Scout insignia on the
front. Hands flew up for the honor of holding the flags. Then there was the
National Anthem, the Pledge of Allegiance, the Scout Oath and the Scout Law. All
attempted to read the oath and law from the blackboard even if they could utter
only the last word in each sentence. Some hummed the anthem. Mr. Fuchs went from
boy to boy arranging fingers in the three-finger Scout sign.

After the cookout the scouts made floating compasses with corks and needles,
which Mr. Fuchs had shown them how to magnetize. They pointed and shouted
directions with Mr. Fuchs. Then, compasses in hand, they walked around the room,
watching the needles move. In addition to teaching them about compasses, the
exercise was intended to help them develop manual dexterity and motor skills.
Identification with a large organization and the opportunity to join
nonhandicapped scouts in some activities is a big plus for the handicapped, Mr.
Wells said. Those who are mentally retarded and some with severe multiple
handicaps can win instant recognition symbols - a plastic badge, with a bead for
each achievement - for almost anything that a teacher wishes to recognize, he
said. Special badges have been designed that recognize the ability to give the
Scout sign, repeat the oath and identify the United States flag, and to camp,
cook, hike, swim or show first-aid skills.

More capable youngsters, including those with physicial handicaps, are
encouraged to participate in regular activities as much as they can.
Requirements for advancement are flexible so that they can move up the Scout
ladder.

The age limit for handicapped boys trying to achieve Eagle rank was eliminated
in 1978, when the national organization rescinded its decision denying Gregory
Wittine, who had cerebral palsy, the rank after he completed the work at age 22,
four years late. It had taken him 11 years to earn the 24 merit badges required.

Now handicapped scouts approaching Eagle rank must supply the Scout Council with
a doctor's statement certifying inability to complete the regular activities for
the required badges, Mr. Wells said. Scouting officials, the boy and his parents
then choose alternative badges with activities that, according to Scout rules,
will be ''equally challenging and useful, but within his capabilities.''

''There's a lot of compassion in the process,'' Mr. Wells said, ''but we want
these kids to achieve.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Frank Brucato Jr. and Marc Severino (page C10)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CBS SEEKS TO DISCREDIT BOOK, MACMILLAN SAYS

BYLINE: By FRANK J. PRIAL

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 549 words


A 1982 television documentary on Vietnam has become the center of a bitter
dispute between the CBS network and Macmillan Inc.

The book publisher has accused the network of attempting to discredit ''A Matter
of Honor,'' a book written by Don Kowet that is critical of the making of the
documentary, a ''CBS Reports'' program. Mr. Kowet originally covered the program
for TV Guide.

In a statement, Macmillan said: ''CBS Inc., a major publisher and media company,
has made an unprecedented and shocking attempt to chill Macmillan publishing
company's May publication of 'A Matter of Honor.' ''

The publishing company said it had received ''a seemingly orchestrated series of
letters from Mike Wallace, the lead correspondent of the documentary; George
Crile, the producer of the documentary; Robert Chandler, the CBS News vice
president who approved the documentary; Andrew Lack, originally 'CBS Reports'
senior producer of the documentary; John Scanlon, a public-relations specialist
retained by CBS; David Boies, Esq., of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, a law firm hired
by CBS to defend it against General William C. Westmoreland's $120 million libel
suit, and others.'' The program, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,''
which was broadcast on Jan. 23, 1982, contended that the American military, and
specifically General Westmoreland, had altered figures on the strength of enemy
forces in Vietnam to make it appear that the United States was winning the war.

The CBS attack on the book came in the form of a packet of material sent to book
reviewers and television writers by Scanlon & Menken Ltd., a public-relations
company hired by CBS. In a cover letter, John Scanlon, head of the company,
described Mr. Kowet's book as ''an unprecedented attack'' on CBS News.

''Mr. Kowet is guilty of reckless journalism and Macmillan is guilty of
irresponsible publishing,'' Mr. Scanlon said.

CBS Inc. and CBS News referred all queries back to Mr. Scanlon.

''We have reviewed a good number of the dramatic fabrications made in the book
with past and present CBS employees,'' Mr. Scanlon wrote. ''We have found,
almost without exception, that Mr. Kowet's portrayal of meetings and
conversations differs significantly from the recollections of the people who
were, in fact, there.''

Mr. Scanlon cited Mr. Kowet's report of two telephone calls from Mike Wallace to
A. M. Rosenthal, the executive editor of The New York Times, regarding the
documentary. Mr. Wallace and Mr. Rosenthal have both denied that the calls were
made.

Mr. Kowet said he was unable to reach Mr. Wallace and acknowledged that he did
not attempt to reach Mr. Rosenthal. ''However,'' he said, ''I had excellent
sources for that information.''

In its statement, Macmillan characterized CBS's statements through Scanlon &
Menken as ''ironic for a company that is brandishing truth and the First
Amendment as its defense in the Westmoreland case.''

''While stopping short of outright threats and paying lip-service to Kowet's and
Macmillan's First Amendment rights,'' the statement said, ''CBS has, by innuendo
and the carefully selected use of 'buzzwords,' familiar to First Amendment
lawyers, left the impression within Macmillan that Kowet and Macmillan will have
to face legal action if the book is published.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Don Kowet

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 25, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Some Export Curbs Eased

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 20, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 122 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


The Government said today that it was easing controls on the export of certain
sophisticated laboratory equipment. The controls had covered analytical
instruments such as air pollution monitors, petroleum test equipment and
chemical measuring devices.

Under the new rules, these instruments may now be exported without Commerce
Department approval to all countries except Libya, North Korea, Vietnam,
Cambodia and Cuba.

Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige said the department had determined after
consulting the Defense Department that national security controls on the
instruments were no longer necessary. He said the new rules would reduce the
number of applications for export licenses in this sector by about 40 percent.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 26, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHAN REBELS ARE SAID TO FLEE VALLEY

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 687 words


Western intelligence sources said yesterday that Afghan guerrillas were
withdrawing into the mountains from the valley stronghold in which they were
hard hit Tuesday by Soviet and Afghan Government forces.

The sources said the rebels were being attacked by Soviet Su-24 planes.

Afghan refugee spokesmen in Pakistan ridiculed a claim made Tuesday by the
Soviet-supported Government of Afghanistan that the attacking forces had scored
a decisive victory in the 50- mile-long Panjshir valley, which runs northeast
from a point 50 miles north of Kabul, the Afghan capital. But rebel groups in
the battle zone appeared to take a different view.

Gulbuddin Hekmatyar, leader of Hezb-i-Islami, a fundamentalist Moslem group,
instructed his forces to support the rebels of Ahmad Shah Masood, who were
forced to withdraw into the mountains. Intelligence sources said this was
significant because the two groups had been bickering ever since Mr. Masood
concluded a truce with the Soviet-Afghan forces last year.

Fundamentalists Get Orders

Mr. Gulbuddin, according to British sources, ordered his Hezb-i-Islami
guerrillas to expand their operations against Soviet-Afghan positions at
Jabal-us-Siraj and Gulbahar. These places are on the main supply route from the
Soviet Union at the mouth of the Panjshir valley and serve as staging areas for
operations by the Soviet- Afghan forces.

British and other North Atlantic Treaty Organization intelligence sources said
they viewed the size and speed of the Soviet-Afghan operations in the Panjshir
valley as a sign that the spring and summer would be used to intensify activity
against the guerrillas.

NATO intelligence sources estimate that the Soviet forces in Afghanistan have
lost 5,000 dead in combat and from illness and 10,000 wounded since they
intervened in December 1979. These losses, the sources said, are unlikely to
cripple the total manpower of 1,800,000 in the Soviet Army and are lower than
the United States Army suffered in a comparable period in Vietnam.

Soviet losses from illness, the sources said, have fallen in the last 18 months
because higher standards of sanitation have been adopted and base hospitals have
been established.

10,000 Cleared From Valley

The operation in the Panjshir valley was intended to clear the area of 10,000
guerrillas who used to attack convoys on the supply route from the Soviet border
town of Termez and, occasionally, raided the Bagram air base used by Soviet
transport planes and helicopters.

Western intelligence sources said they thought the Soviet forces now faced the
problem of maintaining the momentum of the Panjshir operation. The informants
said this could mean the diversion of other units of the 108,000-man Soviet
force in Afghanistan for other operations.

At present the Soviet commanders are said to deploy no more than 20,000 soldiers
and airmen against the guerrillas while the remainder of the force carries out
exercises.

In view of Soviet supremacy in the air, intelligence sources said, the Russians
are likely to use their medium bombers and ground attack planes more than they
have in the past. The guerrillas have no planes and their antiaircraft resources
are negligible.

Experts on the Soviet home front's reaction to the Afghan operations suggest
that the interanl political problem may prove to be more difficult than the
tactical problem in the field.

Moscow acknowledges, one source said, that the impact of losses on the civilian
population cannot be hidden. But accounts of casualties are rare in the Soviet
press and, when they are printed, the dead are portrayed as heroes.

Soviet publications have begun describing conditions in the field. Krasnaya
Zvezda, the army newspaper, took the unusual step in late February of reporting
an attack on a Soviet supply convoy. The next day it described an attack on a
Soviet airfield.

A British source said these Soviet press developments have been accompanied by
tougher language describing the guerrillas as ''terrorists'' and ''bandits'' and
asserting that an ultimate Soviet victory is inevitable.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 26, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam's Resistance Reports Killing Russian

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 25


The anti-Communist underground in Vietnam has killed a Soviet officer in the Cam
Ranh Bay area, a clandestine resistance radio broadcast asserted today.

The broadcast said the killing took place March 28 near the naval base the
United States built in southern Vietnam. It is used by Vietnam and the Soviet
Union.

The name and rank of the Soviet officer were not given in the broadcast, which
was monitored here. The report could not be independently verified.

The shortwave radio station, which is believed to broadcast from the region
where the borders of Thailand, Laos and Cambodia meet, came on the air in late
February.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TEEN-AGER IS FOUND GUILTY IN MURDER OF TWO BANKERS

BYLINE: By ANDREW H. MALCOLM

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1011 words

DATELINE: IVANHOE, Minn., April 26


Steven Todd Jenkins, a teen-ager so fascinated with guns that he took his rifle
to bed with him every night, was found guilty here today of the first-degree
murder of a local banker who had repossessed his family's farm.

In addition, the tall, thin youth was found guilty of second-degree murder in
the rifle slaying of another bank officer who was also lured to the former
Jenkins family farm last Sept. 29.

The 18-year-old, who will spend at least his next 18 years in prison, appeared
impassive as the twin guilty verdicts were read in the tense courtroom here in
rural southwestern Minnesota. But when his bail was revoked and sheriff's
deputies moved in with handcuffs, Mr. Jenkins broke into tears and clung to his
weeping mother. After several minutes they were gently pried apart.

''One cannot feel exultant in any case like this,'' said Thomas L. Fabel,
Minnesota Deputy Attorney General. ''It is the sad culmination of a tragedy for
three separate families that began last Sept. 29 and we can only hope now that
the families can begin to put their lives back together again.''

Jury Meets 10 Hours


The verdict from the panel of seven women and five men came, after 10 hours of
deliberation last night and this morning, in a small, sparsely furnished, yellow
jury room on the third- floor of the Lincoln County Courthouse in this small
rural community 560 miles northwest of Chicago. The case and the
two-and-a-half-week trial have been closely watched across this agricultural
region where frustrated farmers experience mounting financial difficulties, as
do their main creditors, the small-town local banks.

An appeal to the State Supreme Court is virtually certain. And Mr. Jenkins still
faces charges of attempted murder in adjacent Rock County for firing at a
pursuing police officer after the shootings.

But, for now, the verdict in the Fifth District Court murder trial, the county's
first this century, seemed to provide an emotional release for many here.
Spectators, court workers and relatives of the victims and the convicted stood
around afterward wiping tears away, smoking furiously, talking solemnly or
sitting quietly in remote corners.

It brought to an end, for the moment, a story that included a nationwide manhunt
and began on a rainy Thursday morning last fall when Rudolph H. Blythe Jr., a
42-year-old native of Philadelphia who had always wanted to own a small-town
bank, took Deems Thulin, his 37-year-old loan officer and a Vietnam veteran, to
the former Jenkins farmhouse.



Bank Tried to Sell Farm

Their bank, the Buffalo Ridge State Bank in Ruthton, had been trying to sell the
overgrown 10- acre plot since Mr. Jenkins's father, James L. Jenkins, a dairy
farmer, abandoned it in 1980 as his marriage crumbled.

Mr. Blythe had received a phone call Sept. 28 from a man identifying himself as
Ron Anderson. He professed interest in buying the farm and sought a 10 A.M.
appointment for the next day. However, the bankers arrived early, finding the
Jenkins truck. Mr. Blythe's wife, Susan, was dispatched to summon the
authorities.

Seconds later, according to a police reconstruction, Mr. Thulin was shot in the
throat, dying instantly from a bullet from Steven Jenkins's .30-caliber M-1
carbine. Mr. Blythe, wounded in the back, fled around the house, trying to reach
a county road.



Yellow Slicker an Easy Target

But his bright yellow rain slicker made an easy target. And, the jury found, he
was quickly stalked by the younger Jenkins, an excellent marksman trained by a
military veteran friend.

Mr. Blythe was shot four times and died in a ditch. The incident left four
children fatherless.

Mr. Jenkins and his 46-year-old father were seen fleeing the scene by a
part-time police officer. Three days later Steven Jenkins, who for years
fashioned himself in dress and action as a junior commando with a shaved head,
turned himself in to a police dispatcher in the small north Texas town of
Paducah. His father was found on a trail outside town, an apparent shotgun
suicide.

Much of the trial centered on marksmanship and guns in a rural area where both
are so common that even self-service gas stations stock several shelves of
ammunition. For the prosecution, Mr. Fabel and Michael Cable, county prosecutor,
contended that because Mr. Jenkins, the diabetic father, had deteriorating
eyesight and was unfamiliar with Steve's balky gun, he could not have done such
accurate shooting.

Witnesses also testified that shortly before the shootings Steve Jenkins had
inquired locally about buying dynamite and what caliber shell would pierce a
bank's bulletproof windows. The father and son had recently returned from Texas
and sought to restart their dairy operation. But bad credit references from Mr.
Blythe's bank thwarted that plan.



Defense Blamed Father

The defense, presented by Allan Swen Anderson, contended Steven was at the scene
of the shooting merely obeying his father, that the youth was hiding behind a
garage the entire time and that he succeeded in dissuading his father from
killing others on a list of perceived enemies.

This morning, however, the jury sent out questions regarding a definition of
premeditation, indicating they had rejected less serious felony murder charges.
Then at 11:29 A.M., Lee A. Smith, the court clerk, read the guilty verdicts. Mr.
Anderson clutched Steve's hand. Mr. Thulin's widow, Lynnette, gasped. And Mr.
Blythe's widow, Susan, sat silently staring ahead.

Judge Walter H. Mann set sentencing for May 22. For first-degree murder, Mr.
Jenkins faces a mandatory life sentence with no parole possible for 18 years.
For second-degree murder the sentence is 10 years, which could run concurrently
or consecutively.

With his hand firmly on Mr. Jenkins' neck, Deputy Vernon Dahl lead the youth
away to jail through a crowd of sobbing friends, curious onlookers and jostling
televison camera crews. Mr. Jenkins was placed in a patrol car precisely on the
spot where last fall authorities had parked the bloody Blythe vehicle.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PROTEST IS PASSE AT GREAT NECK SOUTH

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINERIP

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1397 words

DATELINE: GREAT NECK, L.I., April 26


When Andrew Ellis ran for student government president at Great Neck South High
School, he was committed to being reasonable.

''There were kids who promised things they could never deliver,'' Andrew, a
senior, said. ''Like a soda machine or movies.''

''Pie in the sky,'' is how he summed them up. Andrew wanted benches for the
school grounds, mirrors for the bathrooms and toilet paper by the roll, rather
than the sheet.

Now, as he nears the end of his term, he looks back with mixed emotions. The
benches are on the way. But the mirrors were good only while they lasted. ''You
see the mirror put up by the custodian one day, and you're all happy,'' he said,
''and the next day, all you see is the hinges, or everyone's name on it.''

As for the toilet paper, that promise was abandoned. ''If people can't handle a
mirror,'' Andrew said, ''you can imagine all the things they'd do with a roll of
toilet paper. Since I took this job, you see the simplest thing can turn into a
mess.''

For the longest time, the simplest things here turned into a protest. Beginning
in the 1930's with a student sitdown strike that ousted the Superintendent of
Schools, Great Neck has often been a place for student activism, a Berkeley of
Long Island.

Prof. Steven Kelman of Harvard remembers going from his senior year at Great
Neck South in 1966 to his freshman year at Harvard, and being surprised that his
college classmates were less sophisticated about Vietnam than his high school
friends had been.

At first glance, from the list of offerings this year, it might appear that
nothing has changed. There is still an alternative school within the school,
where students design their courses. There is a club opposed to nuclear arms,
and a black student union. Students elect representatives to several
student-faculty committees.

Yet so much has changed. Scott Currie was the only student to show up for a
meeting in January of the antinuclear weapons club. The black student union is
now primarily a social club.

Norman Wheeler, a teacher, sees a sign of the change when he gives his annual
lecture on ''The Prince.'' Each year the percentage of youngsters who agree with
Machiavelli grows.

Not even alternative-school students sound alternative. One of them - Carolyn
Trufelman, a senior - has this dream: ''I want to go to graduate school. I want
to get married. I want to have children. I want to live in Great Neck. I just
want a typical Great Neck life.''

Students now tend to think of politics as something that goes on away from
school. David Bomser, a senior, has formed a government club that travels to the
East Queens Democratic Club to meet politicians. The student group has served as
the host for speakers at school, including Governor Cuomo's wife, Matilda.

A Chance to Protest

There was a time when everything about school was an opportunity for students to
make a political statement. In 1972, 65 seniors felt the yearbook was too
''establishment,'' and refused to have their portraits taken.

This year, only Scott Currie, a senior, resisted - and he changed his mind after
the yearbook faculty adviser, Robert Shallow, asked him in a nice way.

In 1968 the Great Neck South seniors demanded a say in running the school. Today
few students are interested in running for the student-faculty committees formed
during those years. They feel it is naive to believe that anyone except the
principal, Gilbert Blum, runs the school.

Most would probably agree with Gregory Bruell, a student government officer, who
says students should give their opinion, and then let Mr. Blum decide.

'We Trust Him'


''Mr. Blum knows what he's doing, we trust him,'' he said. ''By putting all
these students on all these committees, he insures that no one will not be
happy.''

In December Mr. Blum decided that, as part of the back-to-basics movement, he
would like to make final exams compulsory in all courses. He mentioned it to
students and teachers on the curriculum committee, but he did not put it to a
vote.

''This was my decision,'' Mr. Blum said, and no one thought to protest.

At Great Neck South there is still faculty support for alternative education and
student activism. Because most students are indifferent, however, the roles have
been reversed on those issues.

Today, it is the teachers - many of them products of the 1960's - who ask the
students of 1984 where their social consciousnesses and willingness to share
have gone.

The 'I' Generation


On a recent day, Frank Batemarco, a teacher, stood in the doorway of the
alternative-school lounge and barred students. After trying unsuccessfully for
six weeks to prod them into taking unified action to stop thefts from the
lounge, he decided to close it.

''I, I, I,'' he yelled. ''That's all I hear around here is I. When is it going
to be we?''

He has had little luck getting alternative-school students to agree among
themselves on anything this year. And that, he says, has meant chaos for a
program that is supposed to be run by student consensus.

Students argued with each other over issues such as whether to serve a meat or
vegetarian menu for parents' night.

During the holiday season, the students said they wanted to bring in gifts just
for their friends, not for everyone, as past classes did.

A Disappointed Enemy


Even when they had a common enemy - the man who closed their lounge, Mr.
Batemarco - they were still divided.

''I had hoped a group might come to me and say, 'We represent the students and
we want to talk,' '' Mr. Batemarco said. ''But all I've had so far is four
students come to me as individuals and say, 'I am taking the following
unilateral action.' I, I, I, I.''

During an after-school meeting, students could not agree on how to protest the
lounge's closing. Some wanted to boycott classes; some thought boycotting was
too radical; some were confused.  A senior, Raelle Koota, explained her position
this way: ''I am responding the way I'm going to do it, to the extent I'm doing
it. I don't want to be held back by others.'' She said she was planning to
''unilaterally boycott'' everything but English, which she needs to graduate.

For years, seniors went on from Great Neck South to be activist leaders on
college campuses. Carol Cohen, first in the class of '60, was an early opponent
of the Vietnam War at the University of Michigan with Tom Hayden; Dale Rosen,
first in the class of '65, was with the students who occupied University Hall at
Harvard in 1969.

In another era, Bruce Weiner, Kenny Moss and Scott Currie may have been
political activists. They are, teachers say, students who think about changing
the world.

A New Kind of Activism


In 1984, however, their activism has different outlets.

Bruce organized walkathons to raise money for cancer research. Kenny collected
books to send to India. And Scott turned to punk rock.

Scott liked the working-class flavor of punk rock, and he appreciated groups
such as the False Prophets for their songs on the dangers of nuclear weapons.

He was drawn by an antiauthority strain in him that, he says, he cannot fully
explain.

''Punk opened up a new world, something away from the straight and narrow,''
said Scott, who is ranked second in the senior class. ''I suppose I was
uncomfortable that I was a little too well adjusted.''

He was pulled to the punk clubs of the East Village. He bought many punk albums
and enjoyed spending time with the kind of person who was ''nasty, snotty, the
ultimate punk.''

'Like Stale Gum'


But by his senior year, he said, punk had lost its taste, ''like stale gum.'' He
was turned off by what he called ''posers'' - ''kids who shave their heads for a
year and then go to N.Y.U.''

He was offended by the lyrics of the most nihilistic groups, which sang that the
working class was as rotten as everyone else. The movement, he said, became a
fashion show populated by people who went to boutiques to buy ''rape victim''
T-shirts.

He feels he has learned from this. ''It was the first time I realized you could
have a lot of people, all doing the same thing, who didn't know what they were
doing,'' he said.

He says he has also learned this: ''Why bother to shave your head if you know
you're different?''

Next year, he hopes to go to Harvard, where he was recently accepted, and study
political science.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: Fourth article of a series appearing periodically about the senior year
at Great Neck South High School on Long Island

GRAPHIC: Photo of students at Great Nech South High School

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 27, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

SPECIALTY BOOKSTORES: A BROWSER'S GUIDE

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 2; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 3594 words


NEW YORK is a city of readers, a place where people demand more than the best
sellers.  That is why New York, perhaps more than any other major American city,
can support small bookstores that concentrate on only one or two subjects.  From
mysteries to military affairs, these speciality bookshops cater to people who
enjoy hunting down a good book almost as much as they enjoy reading it -
customers who love to spend long weekend hours browsing for rareities,
remainders and those impoossible to find titles.

Some of the city's speicalty bookstores are new, some are musty, and some are
out of the way - but not so far from the big general interest bookstores on
Fifth Avenue between 48th and 57th Streets.

More often than not, a book lover can walk in and talk to a clerk who knows all
the tilles in the store, and who knows precisely where each one has been
shelved.  Unlike some of the larger stores, specialty bookstores tend to order
titles that do not sell in huge quantities books that bigger shops, customers
snap up every copy.

Speciaty shops set their prices according to their own formaulas; some charge
full cover prices, some far less.  The owners say their profits tend to be
slimmer than averae in an industry known for the slimness of its profits; most
specialty bookstores worry about increases in rent and postage (since most do a
substantial part of their business by mail).

From paperback to hard cover, remainders to rare editions, here is a look at
some of the city's specialty bookshops: Stage, Movies, Dance

Three bookshops are within easy walking distance of Manhattan's theater district
- Drama Bookshop, on the second floor of 723 Seventh Avenue, at 48th Street
(944-0595); Theater Books, on the third floor of 1576 Broadway, near 47th Street
(757-2834).  The Drama Bookshop, with its uncluttered ultramodern design, and
Theater Arts Concentrate on new and in print material, while the collection at
Theater Books is more eclectic.

Remember Archie Leach?  Richard Stoddard Performing Arts, at 90 East 10th Street
(982-0440), does, and theater-trivia buffs will be delighted.  For $10, this
shop is selling a 40-page Playbill from Archie leach's 1929 Broadway debut (in
''A Wonderful Night'' at the Majestic).  Soon after, Archie Leach changed his
name to Cary Grant.

In addition to its playbill inventory - more than 4,000 Broadway bills and a
huge Off Broadway file - the shop specialzes in rare theater books, with
emphasis on scenic and costume designs.  There are also plays for $1, as well as
shelves on circuses, vaudeville and classical music.  One out-of-print book,
priced at $17, is ''People and Pianos,'' the history of Steinway & Sons.

Wednesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.

Applause, 100 West 67th Street, between Broadway and Columbus Avenue (496-7511),
stocks anthologies of plays about the California gold rush, 20th century
american melodrams Russian satiric comedies.  but the emphasis is on British
drama.  the shop's 4,000 titles include out of print plays by Shaw and off the
wall Monty Pythonesque collections.  Of course, there is always the ''Annotated
Shakespeare,'' edited by A.L.  Rowse ($75).

''I haven't been to London myself,'' the manager, Beck Lee, said, ''but
customers say this shop has much more British theater in one place than any of
the shops there.''

Monday to Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.; sunday, noon to 6.

Books about movies get top billing at Cinemabillia, 10 West 13th Street
(969-8519), but books are not all the store sells.  For $3.50, there's a picture
of Paul Muni as he appeared in the original ''Scarface'' or , for $4.50, a shot
of Alan Alda in the film ''Jenny,'' in which he appeared next to a life-size
shredded-wheat biscuit.  Cinemabilia also sells old movie posters and hard to
find film magazines.'' many of its books are equally rare.  For fans of ''The
Wizard of Oz'' for example, there is John Lahr's ''Notes on a Cowardly Lion''
(16.95), about his father, Bert Lahr.

Monday, Wednesday and Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.; Tuesday, Thursday and
Friday, 11 to 7.

The Ballet Shop, 1887 Broadway, in the Empire Hotel, at 83d Street (581-7990),
began when Norman Crider, a champion juggler in the late 1960's, decided to open
a bookstore in the tradition of the English bookseller Cyril Beaumont.  ''I
started by specializing in ballet history,'' he said.  But his inventory quickly
became much broader - and more modern.  Now he has more than 200 dance titles in
stock, plus out of print and rare books on dance, opera and music.

Monday through saturday, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M. and Sundays noon to 7 during the
ballet season. For Children

Remember a magic rabbit?  Or a land of monsters?  Or the little girl who lives
in a hotel?  They are all alive and well at Books of Wonder, 464 Hudson Street,
at Barrow Street(969-3270) And the clerks know the stock well enough to find the
books you read when you were young, even if you have forgotten the titles -
''Masquerades,'' ''Where the Wild Things Are'' and ''Eloise,'' for example.

The shop's hottest sellers are L. Frank Baum's Oz books - one whole wall is
devoted to editions of them - and Books of Wonder has 20 versions of ''Alice in
Wonderland'' by Lewis Carroll ''These days,'' Peter Clasaman, one of the owners,
said, ''parents understand that buying old or rare books for children is not
like buying breakable toys.  They can be wonderful to share.'' Weekdays are the
best time for browsing.

Monday through Thursday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M., Friday and Saturday, noon to 9, and
Sunday, noon to 6.

Bartholomew Fair , at 61 East 57th Street (644,3717), specializes in old books
that children and parents can read together.  One of the most interesting titles
is ''Rochester, With the Aqueduct Over the Genesee,'' a 19th century classroom
copy book that sells for $15 .  what makes it special is not the engraving on
the cover, but the teacher's stern comments to the volume's original owner, a
student struggling with penmanship.  One drill was judged ''rather careless''
after another, the teacher noted: ''Orthography good, but badly written.'' The
books at Bartholomew Fair start at $10 and go to $1,500, for an 1896 copy of ''a
Child's Garden of Verses.''

Tuesday through Satruday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.

summer camp time is approaching and Eeyere's is ready, for $15 or $25 its two
well stocked children's bookstores will send packages to readers at camp and
choose the titles if the campers' parents don't.

Eeyore's sells only new children's books., and this weekend its youngest
customers and their parents will get a chance to enjoy a story hour on Sunday at
11 A.M. at the West Side store and 12:30 P.M. at the East Side Eeyore's.

The West Side Eeyore's, at 2252 Broadway, at 81st Street (362-0634), is open
Monday to Saturday from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, 10:30 to 5.  The store at
1096 madison Avenue, also at 81st Street (988-3404), keeps the same hours except
for Sunday, when it opens at noon. Cooking

Kitchen Arts & Letters, 1436 Lexington Avenue, at 94th Street (876-5580), bills
itself as a food bookstore, not a cookbook store., Perhaps, then, it is no
suprpise that the shop's best selling author is M. F. K. Fisher, who writes
about food, but has never written a cookbook per se.

''I have no trouble keeping Julia Child or Craig Claiborne in stock,'' the
owner, Nahum J. Waxman, said, ''but when people come here, they want things like
'Traditional Recipes of Laos.''' At Costs $10.95 in trade paperback, $25 in hard
cover.

Mr. Waxman, himself a former publishing executive, says his main challenge is to
stock up on unusual cookbooks before they go out of print.  An amateur chef
(Indian dishes and ''big soups''), Mr Waxman has only one complaint: ''Since
opening the store , I don't get as much chance to cook as I used to.''

Hours Monday to Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturday, 11 to 5. Mysteries

Whodunit?  The clues are at The Mysterious Bookstore, 129 West 56th Street
(760-0900).  The shop specializes in rare books (a first edition of ''The Return
of Sherlock Holmes'' sells for $750), but that should not deter readers who just
want good paperback page-turners.  The first floor of the shop is filled with
them: rarer items are upstairs.

Monday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.

Murder Ink, 271 West 87th Street between Broadway and West End Avenue
(362-8905), is smaller but boasts its own Inspector Clouseau - a mostly black
cat, who shadows cutomers through the well stocked shop.  and the site is
appropriate - in the early Ellery Queen books, the dective's home was on 87th
Street, according to one of the shop's owners, Carol Brener.  Miss Brener's own
tastes run to classic mysteries - she dislikes ''gratuitous gore.'' Daily, 1 to
7 P.M.; Tursday to 10.

The city's newest mystery bookshop is Foul Play, 10 Eighth Avenue, at West 12th
Street (675-5115).  Its laquered shelves carry nothing but paperbacks, and it
also has a secret door (hint: it's well camouflaged along the back wall).

What may be most notable about Foul Play is what lurkes behind the front counter
- such titles as ''The Cannibal Who Overate'' ($2.95) and Edward Gorey's
''Epiplectic Bicycle'' (6.95).  The shop also stocks tapes of old radio
thrillers and T-shirts inscribed with such sayings as ''I Haven't a Clue''($8).

Monday through Saturday, noon to 10 P.M.; noon to 6 on Sunday. Military

Harris Colt used to be an investment banker who spent weekends searching for
World Warr II histories. ''Wherever I went,'' he said, ''I found the same tired
titles over and over again.'' So he opened his won shop the Militay Bookman, at
29 East 93rd Street (348-1280), between Fifth and Madison Avenues.

Hours: 10:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. Tuesday through Saturday.

Mr. Colt avoids best sellers and current events: there are no titles on the
Falklands or Grenadas, and not many on Vietnam.  Instead, browsers will find the
Confederate Infantry Tactics Manual and the ''Intercepted Letters of Napoleon
From Egypt.''

By contrast, Sky Books International spotlights modern military affairs,
aviation and weapons.  The shop on the second floor of 48 East 50th Street
(695-5096), has titles on the Navy's Blue Angels, the German Lufwaffe and the
''secret squadrons'' of the British royal Air Force in World War II.

The Reagan Administration's push to increase the defense budget had helped
business, according to the manager, Daniel David.  So have recent world events.
''The Falklands might have done a lot for Mrs.  Thatcher,'' he said, ''but we
made out even better.''

Open Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.

The Soldier Shop, 1222 Madison Avenue at East 58th Street (536-6786), puts less
emphasis on the political side of military history.  ''We stay away from
opinionated authors,'' the owner, Peter Blum,. said.  It is a strategy that
apparently serves the shop well.  ''Even in the antiwar poeriods,'' he said,
''younger readers always came in here because this is basically history,'' The
row of toy soldiers in the window and the helmets and swords in the shop are
also a visual treat.

Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M., Saturday, 10 to 5.  Astrology and
Occult

The shelves at Samuel Weiser, 740 Broadway, near Astor Place (777-6363), are
divided into more than 30 categories - parapsychology, the ''demedicalization''
of childbirth even crystal bells.  But perhaps the most unusual section of the
store - which began as a general interest bookstore in the 1920's, but gradually
came to focus on the supermatural - is a case containing rare books.  On its
shelves are a 1653 French volume on demonology, an 1881 ''Technology of Soap and
Candies'' and for $400, a book of card tricks edited by Harry Houdini.

Daily except Thursday, 9 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 10 to 7: Saturday. 9:30 to 5.
Science Fiction

The Science Fiction Shop, 56 Eighth Avenue, at Horatio Street (741-0270),
carries only books, no comics or toys.  The shop emphasizes British paper backs
and hard covers, as well as first editions, such as ''The Moon is a Harsh
Mistress'' by Robert A. Heinlein ($750).  An auitographed edition of Frank
Herbert's latest novel, ''Heretics of Dawn,'' is on sale for $75.

No science fiction shop would be complete without ''Star Treck'' books and they
are here, along with ''Di Fate's Catalogue of Science Fiction Hardware''
($8.95).  It lists the bizarre battle machines and spaceships that regular
science-fiction readers encounter all the time

Monday to Friday, 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.; Saturday 11 to 6, and Sunday, noon to 6.
Comics

Bam! Pow! Zoom! The forces of good and evil slug it out in full color in three
Manhattan shops - Funny Business Comics, 686 Amsterdam Avenue at 92d Street
(799-9477); Back Date Magazines, 225 West 23d Street, next to the Chelsea Hotel
(243-9349), and West Side Comics, 107 West 86th Street near Columbus Avenue
(724-0432).

The owner of the eight year old West Side shop, David Toplitz, saved comic books
as a child, but says that his mother discarded them.  Now he presides over an
extensive collection.  Some are sold at collectors' prices - $75 for a 1945 Walt
Disney comic book with Donald Duck on the prices - $75 for a 1945 Walt Disney
comic book with Donald Duck on the cover.

''A lot of our clientele is adults,'' Mr. Toplitz said.  ''Most are just keeping
up with the new stuff that's coming out.'' Mr. Toplitz will not say which
characters are his favorites.  ''These days,'' he said, ''I'm more into reading
mysteries.'' Foreign language

Perhaps because so many United Nations diplomats live in New York, the city can
support foreign language bookstores.  Adler's Foreign books, 28 West 25th
Street, between Broadway and the Avenue of the Americas (691-5151), has one of
the broadest collections of books in German and French.  Francophiles can browse
in Le Bookstore at the Alliance Franciase, 22 East 60th Street, east of Fifth
Avenue (355-6100), and La Librairie de France, 610 Fifth Avenue in the
Rockefeller Center Promenade (673-7400).

When it was recently faced with a 500 percent rent increase, the French and
Spanish Book Corporation, Fifth Avenue and 19th Street (581-8810), reduced the
size of its shop by 70 percent.  The rent still doubled, but the inventory has
not shrunk.  The shop features foreign language dictionaries and novels, and not
just in French and Spanish.  There are dictionaries for Indian dialects, and
during the winter Olympics Serbo-Croatian was a cinch.  Now the shop is
expanding its selection of language learning books.  When the remodeling is
finished, the dictionaries and Spanish titles will fill the first floor, while
French will fill a new lower level.

Monday to Friday, 9:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.

Mary S. Rosenberg was 16 years old when she began helping out in her father's
bookstore in Germany, where she sold schoolbooks to Henry A.  Kissinger.  The
Nazis seized the inventory; in 1939 she fled to new York and started her own
book-selling business.  It has grown into one of the country's largest
collections of German and French texts, at 17 West 60th Street, a few steps west
of Broadway (362-4873).

Over the years, her customers have included Albert Einstein, the pianist Rudolf
Serkin and the conductors Bruno Walter and Erich Leinsdorf.  This year, Miss
Rosenberg is placing special emphasis on books about Martin Luther for the 500th
anniversary of the Protestant reformer's birth.  In addition to an extensive
stock of Thomas Mann (a former customer), Bertolt Brecht and Martin Buber, the
100,000 volumes in her shop include some first editions by Sigmund Freud.

Hours, Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Saturday, 9 to 3.

Kerkes Brothers began 60 years ago, when German was still spoken regularly on
the streets of Yorkville.  It is a general-interest bookstore at 177 East 87th
Street, between Lexington and Third Avenues (289-2020), with a sprinkling of
Hungarian titles among the 100,000 neatly arranged German books and Magazines,
cheery not ascademic.  This is the place to go for the German translation of the
latest Robert Ludlum or Harold Robbins novel.

Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday, 10 to 2:30.

For readers of things Oriental, there are China Books, 125 Fifth Avenue at 19th
Street (677-2650); the Zen Oriental Bookstores, at 115 West 57th Street near the
Avenue of the Americas (582-4622) and 521 Fifth Avenue, near 43rd Street
(697-0840), Japantopia, 69 West 10th Street near Sixth Avenue (477-9002), and
the Paragon Book Gallery, at 14 East 38th Street (532 4920.  Rachel Faerber
started what became the Paraghon shop in 1942 in Shanghai.  Paragon's inventory
has grown to 100,000 titles, but she says the only ones from China itself are on
art.  ''Things are a little easier than they used to be,'' Mrs. Faerber said,
''but Communists don't write many books.''

For that reason, she has reprinted some.  In the 1960's, she reprinted ''Chinese
Jews'' in conjunction with the University of Toronto, an account of Jewish
traders in China in the 11th century who married and gradually came to be
considered Chinese ($30).  Japenese history and literature are also Paragon
specialities, along with books on Iran and Egypt.

Hours, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; Saturday, 10 to 4. Irish

When he collected two books of Irish folklore nearly a century ago, William
Butler Yeats wrote of Trooping fairies, leprechauns and clurichauns.  In New
York, a new $7.95 paperback edition of Yeat's work can be found amid the Irish
books and records at Facsimile, a quiet shop at 16 West 55th Street, near Fifth
Avenue (581-2672).  Kechcarrigan 90 West Broadway near Chambers Street
(962-4237), also deals in Irish culture, and Rivendeli, at 45 East Seventh
Street, near Second Avenue (533-2501), specializes in Celtic folklore and
mythology. New York

East Side, west Side, Urban Center Books in the Villard Houses on Madison
Avenue, at 50th Street (935-3695), has books from all around the town.  The
Urban Center specializes in what the manager, John Frazier, calls ''the build
world of architecture, landscape architecture and historic preservation.

The shop, which carries 4,000 titles, is operated by the Municipal Art Society,
with financial backing from the J. M. Kaplan Fund.

Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.

New York Bound, 43 West 54th Street (245-8503), specializes in out-of-print
books, such as the six-volume Phelps Stokes ''Iconography of Manhattan Island''
in its original edition ($5,000), a work that reproduces all major maps of the
city from the days of Dutch settlers to the early 20th century.  Or, for $5
there is ''A True History of Riverside Drive.'' Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M.
to 5:30 P.M.; Saturday, noon to 5. Travel

This is the time of year when the key question is simple at the Complete
Traveler, 199 Madison Avenue at 35th Street (679-4339).  Is the red guide in
yet?

The red guide is the Guide Michelin.  ''It creates this kind of excitement
almost like clockwork,'' Edward Reeley, the owner, said, ''because everyone
wants to know who's lost two stars and who's picked them up.''

Travel books, Mr. Feeley says, are perhaps the fastest growing segment of the
publishing industry.  ''We're no longer innocents abroad,'' he said.  ''Europe
is no longer a once in a lifetime experience, and people want more information
and more details to make intelligent choices.'' One of the shop's most popular
guides, in addition to the Michelin, is Georgina Masson's ''Companion Guide to
Rome'' ($8.95).  Mr. Feeley also stocks Nagel's encyclopedic guides on
everywhere from Ireland ($22) to China ($55 for 1,600 pages).

Monday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. Wonen's Studies

Woman books, 201 West 92d Street, at Amsterdam Avenue (873-4121), stocks 6,000
titles by, for and about women - from ''The Collected Stories of Collette''
($19.95) to Rosalind Rosenberg's ''Beyond Separate Spheres: Intellectual Roots
of Modern Feminism'' ($9.95).  The shop, now nine years old, also sells what it
describes as nonexist, nonracist children's books, and there is a corner where
young readers can sit while their parents browse through the rest of the bright,
well organized shop.  Also, there is a sizable collection of recordings of music
composed by women.

The store tries to carry the complete works of female writers - ''If we don't
have it, the publisher doesn't,'' the owner, Karyn London, said.  Woman books
regularly finds books from feminist publishing houses that never make it to
general interest shops.

Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.; sunday, noon to 6. Automobiles

From A (for Alfa Romeo) to V ( for Volvo), Albien Scott Limited is crammed with
titles about racing, rallying, runabouts and roadsters - everything but the
Beach Boys' ''Little Deuce Coupe.'' The shop, at 48 East 50th Street (960-1928),
has volumes on Porsches, Masseratis and even Matchbox toys.  It also sells a $15
calendar with pictures of foreign fire engines.

The shop stocks dozens of repair manuals including one for the illfated
Chevrolet Corvair, which are certtain to delight weekend mechanics - a category
that does not include the shop's general manager, Michael Hespen.  ''I live in
Manhattan,'' he said, ''I wouldn't dare have a car - any car - here.''

Monday to Friday, 10 A.M. to 7 P.M., Saturday, 10 to 6:30.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN AND ZHAO REPORTEDLY CLASH ON FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1181 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Saturday, April 28


President Reagan stressed to Chinese leaders Friday that China and the United
States have parallel international interests, but he encountered complaints
about his policies in several parts of the world and found that parts of a
televised speech had been censored by the Chinese.

This morning, the White House issued a formal statement of regret that some of
Mr. Reagan's remarks - about the need for belief in God and in democracry, and a
critical reference to the Soviet Union - had been deleted on Chinese television
Friday night. (Page 4.)

Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang met Mr. Reagan for two 90-minute sessions, one on
Friday morning on international problems and another in the afternoon on United
States-Chinese concerns. During the meetings, Mr. Zhao voiced complaints about
the Reagan Administration's policies in Central America, the Middle East and
Taiwan and about the deployment of new American missiles in Europe.  Afterward,
Hu Yaobang, General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, spent an hour
talking with Mr. Reagan.



Meeting With Deng Xiaoping

This morning, Mr. Reagan spent an hour and 40 minutes with China's paramount
leader, Deng Xiaoping. Before they adjourned for a working lunch, Mr. Deng said:

''Much progress has been made.  The most important progress is that I met the
President for the first time, so this is the most important meeting.''

The two leaders declined to say how their meeting had gone, but Mr. Reagan said,
''We're still smiling.'' Mr. Deng added, ''Yes, I agree with him.''

Personally, Mr. Reagan has been fascinating to the Chinese because of his age,
and his 73 years are regarded as enhancing his stature. ''You look very
energetic at your age,'' Prime Minister Zhao, 64, told the President, who seemed
to try to change the subject. (Page 4.)



Common Interests Stressed

Since his arrival on Thursday afternoon, President Reagan has stressed that
China and the United States should set aside their differences and concentrate
on what they have in common.

In a toast Friday night at a dinner in his honor, Mr. Reagan told his host,
Prime Minister Zhao, that ''our citizens want our countries to work together in
harmony.'' Then he said United States-Chinese ''cooperation is based on more
than simply the desire to improve our economies.'' ''Today,'' he went on,
clearly alluding to the Soviet Union, ''the peace of the world is threatened by
a major power that is focusing its resources and energies not on economic
progress but, instead, on military power.''

''The shift in military might of the last decade has made trust and friendship
between us ever more vital,'' Mr. Reagan said.

The key portion of the broadcast of Mr. Reagan's speech to a Chinese audience in
the Great Hall of the People that was omitted in Chinese news reports implicitly
criticized the Soviet Union. In the speech, the President pointedly observed
that the United States did not mass its troops along China's border as the
Soviet Union has done.

''Nor do we commit wanton acts, such as shooting down 269 innocent people out of
the sky for the so-called cause of sacred air space,'' Mr. Reagan said,
referring to the Korean airline jetliner shot down by a Soviet fighter last
September. The Chinese muted their criticism of that incident at the time and
abstained from a vote condemning it in the United Nations. Official television
omitted it in Mr. Reagan's speech, as did the New China News Agency in
circulating excerpts.

According to a Chinese official present at the Zhao-Reagan talks, the Prime
Minister told the President that China hoped the United States would stop
deploying its medium-range missiles in Western Europe.

Mr. Zhao was quoted as saying he had also urged the Soviet Union to stop taking
what it called countermeasures, so that the two countries could join in reducing
the number of medium-range nuclear missiles.

A sharp reduction of Soviet missiles and troops along China's northern frontier
is one of the preconditions that Peking has set for relations to be normalized
with the Soviet Union. The others are the withdrawal of Soviet forces from
Afghanistan and the end to Soviet support for Vietnam's military occupation of
Cambodia.

Reagan's Latin Policies Criticized

Both United States and Chinese officials indicated that Mr. Reagan and Mr. Zhao
generally agreed there was a need to get Soviet forces out of Afghanistan and
Vietnamese troops out of Cambodia and did not clash on the issue of independence
for Namibia.

But Mr. Zhao, it was said, did not accept Mr. Reagan's explanation of the
current United States involvement in Central America. A Chinese official quoted
Mr. Zhao as telling Mr. Reagan that China opposed the ''meddling in the affairs
of Central America by any big power'' and did not like some American practices
in the region.

A senior Administration official conceded that the United States support for the
guerrillas opposed to the Nicaraguan Government had been discussed.

The Chinese Prime Minister also reportedly told Mr. Reagan that the United
States should open discussions with the Palestine Liberation Organization as a
way of solving the Palestinian problem in the Middle East, a proposal that
United States officials said the President rejected out of hand.

U.S. Position on Korea Assailed

White House officials had suggested earlier that China might be able to
cooperate with the United States in reducing tensions on the Korean peninsula.
But Mr. Hu, the party secretary, who is to visit North Korea early next month,
reiterated Chinese criticism of the United States position on Korea when he met
Mr. Reagan.

According to the Chinese official, Mr. Hu made clear that China wanted the
United States troops stationed in South Korea to go home. China supports a North
Korean proposal for talks with Seoul and Washington but refuses to get involved.

Mr. Reagan was quoted as telling Mr. Hu that stability could best be achieved if
North and South Korea talked to each other and initiated confidence-building
steps like advance notification of military exercises.

Officials traveling with Mr. Reagan have downplayed the significance of the
Taiwan issue, the principle obstacle in the relationship, as a factor
influencing the Presidential visit.

At a news briefing Friday afternoon, the White House spokesman Larry Speakes,
told reporters that ''it might interest you to know that Taiwan occupied less
than five minutes of the 90- minute meeting this afternoon'' with Prime Minister
Zhao.

Still At Odds Over Taiwan

Mr. Speakes said both sides were ''determined not to let it interfere with our
growing relationship,'' in which the White House had emphasized the benefits of
trade and technology transfer.

But a Chinese official said that Mr. Zhao had brought up the issue of Taiwan and
that China wanted to see United States arms sales to the Nationalists reduced
considerably and soon phased out, as is provided for in a joint communique
reached between Peking and Washington in August 1982.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Nancy Reagan feeding pandas (page 4)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

'THERE ARE NO POL POT BASES IN THAILAND'

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 301 words


To the Editor:


''Asian Neighbors At It Again,'' an item in your April 15 Week in Review, stated
that Vietnamese forces attacked ''bases in Thailand of Pol Pot'' and that
officials in Bangkok ''accused the Vietnamese of entering Thailand to raid a Pol
Pot base and of preparing to attack another Pol Pot bastion deeper inside
Thailand.''

I would like to provide the following clarifications:


* There are no Pol Pot bases or bases of any other Kampuchean resistance forces
in Thailand.


* Thailand has no desire to become involved in the armed conflict in Kampuchea.
The fighting there is between Vietnamese occupation troops and forces of the
legitimate Kampuchean Government, which include those loyal to nationalist
leaders Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann. The conflict stems from Vietnam's invasion
of Kampuchea in 1978 and its continued illegal occupation of that country.

* Indeed, there are many repercussions on Thailand from the conflict in
Kampuchea. Several tens of thousands of Kampuchean civilians have fled into
Thailand from Vietnamese attacks. Vietnamese artillery regularly shells Thai
territory, killing and wounding Thai defense personnel and civilians. Vietnamese
forces stage armed incursions into Thailand in gross violations of Thailand's
sovereignty and are repulsed by Thai defense forces.

* Your Week in Review item is contradicted by a news article and a map you
published on April 16 concerning Vietnamese attacks on Kampuchen civilian
encampments and resistance forces. Misunderstandings that may arise as a result
of such inaccuracies can only prolong Vietnam's attacks on innocent civilians
and illegal occupation of Kampuchea.

KOBSAK CHUTIKUL Information Officer, Mission of Thailand to the United Nations
New York, April 16, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHITE HOUSE AIDES UNSURE CHINA ACCEPTS AMERICAN VIEW OF SOVIET

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN , Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: PEKING, Sunday, April 29


White House officials said Saturday that they might not know for months whether
President Reagan had convinced China's leaders that his policy toward the Soviet
Union is effective.

The assessment, voiced by the officials in interviews after the President's
talks here, contrasted with the upbeat tone of earlier American suggestions that
the talks had brought Peking and Washington closer together.

The White House officials voiced disappointment that China had censored Mr.
Reagan's anti-Soviet comments from news accounts and videotaped television
broadcasts. The officials said a bigger problem was whether the comments got
through in private.

''It is very seldom that your impressions of one of these visits emerge until
months later,'' one official said. ''Even then we won't know how the Chinese act
until we see their performance in some particular matter. That is how we will
know how they view their relationship with us.''

Before Mr. Reagan arrived here, the officials said his main objective would be
to discuss his thinking about the Soviet Union.

They said he would speak ''from the heart'' and sketch his view that Soviet
meddling had caused the world's trouble spots to boil over. (The Soviet press,
in reporting on Mr. Reagan's visit, says he is trying to draw Peking into a
strategic embrace against Moscow. Page 10.)

In particular, the President attributes tensions in Europe and the crises in the
Middle East and Central America to the Soviet Union.

The Chinese do not share this view, and they say that it is American
intervention in those areas that have exacerbated tensions. Mr. Reagan's aides
have suggested that one positive outcome of the trip would be the muting of
Chinese criticism. But that is what it may take months to determine, officials
said.

They acknowledged that China's criticism seemed as strong as ever. One official,
for example, said the Chinese had criticized the mining of Nicaraguan harbors
and, in general, the support the United States has been giving through the
Central Intelligence Agency to Nicaraguan insurgents seeking to overthrow the
Sandinistas.

On the other hand, officials were hopeful because, they said, the Chinese
leaders did not emphasize the criticism as much as they might have.

In briefings, officials said they had expected few if any breakthroughs on the
more than 25 issues that Mr. Reagan had planned to discuss. Indeed, one official
said the discussions had been ''boring'' and ''bureaucratic.''

The issues ranged from trade with Taiwan to cultural and scientific exchanges,
energy development and investment in China.

Mr. Reagan has spent virtually his entire time on these issues in meetings,
luncheons and dinners.

Before Mr. Reagan came to China, American officials said they understood that
Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, wondered whether Mr. Reagan would be able to
keep the Western alliance together with his policies against the Soviet Union in
the Middle East, Central America and elsewhere.

China is officially nonaligned, but it has been friendly to the West and fearful
of Soviet troops along its northern border, and also of the Soviet Union's
intervention in Afghanistan and its support of Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.
Administration officials said today that Mr. Reagan had assured Mr. Deng that
the Western alliance would remain cohesive in spite of American actions in
various parts of the world.

Mr. Deng is said further to worry that the deployment of American missiles in
Western Europe is creating an antinuclear movement that is weakening American
defenses. Here again, American officials said, Mr. Reagan sought to convince the
Chinese leader that the West would continue to remain united.

A White House aide said he was pleased that Mr. Deng's objections seemed to be
less directed at American policies themselves than at concern that they would
divide the United States from its European partners. A common thread of Mr.
Deng's comments, the officials said, was that American policies entailed ''risks
of lessened cohesion among our friends.''

Another purpose of Mr. Reagan's comments has been to talk about what his staff
called ''family values.''

Such talk is a staple of his speeches in the United States. But American
officials say they think the Chinese leaders are worried about the decline of
these values in the United States.

A White House official said that too many in China accepted a stereotyped view
of Americans and of American society as in decline because of crime, family
deterioration and the collapse of such institutions as marriage and
neighborhoods.

This was the explanation given by White House officials for why Mr. Reagan
attempted to talk about faith in God, respect for the elderly and neighborhoods
and families in his speeches here. White House officials expressed surprise as
well as regret that some of these thoughts had been omitted in the television
broadcasts.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PatriciaAllen I t B

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 68, Column 1; Society Desk

LENGTH: 238 words


Patricia Stuart Allen, the daughter of the late Mr. and Mrs. James Stuart Allen
of New York and Remsenburg, L.I., was married yesterday to Paul Humphrey Ross,
the son of Mrs. Richard Ross of Stamford, Conn., and the late Mr. Ross. The Rev.
Frederick Baldwin performed the ceremony in the chapel of St. James Episcopal
Church in New York.

Mrs. Ross is an interior designer in New York. She attended the Brearley School
and graduated from the Westover School and Wheaton College. She received a
master's degree from Teachers College of Columbia University and a master's
degree in business administration from Fordham University and attended the New
York School of Interior Design and the Parsons School of Design. She was
presented at a dinner given by her father before the Debutante Cotillion and
Christmas Ball and before the Mistletoe Ball. She is a member of the New York
Junior League. Her father was a private investor.

Mr. Ross is a vice president and manager of the corporate bond research
department of Salomon Brothers, the investment banking firm in New York. He
graduated from the Taft School and the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in business administration from the
Northwestern University Graduate School of Management. He was a lieutenant in
the United States Army in Vietnam. His father was a senior partner of Ross, Low
& Company, a brokerage in New York.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Patricia Ross

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HELPING HAND FOR HONDURANS

BYLINE: By JOSEPH B. TREASTER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 66, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words

DATELINE: TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras, April 22


When two United States Army helicopters ran into a spray of gunfire near the
border with El Salvador earlier this month, one of the passengers was Diana
Negroponte, the wife of the United States Ambassador to Honduras.

For the British-born Mrs. Negroponte, who has a law degree from American
University in Washington, the flight had been planned as a working trip to see
firsthand, with two United States Senators, the living conditions in a refugee
camp sheltering 6,000 Salvadorans.

The 36-year-old Mrs. Negroponte has been helping refugees for most of the 2 1/2
years that she and her husband, John D. Negroponte, have been in Honduras, a
desperately poor Central American country where disease is endemic and more than
half of the four million people are illiterate.

One of her projects was to supervise the construction of a bridge so that food
and clothing could be trucked to refugees. She has also organized groups of
Hondurans to clean up the creeks in the capital that serve both as sources of
drinking water and as sewers, and she has been a leader in reforesting huge
tracts of wind-blown land.



Peasant Literacy Program

When she discovered that a Government literacy program was ending, she got
volunteers to continue classes for peasants in three remote areas and got books
and magazines for the students to read.  Mrs. Negroponte and her husband have
adopted two Honduran orphans, Marina, now nearly 2 years old, and Alexandra, now
8 months old. In addition to her many projects, she serves in the more
traditional role of hostess at embassy cocktail parties, teas, dinners and other
social functions.

The Hondurans have been taken with her. ''If you meet her, you must tell her how
much we admire and respect her for what she is doing,'' a retired Honduran
engineer said on a recent flight from Miami.

Mrs. Negroponte's work is not always easy or pleasant. She has come down twice
with malaria, and on one trip she caught pneumonia. She says she lives
permanently with intestinal parasites.



An Emergency Landing

She often travels in the rugged, mountainous countryside for three and four days
at a stretch, bouncing along rutted dirt roads in a four-wheel-drive vehicle or
flying by light plane. Once on a trip to a Miskito Indian refugee camp, her
pilot lost his way and flew over Nicaragua, where exiles backed by the United
States Central Intelligence Agency are fighting Nicaraguan Government troops.
Another time her plane ran out of gas and had to make an emergency landing on a
dirt airstrip.

The fighting in El Salvador and Nicaragua spills over into Honduras only
occasionally, but the border areas are regarded as dangerous. Until April 19,
however, Mrs. Negroponte had never been shot at.

On that day, Mrs. Negroponte and the two Senators, Lawton Chiles of Florida and
J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana, both Democrats, were flying to the camp when
they came under fire from the ground. The Senators' helicopter was hit; one
bullet came within 12 inches of Senator Chiles, but no one was hurt.

Mrs. Negroponte says she was frightened but undaunted.

''You take a risk if you fly near the borders in this country,'' she said over
breakfast the other morning at the palatial United States Embassy residence that
is her home here. ''There's nothing very romantic about it. It's just in a day's
work.''

Ambassador Negroponte declined to discuss details of the incident, saying it was
under investigation by the Army. But he said that the trip was ''not unusual,''
and that several delegations, including one with the chief United States
representative to the United Nations, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, have flown through
the area. ''We had a very unfortunate incident,'' he said of the April 19
flight, ''but other senior American officials, including Ambassador Kirkpatrick,
have visited Colomoncagua without any problem. I went there myself in 1981.''

''While it is close to the border,'' he said, ''there's never been such an
incident. I have the greatest confidence in the U.S. helicopter pilots, but I'm
not the dispatcher of the task force.''

Mrs. Negroponte, a tall woman with blond hair and green eyes, met her
husband-to-be in Saigon in 1967. She was visiting her uncle, Peter Wilkinson,
British Ambassador to South Vietnam. Mr. Negroponte, a young political officer,
sat next to her at a British Embassy dinner party.

''He described the Constituent Assembly to me throughout the whole meal,'' she
recalled. ''I was 19. At the end of the dinner I was absolutely bewildered and
bored and I hoped I wouldn't have to listen to that again.''

The next day the young British visitor and the young American diplomat found, to
their surprise, that they were on the same plane to Paris.

''We sat side by side for 19 hours and he charmed me,'' Mrs. Negroponte said.
''I thought I'd met the hero of heroes. Then when we got to Paris he politely
shook my hand and said goodbye.''

Almost 10 years later, after she had spent two years in Uganda in the Voluntary
Service Overseas, the British equivalent of the Peace Corps, graduated from the
London School of Economics with a degree in political science, taught French and
history, worked as a trainee with the European Economic Commission in Brussels
and served as executive secretary of the British Conservative Party, she bumped
into a Mrs. Negroponte at a wedding in London. It was the American diplomat's
mother.

The mother dropped a note to her son. He invited the young woman to visit him at
his post in the United States Consulate General in Salonika, Greece. She
accepted.

''Three days later,'' Mrs. Negroponte said, ''we knew we wanted to marry.''



Wedding in December

The wedding was a few months later, in December 1976, at the Ascot home of her
parents, Sir Charles Villiers, a former chairman of the British Steel
Corporation who was knighted for his work as head of the Industrial
Reorganization Corporation, and the former Maria Jose de la Barre d'Erquelinnes,
a Belgian countess who fought in the Resistance in World War II.

In 1977, the couple moved to the United States. Mr. Negroponte became Deputy
Assistant Secretary of State of Oceans and Fisheries Affairs and Mrs. Negroponte
enrolled in law school.

''Our agreement was not to go abroad until I graduated,'' she said. ''I
graduated in August of 1981 and we came here a couple of months later.''

Mrs. Negroponte, who became a United States citizen in 1981, is not sure what is
going to happen to her law career. She and other diplomats' wives, some of them
professional women and others who feel they should be compensated for the
contributions they make to the United States Foreign Service as hostesses for
their husbands, have raised new questions for State Department personnel
officers.

''I personally do not want compensation,'' Mrs. Negroponte said, ''but I believe
that in the future, in order to persuade wives to accompany their husbands, the
State Department is going to have to give them an ability or an opportunity to
practice their professions overseas or to compensate them for their contribution
to the embassy.''

Lately, Mrs. Negroponte has been working with specialists at the public hospital
in Tegucigalpa who see 10,000 cancer patients a year. She has been trying to
establish a relationship with a teaching hospital or cancer institute in the
United States.

''We need help,'' she said, ''from doctors who are at the top of their
profession and who know about the latest treatment for the varied and many
different types of cancer found here. We need doctors to visit and to bring
ideas and suggestions to deal with the problem here.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Diana Negroponte with hospital residents

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

China Reports 40 Casualties From Shelling by Vietnamese

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 72 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 28


China accused Vietnam today of shelling densely populated border villages,
killing or wounding more than 40 Chinese frontier guards and civilians this
month.

Vietnam said it killed two Chinese and wounded many in attacks along the border
in response to Chinese attacks from April 21 to April 26 that killed one
Vietnamese and injured seven others. Vietnam made its charges today in reports
monitored in Bangkok, Thailand.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW SEES ANTI-SOVIET PURPOSE IN REAGAN TRIP

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 10, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 855 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 28


President Reagan's visit to China has attracted skeptical coverage by Soviet
news organizations, which have said he is trying to draw China into a strategic
embrace against the Soviet Union.

The Government's press agency, Tass, said today that Mr. Reagan was using his
trip ''as an opportunity for crude attacks on the Soviet Union and other
socialist countries,''

''Shamelessly distorting the policy of the Soviet Union, Reagan is also going
out of his way to present the aggressive policy of his Administration in various
parts of the world in a favorable light,'' Tass added.

The coverage has been relatively restrained. Western diplomats attribute this in
part to a Soviet desire not to offend China at a time when its relations with
the Soviet Union seem to be improving.

Concern that Mr. Reagan's visit could draw Washington and Peking closer together
to the detriment of Moscow has been a recurring theme in Soviet press reports.

Soviet Is Presented as Target

One Tass item, released as Mr. Reagan was en route to Peking, said:

''The American media do not conceal that Reagan has placed at the foundation of
his so-called China policy political strategic considerations, including
confrontation with the Soviet Union.''

The agency quoted one report in the United States to the effect that the
President had implied that improved American-Chinese ties ''should be directed
against the Soviet Union.''

The warmth of the reception accorded Mr. Reagan in Peking was not reflected in
Tass reports. They emphasized the anti-Soviet implications of the visit, saying
the President was trying to capitalize on Peking's differences with Moscow over
Afghanistan, Vietnam and Cambodia.

''Taking advantage of Peking's policy in Southeast Asia, Washington seeks to get
China more actively involved in the tripartite military alliance of the United
States, Japan and South Korea that the United States is forging in the Far
East,'' Tass said.

Part of Electioneering Seen

Tass has also stressed the American domestic considerations behind the China
trip. One article called it ''an electioneering stunt,'' and another ''the
Peking primary.''

Quoting L'Humanite, the French Communist paper, Tass added, ''After four years
of politics based on force, hatred and constant fostering of enmity toward the
socialist countries, Reagan hopes to win over part of the American electorate by
posing as an 'open' and 'peaceful' President.''

Tass said Mr. Reagan was being opportunistic in professing friendship for the
Chinese Communists after having backed the Nationalists in Taiwan for years.
Quoting an unidentified American television commentator, Tass spoke of Mr.
Reagan having ''raised a toast to China, the selfsame China at which he had been
slinging mud for decades.''

In a report of Mr. Reagan's talks Friday with Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, Tass
noted that Mr. Zhao had urged the United States to forgo further medium- range
missile deployment in Western Europe in return for a halt to Soviet
countermeasures.

Short of the Soviet Position

The Chinese position fell short of the Soviet demand that the United States
withdraw missiles already deployed before so that arms talks in Geneva can
resume.

Tass also noted Mr. Reagan's assurance to Mr. Zhao that no accord would be
signed on missiles in Europe ''if the Soviet missiles based in Asia remained in
place.''

Countering the contention that Soviet missiles east of the Urals were targeted
partly on China, Tass said they were needed to counter American weapons in the
Far East and the Pacific that could hit targets in Soviet Asia.

China has also come in for some criticism. Tass said Mr. Zhao had outlined ''the
well-known Chinese position on the so-called Cambodian problem,'' meaning the
occupation of Cambodia by Vietnam, a Soviet ally, and Soviet- Vietnamese support
for the Government in Phnom Penh. The Chinese are backing the Cambodia's
previous Pol Pot regime.

Chinese Stand on Korea

In addition, Tass said, Mr. Zhao spoke out against any action that would worsen
the situation on the Korean peninsula without specifically demanding the
withdrawal of American troops from the south, a standing Soviet demand.

The agency also said that Mr. Zhao had called on the United States to recognize
Palestinian rights but had not mentioned ''the aggressive, expansionist policy''
of Israel.

The Chinese-American discussions are expected to be a topic when Ivan V.
Arkhipov, a Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister, visits China next month. He will
be the highest-ranking Soviet official to go there since Prime Minister Aleksei
N. Kosygin met at Peking airport with Prime Minister Zhou Enlai in 1969.

The visit by Mr. Arkhipov, who is responsible for foreign economic relations, is
expected to focus on efforts to expand Soviet-Chinese trade. But the visit will
also mark a renewed bid to find common ground in the political negotiations that
began 20 months ago and have been snagged over differences over troop deployment
along the border and over the situation in Afghanistan and in Indochina.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL GIAP CITES LESSONSOF DIEN BIEN PHU

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: DIEN BIEN PHU, Vietnam, April 28


Standing on a hill this week overlooking the historic battle site here, Gen. Vo
Nguyen Giap talked about his greatest military victory, against the French 30
years ago. ''Their mistake was they underestimated us,'' he said.

Dressed in an olive-green army uniform with four gold-colored stars glinting on
his shoulders, General Giap said the victory proved that ''the future belongs to
nations who struggle to be masters of their destiny.''

On the day General Giap spoke to reporters, his aides said the weather over the
valley in the northwest corner of Vietnam was similar to that of May 7, 1954,
when Vietnamese forces overran the French garrison after a 56-day seige,
spelling the end of France's rule over Indochina.

Overcast skies and mist blotted out most of the 11-mile length of the valley,
which is five miles wide at its broadest point.

A Key Battle

General Giap, 71 years old, visited Dien Bien Phu this week to oversee
arrangements for the 30th anniversary of the battle, judged by some historians
as among the most decisive of the 20th century.

In an interview with foreign journalists, he spoke of Vietnam's almost
continuous wars against the French, the Americans and the Chinese, and said his
country longed for peace.  Alluding to the valley's historic military
importance, he said, ''As we stand now on the Dien Bien Phu battlefield, let us
do everything we can to build up friendly relations and cooperation.''

General Giap was driven in a small car to Hill Eliane overlooking the command
headquarters of his former foe, Gen. Christian de Castries. As he got out, a
group of soldiers stood reverentially and saluted.

He shook hands with some of them and then clambered up the last few steps to the
top of the 3,000-foot hill code-named ''A-1'' by the Vietnamese.

The general's apparent good health seemed to confirm the view of diplomats in
Hanoi, who reported that he voluntarily stepped down from Hanoi's 13-member
Politburo two years ago to make way for new blood.

Born on Sept. 1, 1912, General Giap, who is a former Defense Minister, once
said, ''The only military academy I have been to is that of the bush.''

Writings Are Widely Read

Despite his lack of formal military training, General Giap's writings on
guerrilla warfare are now standard textbooks for revolutionaries the world over.

Asked if military lessons learned at Dien Bien Phu were applied against the
Americans in the Vietnam War, he said: ''Of course we applied it to them, and we
are now applying it to the threat from the north (China). History is a continual
process with the present linked to the past and the future.''

He said his troops fought with the most ''rudimentary means'' against the
French, and he laughed as he recalled France's boast that the Viet Minh, as the
army was then known, would be destroyed if it attacked Dien Bien Phu.

Hill Eliane was considered the key to the valley's defense, and, when it was
captured on May 6 after 36 days of continuous fighting, the end for the fortress
came the next day.

Nearby is a cemetery for Vietnamese troops killed in the campaign. Overlooking
the 700 gravestones in neat rows is an obelisk with the words, ''The Fatherland
Honors You.''

The freshly whitewashed stones carry no names.

''We are still trying to identify our dead and some of the graves have three or
four bodies buried together,'' a guide explained.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
THE ISSUE IS COMPETENCE

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 794 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 28


Whatever else the primaries have shown, they have been a depressing rerun of old
issues. If that is a foretaste of the general campaign, the election won't do
its job of informing and challenging the public to focus on America's needs.

An American abroad wrote to the International Herald Tribune in disgust, calling
on the politicians to stop posturing and start talking about how to face the
changes coming in the world. ''Tap America's enormous reserves of men and women
tired of being stuck in the mud and eager for a go at the future,'' he said.

That is good advice. The problem isn't lack of ideas, old or new. It is a
question of competence. In 1980, the election revolved on twin fears, the fear
of war and the fear of weakness. Ronald Reagan looked tough, and the voters
liked that. Since then, he has talked tough, but what are the results?

In April 1983, President Reagan said, ''If we don't stop the left in Salvador,
we cannot expect to prevail elsewhere. Our credibility would collapse, our
alliances would crumble, and the safety of our homeland would be put at
jeopardy.''

What did he mean by ''prevail elsewhere''? The U.S. is certainly prevailing in
Honduras, where there are some 3,000 U.S. troops building a military
infrastructure to support guerrillas fighting against Nicaragua. Senator Alan
Cranston, a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, says ''Honduras is being
converted into a permanent U.S. garrison state.''

But the left is still going strong in El Salvador, and Nicaragua is tightening
its resistance. Far from stabilizing and pacifying Central America, the
combatants have spread war.

The week before pulling U.S. Marines out of Lebanon, Mr. Reagan said withdrawal
would bring ''a pretty disastrous result for us worldwide.'' When he did order
them out, it was announced as a ''redeployment'' a few miles to the west, on
warships that were supposed to continue providing support for President Amin
Gemayel. Now the ships have gone, too, and Mr. Gemayel is negotiating with
Syria's President Hafez al- Assad, something he always knew he'd have to do
eventually even though Mr. Reagan denounced Syria as the enemy.  Relations with
the Russians are at a nadir. Mr. Reagan said he needed MX missiles to give them
an ''incentive'' to negotiate. But when he finally professed eagerness, Moscow
broke off talks. Now he offers a treaty banning chemical weapons with such
intrusive verification demands that the Russians don't take it seriously. He has
refused Soviet proposals to negotiate a ban on antisatellite weapons, for which
essential tests are easily verifiable.  What arguments are the Democratic
candidates making in response? Senator Gary Hart has sensible things to say
about the defense budget, challenging not the need for a strong defense but bad
practice and bad judgment in using the money available so that effectiveness of
defense is undermined.  But he has been foolish about the purpose of America's
force, listing all the places he says he would never send troops, whatever
happens, a decision that would be an invitation to adversaries. Europeans
consider him dangerously isolationist.

Walter Mondale sounds as if he's still fighting against the war in Vietnam and
not seeking ways to find solutions in current trouble spots so as not to wander
into a new war.

In domestic affairs, the argument seems to turn on whether or not to dismantle
the old New Deal and bash trading partners who have succeeded too well in being
competitive. This is not the way to revitalize industry and create jobs.

The economy is doing well now. The problem is to keep it on a steady keel,
educate the young to the new skills that are required as industry is
transformed, and ease the transition for those who are inevitably displaced.

Deregulation has been successful in some areas, unsatisfactory in others like
the telephone system. The experience shows that neither the idea of regulating
practically everything nor the idea of removing all regulations is a useful
answer. What works is to look at practical needs and make the best possible
attempt to foresee the consequences, not relying on the dogmas of either
liberalism or conservatism.

The exercise of government goes askew when theories are more important than
facts and getting work done. The task of the executive branch is just what its
name suggests: making decisions and seeing that they are executed.

An argument about the ability to do that, to be firm without being bellicose, to
be both candid about the state of the nation at home and abroad and to be
patriotic in its goals would give the voters a sense of positive choice.
Otherwise, 1984 risks being another election where there is only a choice
between shadowy fears.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOST IDEALS OF YOUTH --

SECTION: Section 6; Page 130, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 154 words


As a participant in the socially conscious 1960's and as someone who has
recently returned to study at Columbia, I must agree with Paul Johnson that the
campus ethos has drastically changed. Ascribing the shift to a seemingly
inexorable generational pendulum, Mr. Johnson (a Briton) leaves out some key
American variables: the Vietnam War and civil rights as motivating cause; the
phenomenon of the 1970's ''me decade'' as a transition from politics to personal
growth to wealth- seeking.

Mr. Johnson describes the desire of students today for riches and advancement,
and their disdain for humanitarian or political issues. He then surmises that
young people may want to create wealth for social or spiritual reasons, though,
not surprisingly, he quotes no one saying this.

Is this wishful thinking on Paul Johnson's part, or just the uneasy conscience
of a conservative?

ROBERT GULDIN New York City

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARTHUR KOPIT:A LIFE ON BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Don Shewey

SECTION: Section 6; Page 88, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4554 words


Don Shewey writes frequently about theater.



 HE SCENE IS the Russian Tea Room, where three top dealmakers for the
International Creative Management talent agency have convened for lunch. Agent
No. 1 is explaining to her cohorts that one of her playwrights has been asked by
a mysterious billionaire to turn a four-page scenario the man has written into a
stage play. The billionaire has vowed to keep the play running even if nobody
comes - a distinct possibility, since the play is about nuclear war.

''This doesn't sound like what I'd call a box-office smash,'' says Agent No. 2.
At once, the three of them apply their skills at disguising serious subject
matter as Broadway entertainment.

A major star would do the trick. ''Hank!'' suggests Agent No. 2, recalling how
Henry Fonda had drawn ticket buyers even to ''First Monday in October,'' a play
on a not- too-riveting subject, the Supreme Court. ''Hank is dead,'' Agent No. 3
says.

Agent No. 2 turns to Agent No. 1: ''What about this as a musical?'' A firm no.
Agent No. 2 then suggests, ''We could take the Winter Garden after 'Cats' is
gone, blow the place up. I mean, it's halfway there already.''

But, Agent No. 1 explains, the billionaire claims to have information indicating
that the earth is doomed, and he hopes to forestall catastrophe by having the
play produced quickly.

''When he says doomed,'' wonders a shocked Agent No. 3, thinking of pending
deals, ''does he mean the West Coast, too?''

The conversation above is from Arthur Kopit's new play, ''End of the World,''
opening at the Music Box Theater next Sunday, May 6, after a four- week
commercial tryout in Washington. Kopit's is the first new American play of this
season, and one of but a handful in the last five years, produced directly for
Broadway - without having its origins Off Broadway, where the financial stakes
are lower, or at a not- for-profit regional theater. What's more, the play is
about the very problem it faces: not merely the survival of the human race, but
the survival of a serious playwright on Broadway.

Arthur Kopit may not have had the epoch-making impact of an Arthur Miller or
Tennessee Williams, nor does he head the list when critics rank important
American playwrights. Possible reasons: He is not prolific, his writing lacks
the readily identifiable style of a David Mamet or Sam Shepard, and his plays
are so unlike one another that they seem the work of several different authors.
Nonetheless, at a time of spiraling costs and ticket prices - which make it
increasingly difficult for producers to speculate, for audiences to attend, and
for playwrights to ply their trade - Kopit is that curiosity, the serious
American playwright who has survived on Broadway.

Kopit has experienced long dry spells between plays, yet most of the time he has
earned his livelihood as a playwright - contradicting Robert Anderson's famous
quip, ''The theater is a place where you can make a killing but not a living.''
And each of his plays, including the new one, has prompted remarks similar to
what The New York Times wrote about ''Indians'': ''It is . . . one of those
plays that is going to test the Broadway audience and ultimately determine
whether there is any role for serious drama on Broadway.''




 ERIous drama on Broadway dates back to the 1920's and 1930's, when playwrights
like Maxwell Anderson and Eugene O'Neill routinely received commercial Broadway
productions. And it still had meaning during the 1940's and 1950's, when Arthur
Miller, Tennessee Williams and William Inge represented American drama at its
finest. Combining stage naturalism with poetic language, they explored the
personal disappointment and sexual torment masked by the tranquil surface of
postwar America. They were the theater's contribution to the literary heritage
of Mark Twain and Henry James, Broadway's answer to George Bernard Shaw and John
Osborne, Jean Anouilh and Jean Giraudoux.

Today there is less unanimity about the playwrights who represent American drama
to the world. The serious writers who emerged during the 1970's have in common
only the assumption that their work will not be produced on Broadway. Economics
have made it inadvisable to produce anything but musicals, light comedies or
star vehicles. The typical Broadway play today is likely to be a formula sitcom,
such as ''Same Time, Next Year,'' or a pseudoserious melodrama like ''Agnes of
God.'' Significantly, over the last 20 years, only three Pulitzer-Prize-winning
plays originated on Broadway.

Broadway and serious drama began to go their separate ways around 1960, but
nobody told Arthur Kopit, Jack Gelber, Jack Richardson and Edward Albee, who all
received their first critical acclaim that year. Article after article
proclaimed this foursome as the potential heirs to

the triumvirate of Miller, Williams and Inge. But it was misleading ever to look
at them as a group. Richardson, who wrote ''The Prodigal,'' has since vanished
into the footnotes of theater history. Gelber's ''The Connection'' was produced
by the Living Theater, whose every impulse was antithetical to Broadway. ''I
never thought of myself as going to Broadway,'' says Gelber, who still teaches
playwriting and directs Off Broadway. ''I worked with people who were too far-
out for that.''

Albee did achieve spectacular success on Broadway in 1962 with ''Who's Afraid of
Virginia Woolf?'' and he continued to dominate American drama throughout the
1960's with plays like ''Tiny Alice'' and ''A Delicate Balance.'' But in the
last decade, Albee's writing has struck most critics as pretentious and empty,
and his recent plays have had very brief runs on Broadway. Only Kopit has
survived more than 20 years on Broadway artistically sound and financially
solvent, though the way he managed it could never have been predicted or
duplicated by anybody else.

''It's a strange situation,'' says Kopit, cutting through Shubert Alley on his
way from rehearsal at the Music Box to an early dinner at Sardi's. Nearly 47,
Arthur Kopit (pronounced COPE-it) retains the boyishness and springy step of a
high-school basketball player. His accommodating slouch, bushy mustache and
overstuffed leather bookbag add a sort of puppy-dog droopiness to his
tall-dark-and-handsome looks. ''I've had these plays on Broadway, yet I'm
anything but what one would consider a Broadway playwright. What is a Broadway
playwright?''

Anyone with a show currently in production, presumably. And Kopit has spent the
day watching Harold Prince rehearse the cast of ''End of the World.'' He plans
to spend the evening rewriting scenes for the touring version of ''Nine,'' the
1982 Tony Award- winning musical for which he wrote the book. And the ease with
which he slides into his corner table bespeaks the Broadway playwright. His
friends note Kopit's fondness for Sardi's and the glamour of Broadway, and his
savoring the savvy of a producer opening a play on the last possible day to
qualify for a Tony Award nomination - as the producers of ''Nine'' and ''End of
the World'' have done.

But to Kopit, a Broadway playwright means Robert Anderson or Neil Simon. ''Then
again, Tom Stoppard has his plays done on Broadway, and Harold Pinter,'' Kopit
muses, digging into some pasta. ''I don't know; they say without awards or a
major star there's only three months' audience for a serious play. Because of
the economic problems, because television has taken over the primary
entertainment role theater used to play, because it's more dangerous in the
midtown area - all of these factors work against . . . the play that is
successful that doesn't sell out. You either become a smash hit, or you're not
going to run. It's harder to be merely a success.''


The career of a writer, like a play, generally has a beginning, a middle and an
end. Kopit has had all those, but not necessarily in the right order. His
success came big and early, before he knew who he was as an artist, and unlike
many writers he has spent much of his career struggling not for recognition but
for the kind of inspiration that usually launches careers rather than crowning
them






KOPIT first jump


Born Arthur Lee Koenig May 10, 1937 (his mother, Maxine, was divorced when he
was very young and married George Kopit, a jewelry salesman), he grew up in an
affluent Long Island suburb, assuming he would go into science or business. But
he became excited by theater when he took a modern drama workshop at Harvard and
began writing short plays with outlandish titles. In 1959, the summer he
graduated with a degree in engineering, Kopit entered a playwriting contest.

In five days, he wrote a wacky one-act about an elegantly monstrous woman who
keeps her husband's coffin at her bedside and her grown son attached to her
apron strings at all times. He finished the play in Europe, where he was
traveling on a fellowship, and submitted it. When he learned he had won the $250
prize and that the play would be put on at Harvard, Kopit was happy that he was
out of the country - he didn't see how anyone could produce a play featuring a
talking, cat-eating fish, a man- eating plant and such a ridiculous title as
''Oh Dad, Poor Dad, Mamma's Hung You in the Closet and I'm Feelin' So Sad.''

''Oh Dad'' was staged Off Broadway by Jerome Robbins, ran for more than a year,
toured for 11 weeks and ended with a six-week run on Broadway. Kopit received a
Vernon Rice Award and the Outer Critics Circle Award for best new play of 1962,
and the critics both praised and damned him for synthesizing the comic,
grotesque and surreal elements of such Theater of the Absurd playwrights as Eug
ene Ionesco and Samuel Beckett.

The play's success spared Kopit the years of waiting on tables and driving cabs
that subsidize most young playwrights' careers. And it inaugurated his
extraordinary relationship with Roger L. Stevens, the veteran Broadway producer
and chairman of the Kennedy Center, whom Kopit met through a classmate while a
Harvard undergraduate. Over the years, Stevens has been involved in producing
all of Kopit's work since ''Oh Dad,'' except ''Nine,'' and he has pulled the
playwright through various financial crises with generous advances and
commissions (for instance, the translation of Ibsen's ''Ghosts'' that Liv Ullman
performed on Broadway).

If young Kopit did not have to worry about earning a living, he did struggle to
fit into his almost accidental career as playwright. ''A lot of the period from
'Oh Dad' to 'Indians' was spent waiting for something to seize me,'' he says
now.

What seized Kopit was a newspaper item about a shooting incident in Saigon that
fueled his impression that the Vietnam War was a continuation of
cowboys-and-Indians on another continent. Out of this and lengthy research came
''Indians,'' which used Buffalo Bill's Wild West Show as a metaphor for the
good-guy bad-guy mythology that often disguises the greed and genocide with
which the West was won. Audiences recognized the parallels to Vietnam and to the
racial tension in urban America; the critics, many of whom had found ''Oh Dad''
juvenile, hailed ''Indians'' as a giant step forward.

Although the play received a Tony Award nomination, it closed after only 96
performances. Kopit limped off to Vermont with the $250,000 he got for selling
the play to the movies (it loosely inspired Robert Altman's ''Buffalo Bill and
the Indians'') and didn't come up with another for nine years.

Kopit had been excited by the dramatic form of ''Indians'' - a hallucinatory
mosaic of documentary, Wild West fantasy, and three-ring circus - and profoundly
dissatisfied with the proscenium- style theater it had to play in on Broadway.
During his Vermont years, Kopit experimented to see how far he could carry the
carnival aspects of 1960's avant-garde theater and still have a play. In 1972,
he staged a fantastic outdoor theater piece involving the whole town. While
teaching at Wesleyan College in 1975, he created a daylong, improvisatory
Bicentennial pageant called ''Lewis and Clark: Lost and Found.'' At the same
time, he continued to write, conceiving a cycle of plays beginning with ''The
Discovery of America,'' which his friends consider Kopit's most imaginative
work, the distillation of his obsessions with American history and theatrical
spectacle.

This experimentation was a maturing process that culminated in ''Wings,'' his
most avant-garde play. Commissioned by the National Public Radio drama series
''Earplay,'' it served a personal need. Kopit's father suffered a stroke in 1976
that rendered him incapable of speech, and the playwright, himself a loquacious
and highly articulate speaker, began to brood about language dysfunction and the
emotional isolation of a stroke victim. His script for ''Wings'' resembles a
John Cage score - instructions for performance combining dialogue, interior
monologue, sounds, images and garbled speech. Brought to the stage by John
Madden with a Tony-Award- winning performance by Constance Cummings in the
central role, it was closer to performance art or the experimental theater of
Robert Wilson than to conventional drama. It ran on Broadway three months.

By 1979, Kopit was just scraping by, on grants and residuals from amateur
rights, but since he had married and was a father by then, it was never enough.
Since he never had a large backlog of produced plays, he couldn't count on the
annuity that more prolific contemporaries like Lanford Wilson and David Mamet
enjoy. Yet, unlike such talented writers as David Rabe, John Guare and Michael
Weller, he never took leave from playwriting to concentrate on movie scripts,
which he attributes to the influence of Audrey Wood, who was his agent until her
stroke in 1981.

''One of the remarkable things about Audrey is she said from the beginning,
'Dear, write plays.' She knew all the writers who went out to California and
never came back,'' says Kopit. ''My life after 'Oh Dad' through 'Nine,' which
was the first real money I ever made, was a series of 11th-hour escapes from
some economic danger. If I needed money, I'd call up the television department
at I.C.M. and go in and pitch some stories. I'm very good at selling a story,
making a deal. But to me it was always to get me through so I could write
another play. The nuclear play is very much formed by the experience of my
family, being out of myself and caring so deeply about other people.''


A scene from ''End of the World'' - the playwright Michael Trent is on the phone
with his agent, Audrey Wood.

TRENT: Audrey, the idea is terrible!

AUDREY: Then don't take it.

TRENT: How can I not take a deal like this? . . . This is the deal of a
lifetime!

AUDREY: Dear, what do you want me to do?

TRENT: Advise me!

AUDREY: Take the deal. . . .

TRENT: I've used up the advance.

AUDREY: What?

TRENT: I've used up the advance.

AUDREY: Darling, I'm sorry, I must have misunderstood: I thought you got this
advance last night.

TRENT: I did.

AUDREY: Dear, it is 10:30 in the morning, what do you do up there in
Connecticut?

In ''End of the World,'' the playwright Michael Trent (played by John Shea), on
commission from billionaire Philip Stone (Barnard Hughes), plunges into research
on the horrifying effects of nuclear weapons. What he learns confirms the
playwright's suspicion that a play on the subject would be impossible to write,
let alone watch.  Yet financial need forces him to persist. Affecting the manner
of a detective (his office door reads ''Michael Trent, Playwright - No Domestic
Comedies''), he goes to Washington looking for a villain among the hawks,
hard-liners and ''war-gamers'' who promote the Government's pronuclear arms
policy.






second jump kopit



Meanwhile, his agent, Audrey Wood (played by Linda Hunt, the Oscar-winning
actress from the film ''The Year of Living Dangerously''), wheels and deals in
the Russian Tea Room. The mixture of comedy and documentary prevents the play
from being a simplistic antinuke diatribe; it also prepares the audience for
what becomes a philosophical inquiry into the connection between man's creative
and destructive impulses. Trent can only proceed in writing his play when he
discovers the evil he's looking for in an unexpected place - himself.

Kopit's play is almost entirely autobiographical. In 1980, while teaching a
playwriting workshop at the City College of the City University of New York, he
met Leonard Davis, an insurance millionaire and one of the school's largest
benefactors, who had written a four-page outline - a futuristic scenario about a
Soviet-American military showdown - and wanted someone to write a play from it.
He felt, as Kopit would later have Philip Stone say, ''Theater alone among the
arts engages in equal measure the emotion and the intellect, and both must be
touched here if we are to survive.''

At first, the playwright laughed at the thought of being hired to write someone
else's play. Then he became intrigued with the practical challenge, and since
this was before his involvement with ''Nine,'' the financial arrangement was
tempting: Davis offered $30,000 for researching and writing the play.


''I started to do this research, and it was just awful,'' says Kopit, his
stocking feet propped up on the desk next to the Compaq computer on which he
writes his plays, his enormous tennis shoes on the floor. He works in a tiny,
paper-strewn bungalow 100 yards from the house in suburban Connecticut he shares
with his wife, the writer Leslie Garis, their three children (Alex, 12, Ben, 4,
and Kathleen, 2) and two golden retrievers, Ruby and Pearl. He goes on: '' 'The
Prompt and Delayed Effects of Thermonuclear Explosions' - how could anybody
write a play from this? You could do it one night for the converted, but could I
write a play in which the audience will come in and learn something about the
issue that they haven't understood before?''

Kopit discarded Davis's scenario because he felt it was undramatizable. What he
could dramatize, he realized, was his own inability to come to terms emotionally
with the horrifying reality of nuclear weapons - thus the autobiographical
format. He decided to consult with experts in Washington, partly to make sure he
had a secure understanding of the military strategy behind nuclear-arms policy,
but also to learn how other people dealt with the issue emotionally: ''I didn't
care to talk to the freeze movement, the people who said we've got to stop. That
I understood. I wanted to meet the hard-liners who say we need more weapons.''

Kopit takes out a scrapbook from which he created ''End of the World.'' It is a
big artist's sketchbook whose pages are filled with newspaper clippings,
handwriting, typed quotations and other bits of research colored and coded under
such headings as ''Why We Need More,'' ''Deterrence Theory,'' ''Problems with
Deterrence Theory,'' ''Views of the Soviet Union,'' ''Blackmail Scenario,''
''Civil Defense,'' ''Why Disarmament Is Dangerous.''

One thinks of a playwright as someone with a stack of blank paper making it up
as he goes along. Kopit's method is more physically involving, creating a
maelstrom of papers to dive into each day, making a mess, then straightening out
what's there, obsessed with documentary accuracy.  At the same time, this
scrapbook is a symbol of the quality in Kopit's plays that strikes some critics
as studious rather than imaginative. Kopit doesn't have Lanford Wilson's gift
for creating rounded characters, Sam Shepard's trust in idiosyncratic dramatic
structures, David Mamet's way with an overheard expletive, or the madcap
spontaneity of Christopher Durang.

But Kopit has other strengths. His playful fascination with language invests
individual words with unusual resonance. ''Oh Dad'' is a purposely silly
Gothic-Absurd vignette. But the characters' names - Madame Rosepettle, Rosalie,
Rosalinda, Commodore Roseabove - have the eerie insistence of an Ionesco game;
they bring the image of Woman as Something Beautiful but Dangerous to the
surface and then mock it with the repetitive echo of Gertrude Stein.
''Indians'' is so fraught with Buffalo Bill's paranoia and performance anxiety
that words like ''heroism'' and ''patriotism'' sound rancid. ''Wings'' chases
the mystery of words, the very source of language, into the life-or-death chasm
between coherent speech and gibberish. ''End of the World'' lingers lovingly on
the Pentagon's genius for inventing euphemisms such as ''discontinuity'' and
''anticipatory retaliation'' to describe repellent concepts.

These are verbal effects, and Kopit is as fond of them as he is of theatrical
effects. His imagination is focused not on the page (his plays are difficult to
read) but on the live event, the historical moment as well as the theatrical
moment. It's hard to imagine plays like ''Oh Dad'' and ''Indians'' being
revived, because they belong so much to their time, to the psychosexual or
political attitudes the audience brings into the theater; ''Wings,'' less so,
but it demands a virtuoso performance. In ''End of the World'' as well, Kopit
walks a thin line between being a playwright and a showman, braving the
indifference of posterity for the opportunity to affect an audience today.

''Arthur has a gift for intuiting the ideas and moods of American culture and
discovering metaphors that somehow clarify them,'' says the critic John Lahr, a
longtime champion of Kopit's work. ''That, to some extent, is what a
playwright's job is, finding a way of expressing to the culture the anxiety it
can't quite comprehend. People don't want to know; they pay for escape, not
disenchantment. Arthur has found a way, which is the trick of really good
playwrights, to essentially corrupt an audience with pleasure.''


''Everyone in the green entrance for 'The Grand Canal'!''

A crowd of women take their places at the stage manager's command. Director
Tommy Tune sits on a high stool in the center aisle of the theater. Composer
Maury Yeston scurries down front to confer with the conductor. Arthur Kopit
slouches in his seat, yellow legal pad in his lap, and watches as four actresses
begin speaking his dialogue.

The touring company of ''Nine'' is rehearsing at the Lunt-Fontanne Theater, and
some drastic changes are being made in the show. The script is being altered to
suit the personality of leading man Sergio Franchi, an acting singer in the role
originally written for Raul Julia, a singing actor. Several cuts must also be
made so the show will play faster out of town. One of these involves reducing
the 20- minute ''Grand Canal'' number to eight minutes, and Tune is going about
it in the same painstaking, moment-by-moment fashion in which ''Nine'' was
created.

''I had to write what Tune could direct, and he works very visually,'' Kopit
explains from the back of the theater as the rehearsal goes on. ''He would stage
a scene with the actors moving around just saying numbers, often in Italian, and
he'd stop and say, 'O.K., we can talk for 10 seconds.' My challenge was to
suggest ways to move the narrative forward in music or staging or lighting or
costumes, because I didn't have enough time with language. I said to Tune one
day, 'I see what I am here - I am a custom tailor.' My job was to be invisible
in the structure of the show.''






Kopit third jump


Brought in after Maury Yeston's score was completed and another book had been
scrapped, Kopit says, ''I didn't have the emotional stake in 'Nine' that I have
with my own material.'' Indeed, writing what amounts to sketch material for a
nightclub singer like Sergio Franchi doesn't sound like the most meaningful work
for a serious playwright. But in return for his 2 1/2 percent of the hit's
weekly gross (the Broadway run brought him almost $600,000), Kopit has learned
well that surviving on Broadway sometimes involves the art of compromise.

Not just with musicals. Even as passionate and personal a play as ''End of the
World'' contains signs of the small, understandable but significant artistic
compromises a playwright makes to get his work to Broadway. Using detective-
story devices to draw audiences into a discussion of nuclear weapons is a comic
way into the material, but also a step back; it sweetens strong medicine.
Choosing a director like Harold Prince, best-known for staging Stephen
Sondheim's musicals, as well as shows like ''Evita'' and ''Cabaret,'' underlines
the playwright's impulse to apologize for his play's serious content by
stressing its entertainment value. And during the show's out-of-town tryout,
Kopit even considered renaming the play ''Funny Business.''

Nobody wants hundreds of thousands of dollars and years of work to evaporate in
a month, a week, a night. And doing a serious play like ''End of the World'' is
certainly risky. Even the serious American dramas that have set the standard for
achievement on Broadway have concentrated on the realistic depiction of troubled
American families. ''End of the World'' is a play that searches out the moral
and spiritual underpinnings of the nuclear-arms debate. Can it engage an
audience? Will theatergoers accept the challenge of identifying with a
playwright trying to rewrite the script of the future? Or will they just yawn?



Serious plays do get done on Broadway. A spartan one-act about suicide and a
four-hour gay-liberation comedy aren't safe, predictable Broadway fare. Yet
Marsha Norman's '' 'night, Mother'' and Harvey Fierstein's ''Torch Song
Trilogy'' were hits last season. However, they came with insurance - Marsha
Norman's play rode in from the regional theater on a Pulitzer Prize, and
Fierstein's had been selling out for a year Off Broadway. David Mamet's
Pulitzer-Prize-winning ''Glengarry Glen Ross'' will soon be joined on Broadway
by David Rabe's ''Hurlyburly,'' but both came from Chicago's Goodman Theater.
Mamet's play won the top prize from London critics when his play had its
premiere at the National Theater last year, and Rabe's play features a cast of
young movie stars, including William Hurt, Christopher Walken and Sigourney
Weaver.

Then there's Arthur Kopit's play, coming to Broadway with no box-office
insurance at all, after an out-of-town tryout. That's the way Broadway shows
used to be done. But nowadays, ''End of the World'' seems less a part of an
honorable tradition than an historical aberration. The normal thing for a
playwright to do would be to hold off on a Broadway production until the play
had proven itself in a less pressured setting.

What is it that makes Arthur Kopit still willing to buck the odds by dealing
with serious themes on Broadway?

''When you ask an audience to pay money and sit in a theater,'' says Kopit,
''you've got to do more than just delight them. Television can do that. Movies
and musicals can get by just with glitz, dancing, entertainment, sheer technical
excellence. In the theater, you must feel and think also. It has to do with why
theater has always existed in civilization. Theater matters.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Kopit

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAN THE MAGIC PREVAIL?

BYLINE: By Steven R. Weisman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 39, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6926 words


Steven R. Weisman is chief White House correspondent for The Times.

AMERICANS LIKE HIM.

Amid the whir and clank of machinery at a Ford Motor Company assembly plant in
Claycomo, Mo., a few weeks ago, even the men wearing ''Mondale'' baseball caps
joined in cheering Ronald Reagan. In New York City, he told Jewish leaders some
things they didn't want to hear about Israel. Then he grinned and wished his
audience a joyful Pesach, and they responded with appreciative laughter and
applause.

When a President runs for re-election, conventional wisdom holds that he runs on
his record. Across the country, voters are surely sizing up Mr.  Reagan's
performance on the economy and foreign policy. But Presidents must also strike a
personal chord and they must embody the dreams and values of the nation. ''You
cannot be a successful President unless you can project a vision about the
purpose of America,'' says Thomas E. Cronin, a leading scholar of the
Presidency. And it is becoming clear that this year, to a degree unmatched in
modern times, the public is being swayed by these intangibles. One of the most
astonishing features of Mr. Reagan's political success is that, whether or not
they agree with him and his policies, Americans like him.

As a candidate, President Reagan still benefits from the public's yearning for a
take-charge leader after the succession of national traumas from Watergate to
the Iran hostages. His political fortunes have been helped by the expanding
economy and by the vitriolic Democratic primary campaign. Yet the White House's
own political experts say that Mr. Reagan's greatest political asset is his
ability to project himself as a man of conviction, genial self-confidence,
optimism and old-fashioned values. It has enabled the President to weather
countless political storms largely unscathed.

He has committed untold public bloopers and been caught in dozens of factual
mistakes and misrepresentations. He has presided over the worst recession since
the Great Depression. The abortive mission in Beirut cost 265 American lives,
and there has been a sharp escalation in United States military involvement in
Central America. An extraordinary number of Mr. Reagan's political appointees
have come under fire, with many forced to resign, because of ethical or legal
conflicts. Yet he is The Man in the Teflon Suit; nothing sticks to him.

Millions of voters do approve of Mr. Reagan's conservative policies, and
millions more don't concern themselves about policy issues. That is to be
expected. What is extraordinary is the President's support from another quarter.
Opinion polls show that he wins substantial allegiance among those very people
who worry about his record-breaking deficits, who fear that his actions could
lead to war and who believe that his economic program has clobbered the poor.

Says Fred I. Greenstein, professor of politics at Princeton University: ''He is
more successful than any recent President in establishing space between himself
and his policies.''

Clearly, the creation of that space has been a major goal of the Administration.
Richard B. Wirthlin, the Reagan campaign polltaker, puts it in terms of a
''social contract'' between the President and the public - ''the giving of a
stewardship to a President based upon trust, confidence and congruence with a
system of beliefs, rather than a congruence with a set of articulated
policies.'' Mr. Reagan's unmatched skills as a communicator of basic values have
been applied to achieving that end.

It remains to be seen, of course, whether Mr. Reagan's magic will prevail in
this election year. A series of foreign-policy setbacks might well tarnish his
public image. He suffered a stunning defeat earlier this month when the
Republican-controlled Senate overwhelmingly repudiated C.I.A. participation in
the mining of Nicaraguan ports. A major disaster in Central America might turn
the race around. And his popularity could be damaged if the economy turned sour.

Yet it seems evident that, given the success of his strategy to date, the
political marketing of Mr. Reagan's personal qualities may change the nature of
the 1984 campaign. To a degree unknown in recent elections, the challenger will
have to meet the incumbent's personality head on, matching his style and
countering his over-arching message with one of his own.

The Reagan approach may also have a more lasting effect. He has fashioned a new
chemistry of image, message and personality - a Presidential persona - that
could change the boundaries of the American Presidency itself.

IN HIS BOOK ''WHY NOT THE BEST?'' JIMMY Carter quotes a line from Reinhold
Niebuhr that summarizes the former President's view of the world and of his
trade: ''The sad duty of politics is to establish justice in a sinful world.''

Americans in this century have tended to elect Presidents who represented change
rather than continuity. John F. Kennedy's youth and vigor were an antidote to
the era of Dwight D. Eisenhower. Jimmy Carter, like Mr. Reagan, based his appeal
on his persona, offering the nation integrity in the aftermath of Watergate. But
the contrasts between Mr. Carter and his successor are particularly
illuminating.

Mr. Carter bore the burdens of office like a cross.  He identified personally
with his Administration's traumas, and told Americans that there were no simple
answers. The apotheosis of his martyr Presidency came with his refusal to set
out on the campaign trail in 1980 because of the Iran hostage crisis. Clinging
to the Rose Garden, he succeeded in turning the White House into a kind of
prison.

He also regarded the mastery of the details of his job as crucial to his
leadership. During the Middle East summit meeting at Camp David, he got down on
hands and knees to study maps of the Sinai. He read volumes of Russian history
before meeting with Leonid I. Brezhnev, the Soviet leader. He sought to educate
Americans to nuances. Discerning a ''crisis of confidence'' over energy
shortages, he consulted leading intellectuals on their view of the national
malaise. He called on Americans to accept limits on future growth.  On every
count, Ronald Reagan's approach to the Presidency is dramatically different. Mr.
Reagan positively enjoys the job, keeps his distance from crises, ignores
details both as Chief Executive and Chief Communicator. No matter how grave
things look, his attitude is invariably upbeat and reassuring.  Some of the
differences from Mr. Carter were inevitable, given the nature of the two men.
More significantly, Mr. Reagan and his aides perceived the style of the Carter
Administration as wrong-headed and doomed to fail. They had altogether new and
different ideas about how to present the President to his people.

Every Administration for a generation has spent substantial time and energy
seeking to make optimum use of television and the print media in the President's
behalf. But as the candidate of the minority party and a President whose
legislative plans represented a dramatic break with the past, Mr. Reagan had a
special need. And because of the long history of Presidents driven from office
or defeated for re-election, White House aides were also determined to use the
media to strengthen the institution of the Presidency itself.  To an
unprecedented extent, Mr. Reagan and his staff have made television a major
organizing principle of his Presidency. His day is planned around opportunities
for TV coverage. Every effort is made to assure a constant flow of positive
visual images and symbols from the White House.

In 1982, as unemployment soared and the President was accused of lacking
compassion for those out of work, Mr. Reagan avoided appearing in public and
before the TV camera in black tie. Instead, he showed up for events concerned
with unemployed teen-agers, dock workers and others being trained for new jobs.
When disaster strikes a community, Mr. Reagan doesn't stop at sending relief
funds - he makes a detour, as he did to flooded-out Louisiana last year, to be
photographed stacking sandbags. When a Presidential journey overseas is in the
works, producers from the television networks accompany White House aides on the
advance trips. The two groups jointly figure out the best photo angles of the
President - staring into the demilitarized zone from South Korea, gazing grimly
across the Berlin Wall. Plans for the President's trip to China were similarly
television-tailored.

This Administration's exceptional ability to manipulate the media is impressive.
One means of assuring that the cameras stay on the President, for example, is a
White House policy that has Mr. Reagan himself making important announcements on
television. For details and analysis, the news media are handed over to Treasury
Secretary Donald T. Regan, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger or other top
aides - but under ground rules whereby they may not be identified in news
accounts. As a result, the only person who can be shown on the 7 o'clock news's
coverage of such announcements is the President himself, offering broad,
positive precepts.

Another goal is to keep Mr. Reagan's image as far from bad news and negative
discussion as possible. Sometimes the President disappears altogether. The
momentous announcement of the withdrawal of the Marines from Lebanon was made in
a written statement distributed late in the day, minutes after Mr. Reagan had
left for his ranch in California. There were no senior officials immediately
available to the press to explain why the withdrawal was ordered.

The White House communications staff is nothing if not imaginative. Last year,
former Interior Secretary James G. Watt stirred up a hornet's nest of
rock-and-roll lovers after he ousted the Beach Boys from their July 4 concert on
the Mall. Mr. Watt was summoned to the White House and handed a large plaster
foot that had a bullet hole in it, a brilliant device for making light of the
incident. Later, it was learned that David R. Gergen, director of communications
at the time, had commissioned the making of the foot weeks before, with the
thought that it would come in handy if someone in the Administration happened to
make a gaffe.

A sense of timing showed up on a more serious topic last December when the White
House learned that the Pentagon was about to release a report criticizing the
Administration for alleged failures in the massacre of marines in Beirut. White
House officials pre-empted the negative impact of the report by leaking Mr.
Reagan's reaction to the charges the day before the report was made public.

THE MASTERY OF MEDIA TECHNIQUES HAS been placed in the service of a President
with a remarkable approach to political discourse.

According to Aristotle, the art of persuasion requires more than logic and
argument. One of a speaker's most important tasks, he wrote, is to understand
the psychology, the ''ethos,'' of his audience. Instead of lecturing his
audiences about limits, President Reagan offers good news. There is no limit, he
says, to what the nation can accomplish. He talks of heroes on the battlefield
and tells Americans that if they work hard, pay taxes and seek a better life for
their children, they are heroes, too. It is a message - known among his advisers
in the 1980 campaign as the ''can-do-America'' theme - aimed at a public that
has felt the nation floundering through years of economic and foreign- policy
crises. It is particularly potent in its appeal to blue-collar ethnic Roman
Catholics in the Northeast and Middle West and to fundamentalist Christian
groups in the South.

Mr. Reagan keeps his message simple. Campaign aides speak of a hierarchy of
public feelings: A voter has an ''opinion'' about money for a new B-1 bomber and
an ''attitude'' toward increasing military spending, but he regards the defense
of freedom as a ''value.'' As much as possible, Mr. Reagan seeks to appeal to
''values.'' And as his aides say, for all his ability as a performer, his appeal
would not work except for the fact that he is a true believer.

''He operates on a separate plane from the rest of us,'' says a senior
Republican in Congress. ''We may find him flawed because he doesn't know the
details and can't analyze them. But he can have a simple dialogue with the
voters. It's raw personality. Jimmy Carter agreed with you, and you didn't like
it. This guy can disagree and you think he's great.''

AS MUCH AS POSSIble, the President tries to prevent his message from being
undermined by the details of political issues. For example, he seeks often to
transform a debate over the effects of his programs into a broader issue of his
personal compassion. Asked at news conferences about his civil-rights record,
the President speaks less of his policies than of how he campaigned as a radio
sports announcer to integrate baseball. His parents, he says, wouldn't allow him
to see ''The Birth of a Nation'' because it was a racist film. Accused of being
indifferent to the hardships suffered by the unemployed, he tells of the pain he
felt when his father lost his job on Christmas Eve during the Great Depression.

Sometimes, the President transcends the details of an issue by focusing on a
single element with all the force of his persuasive powers. In 1982 and 1983,
Europe was roiled by protests over American plans to place new missiles on that
continent. Rather than devote his time to the intricacies of his arms-control
policies, the President addressed the issue generally. With utmost sincerity, he
spoke of his commitment in principle to arms control, and of his fervent wish
that nuclear weapons could one day be banished from the face of the earth. The
speeches helped ease European fears, clearing the way for the missiles to be
installed on schedule.

Mr. Reagan has used a similar approach - ignoring the elements of an issue to
concentrate on general principles - in talking about the Middle East. ''How many
people follow the ups and downs in Lebanon closely?'' asks a top Reagan adviser.
''It's probably less than 20 percent. But how many people understand that his
attempt to establish peace was the major objective? You're getting closer to 50
percent.''

If positive communication with the mass of the public is the goal, Mr. Reagan
seems to achieve it. He seems to know intuitively how to communicate on the
right plane for his larger audience, even when doing so involves skirting over
the nitty-gritty of an issue.

In political terms, the President thus enjoys remarkable freedom from attack on
the frequent occasions when his statements are at variance with the record. Even
the press, which sometimes takes Mr. Reagan to task on such statements,
generally ignores them.

The official position of the Reagan Administration, set forth by the Defense
Department, calls for the United States to ''prevail'' in a nuclear war. Yet the
President, repeatedly and in clear response to the widespread support for a
nuclear freeze, says that he believes that a nuclear war cannot be won.  Mr.
Reagan claims that the Government is spending more on those in need than ever
before. But he fails to note that inflation has eroded the value of most such
Government programs: Food stamps, for instance, buy less food today than they
did a few years ago. Moreover, he has made many poor people ineligible for
Federal aid.

In defending his domestic programs, Mr. Reagan typically makes two claims. He
leaves the clear impression with his audiences that there have been no outright
budget cuts in major programs, and that where cuts have occurred the poorest
families have not been affected. In fact, the funds budgeted this year for the
Environmental Protection Agency, job programs, aid to families with dependent
children, social-services block grants for the poor and aid to elementary and
secondary schools are less today than in the 1981 fiscal year, even without
including the negative effects of inflation. And according to the nonpartisan
Congressional Budget Office, about 40 percent of the reduction in benefit
payments has fallen on families making less than $10,000 a year.

The President's willingness to stretch the facts takes a variety of forms. In
1982, he portrayed his program of tax increases as a corrective measure to
eliminate loopholes and ''ornaments'' others had hung on his 1981 tax cut. In
fact, Mr. Reagan had placed those ornaments himself to corral enough votes to
get the legislation passed.


After seeking to weaken key enforcement provisions of the Voting Rights Act, he
finally signed the strengthened version demanded by Congress. Then he announced:
''This legislation proves our unbending commitment to voting rights.''

MORE often than not, such presidential comments attract scant public attention.
Even when they are reported in the print media and on television, they
apparently have little negative effect on Mr. Reagan's public image. The voters
seem to have come to recognize that the President is absolutely sincere in his
statements. What might be construed as deviousness in another politician is
accepted in his case as a simple mistake or a mistaken simplification or
nitpicking on the part of the press. Moreover, there is evidence that the public
is willing to draw a distinction between Mr. Reagan and his personal beliefs, on
the one hand, and his Government policies, on the other. According to a
mid-March Gallup Poll, 55 percent of Americans approve of Mr. Reagan's
performance in office. Yet several other polls show that they give his policies
in Lebanon and Central America substantially lower ratings.

Though much is made today of Mr. Reagan's years as a film actor, in fact he was
not as well known on the movie screen as he was on television. As Christopher J.
Matthews, a top aide to the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., has
pointed out, it was not until Mr. Reagan took over as host for the General
Electric Theater that he became the proverbial household word. He was known
throughout the nation as a genial host who was not a G.E. official, but a kind
of mediator between the company and the audience.

In Mr. Matthews's view, Mr. Reagan has found a similar spot for himself as
President. He is, says Mr. Matthews, ''not in government'' but ''at some unique
point - previously uncharted - between us and government.'' He presents himself
as independent of whatever problems may be vexing the nation - a kind of genial
host to the whole country.

At press conferences, Mr. Matthews notes, the President consults a seating chart
that helps him to call on reporters by their first names as though he were the
host of a friendly get-together rather than an adversarial press conference.
Delivering the State of the Union Message, he introduces heroes in the audience
- Lenny Skutnik, who saved a man from drowning in the icy Potomac River, or
Stephen Trujillo, an Army sergeant who performed bravely in Grenada. He uses
radio and television addresses to salute such developments as the efforts to
combat drunk driving or to arrange for organ transplants.

As the nation's host, Mr. Reagan can fully exercise his profound skills as a
communicator. His charming manner and his oratorical gifts are seen and heard to
best advantage. (His greatest gift is for narrative: The strongest speeches,
such as the one last September after the downing of a South Korean airliner, or
the one in October after the invasion of Grenada and the truck bombing in
Beirut, were masterpieces of storytelling.)

But the President's public stance apart from his Government has another, more
significant advantage. It removes him from the firing line, softening public
anger toward him personally over unpopular or mistaken policies. In 1982, he
addressed rallies on Capitol Hill, denouncing the members of Congress as though
he were just another citizen with a bill of grievances. In fact, incongruous as
it may seem, Mr. Reagan - four years after being elected Chief Executive -
continues to blame many of his problems on those he calls ''the people in
Washington.''

STRATEGY AND TECHNIQUE HELP EXPLAIN President Reagan's ability to make himself
liked by Americans, but his efforts to project himself come easily. Backstage,
by all accounts, Mr. Reagan is the same person he is out front.

To be sure, there are certain anomalies about the President's public image. For
many voters, he embodies an old-time America of tightly knit families,
small-town neighborhoods and God-fearing values. Yet he came of age in show
business, became the first divorced man to serve as President, has had an
often-troubled relationship with his children, rarely goes to church and, though
he has publicly praised the notion of tithing, doesn't personally come close.

On most counts, though, Mr. Reagan is much the way he presents himself. Dwight
Eisenhower had some of Mr. Reagan's public qualities - the infectious smile, the
mangled syntax, the relaxed working habits - but Mr. Eisenhower struck many of
those who knew him privately as a crafty operator and a demanding boss. Close
associates of Mr. Reagan describe him as ''guileless'' and an ''undemanding''
person to work for.

Mr. Reagan's old-school, noblesse-oblige quality also shows up even with his
staff. On a sweltering afternoon in the Oval Office in 1981, for example, a
close aide suggested that the President might want to remove his jacket; after
all, the two men were alone. Mr. Reagan was shocked at the suggestion.

Mr. Reagan extends myriad courtesies to his staff, autographing pictures for
them, remembering their birthdays and greeting their families in the Oval
Office. He goes out of his way to assure adversaries that he does not hold
grudges or take their criticism personally. He seems to recognize that
graciousness is the best policy politically, as well.

In 1982, while on his way to Bogota, Mr. Reagan learned that President Belisario
Betancur of Colombia was going to denounce him in a speech. Mr. Reagan's aides
debated what action to take until he finally announced, ''We're going to smother
him with kindness.'' Mr. Betancur's tongue-lashing took place as expected, but
the relationship between the two men flourished. Before seeing Mr. Reagan off at
the airport, the Colombian President commented with some amazement: ''You are
such a friendly man.''

More recently, White House aides were divided over how much hospitality to show
the Rev. Jesse Jackson and the downed Air Force pilot he brought back from
Syria. Mr. Reagan cut short the debate by saying: ''The only way we can lose is
if we're not gracious.''

When Mr. Reagan was 17 years old, he wrote a poem for his high-school yearbook
in Dixon, Ill., containing the following passage:  I wonder what it's all

about, and why We suffer so, when little

things go wrong?  We make our life a struggle, When life should be a song.

That upbeat message is still part of the President's personality. ''He is an
absolutely unstoppable optimist,'' says one Administration official. Throughout
the 1982-83 recession, for example, Mr. Reagan saw each new economic development
as a sign that prosperity was on its way back. During a hopeless moment in the
negotiations to prevent a war over the Falkland Islands, Mr. Reagan counseled
aides in the Situation Room not to despair. The United States, he said brightly,
could be ''the envy of the world'' if it could broker a solution.

Like the President's graciousness, his optimism is a useful quality in building
support for his programs. All Presidents come to recognize that persuasion is
their principal task, and Mr. Reagan is typical in that regard. White House
aides estimate that he spends 80 percent of his time selling his programs and
only 20 percent of his time actually shaping them. Optimism is the hallmark and
chief technique of a successful salesman.

But Congressional critics charge that the President's optimism keeps him from
giving policy problems the rigorous analysis they deserve. Repeatedly, for
example, Mr. Reagan has rejected the pessimistic warnings of key economic
advisers of what might happen if the Federal deficit is not reduced drastically.

And while the situation in Lebanon deteriorated, the President continued to tell
Congressional visitors that prospects were good for a settlement. Speaker
O'Neill, for one, said later that he felt deceived. Some senior Administration
advisers now admit, in fact, that Mr. Reagan's optimism may have prevented him
from seeing that events were undermining his original assumptions in sending
American troops to Beirut.

The picture of the President's decision-making process, as painted by his aides,
makes for a sharp contrast with what is known of most of his predecessors.

For one thing, Mr. Reagan enjoys the job. He never complains about the
loneliness of making difficult decisions that has for generations been a staple
of Presidential leadership. Typically, Mr. Reagan puts in an eight-hour day,
does homework in the evening, and takes the trouble to master material for
meetings and trips.

But a vacation is a vacation: Last February, he was on his way to his ranch in
Santa Barbara when - in the course of a few days - the Lebanese Government
virtually collapsed, his decision to withdraw the Marines from Beirut produced
an uproar and Yuri V. Andropov suddenly died in Moscow. Mr. Reagan refused to
interrupt his holiday to return to Washington. His personal inclination fit with
the White House's general aversion to having the President seen as a super
crisis manager. ''If he had come back and held a bunch of meetings,'' a White
House official explained, ''the public might have developed unrealistic
expectations about what could be accomplished.''

The distaste for details is a trademark. In his memoirs, Jimmy Carter offers an
incredulous description of the briefing he gave Mr. Reagan on the hostage crisis
just before his inauguration; Mr. Reagan took no notes. Nor does President
Reagan have much of a memory for details. In 1982, he toasted the people of
Bolivia when he was in Brazil. During a recent meeting, he referred to his
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, William D. Ruckelshaus, as
''Don.'' (Later it became clear he had mistaken him for Donald H. Rumsfeld, the
Middle East negotiator.) In front of reporters at his ranch, he called his own
dog by the wrong name.

If Mr. Reagan receives a sheaf of papers with a short covering memorandum, he
generally reads the memorandum. On the eve of the Williamsburg economic summit
conference last year, he set aside his stack of carefully prepared briefing
documents to watch ''The Sound of Music'' on television and never got back to
the papers.

To refresh his memory on the points he wants to raise, the President uses cue
cards in meetings with foreign leaders and others. Although some call the cards
a distraction, Mr. Reagan seems not at all embarrassed.

An aide recalled that at a White House session last year, the President sat down
at the Cabinet table with a group of educators. Their spokesman confessed that
he was quaking with nervousness; would the President mind if he read from his
notes? Mr. Reagan told him not to worry. With a grin, he held up his own cue
cards.

More serious problems arise, however, from the fact that the President rarely
puts aside significant amounts of time to look into subjects he knows little
about. He doesn't devour books, engage in intellectual argument or seek out
information from unofficial sources. If he is seated at dinner with a stranger
who might be an expert on a topic Mr. Reagan knows little about, the President
prefers to banter about sports or show business. In general, he relies more on
what he hears and observes than what he reads. He is not one to reach out for
ideas. ''The possibility that you can teach him is not there very much,'' says a
former foreign-policy adviser. ''You get the feeling that his mind is pretty
much made up.''

The President's approach can lead to significant confusion. He astounded
associates recently with an admission: Not until last fall, he said, did he
realize that the Soviet Union has 70 percent of its strategic nuclear warheads
placed on its land- based missiles, whereas the United States has only 20
percent of its strategic warheads on such missiles. Not until then did he
realize why his original proposal for Russian cuts in land-based missiles,
without similar American concessions, had been perceived as one- sided. The
failure to master such basics has prevented him from resolving philosophical
divisions in his Administration over arms control.  A top White House official
likens a policy session with Mr. Reagan to a meeting between a client and his
lawyers: He focuses less on minutiae than on the extent to which a proposal is
consistent with his personal guidelines. Before asking the President to make a
decision, his aides try to achieve a consensus among themselves, but, like any
client, he sometimes rejects even unanimous advice. Mr. Reagan took that tack
when he dismissed the striking air traffic controllers in 1981 and when he
refused to entertain the idea of tax increases in early 1982.

Close aides concluded long ago that it is often useless to try to persuade Mr.
Reagan to support something he cannot believe in. In fact, as his aides
recognize, his success in communicating an idea to the public is in part a
function of his genuine emotional commitment to that idea. ''So many politicians
tire of that stump speech,'' says an adviser. ''Reagan is willing to repeat it
again and again because he believes every word of it.'' A Republican ally in
Congress adds: ''If he gets an idea firmly fixed in his head, he uses it
forever.''

Sometimes, though, the President's aides feel that he must be made to see the
light on a particular issue. Then they may try to administer what they call
''reality therapy.'' It usually takes the form of a visit by Congressional
leaders who agree with White House aides that the time has come to urge Mr.
Reagan to be more flexible.

White House aides avoid appealing directly to the President on political
grounds. ''You argue from weakness if you go in there and tell him, 'If you
don't do this, you're going to suffer a loss in your job approval rating,' ''
says James A. Baker 3d, the White House chief of staff. But Mr. Baker and others
admit that they cannot ignore their mandate to help win legislative approval for
Administration programs, or to strengthen Mr. Reagan's political standing. If
the political stakes are high enough, they find a way to get his cooperation.

Their time-tested technique is to persuade the President that he is not
reversing course even if that is precisely what they want him to do. Mr. Reagan
truly does not believe that he changed policies significantly when he accepted a
tax increase in late 1982, or when he dropped his efforts to delay construction
of a natural-gas pipeline from Siberia to Europe, or when he decided to withdraw
American troops from Lebanon.

White House aides say that Mr. Reagan is a genius at boiling abstractions down
to concrete concepts that the public will understand.  Often, his staff may look
over the draft of a speech he has been working on and point out that a statement
is incorrect. ''How can we state it so that it is correct?'' he will reply and
prod his aides to find the down-to-earth facts and images to support his
notions. He seizes on any bit of information that comes to him if it reinforces
something he already believes.

Mr. Reagan, himself, skims the leading newspapers each day in search of telling
anecdotes. He also seeks them in letters he receives and in articles in such
publications as Human Events, the ultraconservative magazine. The stories tend
to be about people who use food stamps to buy vodka or who falsify papers in
order to obtain disability payments.

Mr. Gergen, the former communications director, calls them ''parables,'' arguing
that the public cares little about their authenticity. But press attention has
forced the White House to ''scrub'' the stories for accuracy before Mr. Reagan
uses them. ''I always think that if we can get through a press conference
without some disaster, it's a success,'' says a senior White House official.

More problematical are what the President's aides refer to as ''notions.'' These
include his debatable statements that the Great Society caused poverty to
increase in the 1960's or that the United States actually decreased military
spending in the 1970's. Asked recently why the President says things that are
untrue, a long-time adviser laughed and said: ''I don't know. He's been doing it
for years.''

The role of Mr. Reagan's staff is much debated in Washington. Some fear that his
refusal to become involved in the intricacies of policy making leaves him
vulnerable to manipulation. Moderates claim, for example, that the President was
persuaded to approve a crackdown on ''leaks'' to the press last fall without
realizing that it called for lie-detector tests for his Cabinet and staff.

Other critics charge that the White House staff is not activist enough, that
they are cowed by Mr. Reagan's strong positions on some issues. Despite
briefings from budget experts, Mr. Reagan resists accepting the idea that his
programs to cut tax revenues and increase military costs have widened the
Federal deficit. His aides no longer push the point. One comments: ''He doesn't
like to be crowded or pushed hard by one individual.''

The result of the staff's wary attitude toward Mr. Reagan is that, for all his
geniality and attentiveness, he is not close personally to anyone. He tends to
regard his closest aides at the White House as retainers or surrogate sons, but
not as cronies.

Their manner toward him, in return, is highly deferential and respectful. Even
Mr. Reagan's closest advisers find him to be basically remote, operating on a
different plane and by his own lights - distanced from them. By all accounts, it
is so rare for Mr. Reagan to confide in them, to share his darkest concerns or
inner turmoils, that there is some doubt among his staff that he is troubled by
any. Not until he was ready actually to announce his decision, for example, did
Mr. Reagan tell even the members of his inner circle explicitly that he had
indeed decided to run for re-election. Mr. Reagan is known to be similarly
circumspect with his long-time friends in California. The only person with whom
Mr. Reagan is known to share his inner feelings is his wife, Nancy.

Backstage at the White House, much as in his public persona, there is a wall of
his own making between the affable President and his audience. The nation's host
is a solitary man.

Long before the age of television, political experts complained about the
electorate's limited attention span. In 1925, Walter Lippman observed: ''The
public will arrive in the middle of the third act and will leave before the last
curtain, having stayed just long enough perhaps to decide who is the hero and
who the villain of the piece.''

No modern President has exploited that tendency more effectively than Mr.
Reagan. His performance inevitably raises questions about his prospects for
re-election and the larger legacy he will have left as President.

The Democratic candidates hope to defeat Mr. Reagan by capitalizing on voter
concerns about world tensions, fears that inflation or unemployment may
resurface or worries that Mr. Reagan will cut Social Security, Medicare and
other domestic programs.

And it remains to be seen how long the President's popularity would hold in the
face of a barrage of policy reverses. The outer limits of his magic touch have
yet to be tested. In the 1982 recession, for example, Mr. Reagan's approval
rating dropped substantially. If there were a major increase in inflation or
unemployment before election day, that rating might very well fall again.

Moreover, there is no way to be certain how the public will react to such events
as the rebuke Mr. Reagan received April 10 when the Senate voted 84 to 12 for a
resolution opposing American support of the mining of harbors in Nicaragua.
Among those voting against him were the majority leader, Howard H. Baker Jr.,
and 41 other Republicans.

It was one of the worst setbacks Mr. Reagan has experienced in his relations
with Congress, and one of the most serious rejections of a Presidential policy
since the Vietnam War. Administration officials state that the mining has
ceased, and the future of all covert assistance to rebels in Nicaragua is now in
doubt. But Mr. Reagan has a record of being able to carry his case to the
public, bringing enough pressure on Congress to salvage much of what he seemed
to have lost and preserving his popularity.

In January, when Congress returned after the holiday recess, Republican
Congressional leaders informed Mr. Reagan that his policy of maintaining
American troops in Lebanon had lost most of its support in Congress. The
President withdrew the troops and his policy was widely described as a debacle.
But his approval rating among the voters has been steadily rising ever since.

The President's astonishing political success to date suggests that the
Democrats will have to do more than base their challenge on a catalogue of
issues. They will have to run against the nation's host. Even now, Mr. Reagan's
re- election strategists are planning some daunting Presidential extravaganzas.
Mr. Reagan plans to open such national celebrations as the World's Fair in New
Orleans and the Olympic Games in Los Angeles. After returning from China, he
will be off for a summit meeting in London and ceremonial stops in France and
his ancestral home in Ireland.

Presidential pageantry gives all incumbents an advantage. But Democrats have a
special problem because of Mr. Reagan's skills. Should they question his work
habits and misstatements? The voters may continue to feel that these are simply
unimportant. More likely, the Democrats will have to meet Mr. Reagan on his own
terms, raising the political debate to a choice between two visions. Senator
Gary Hart would be under more pressure to define his ideas. Former Vice
President Walter F. Mondale would be under more pressure to give his ideas fresh
urgency and drama. Any Democrat will have to find a way to convince the voters
that he, like Mr. Reagan, is speaking from his heart.

What impact will Mr. Reagan's performance have on the Presidency itself? It
seems hard now to remember the days when much of official Washington patronized
him as an amiable amateur. He ended up transforming the conventional definition
of the job.  In part, he has avoided some traditional pitfalls. He has not
allowed himself to be unduly awed by the trappings of power - he has not taken
the obsessive personal interest of his predecessors in assigning seats at state
dinners or aboard Air Force One or in deciding who can use the White House
tennis court.

''The main problem with power is that the person who uses it has trouble holding
onto his identity,'' says John P. Sears, who managed Mr. Reagan's campaign in
1980 before being dismissed the day of the New Hampshire primary. ''I think
Reagan really does believe he's just a temporary custodian. This is where his
training as an actor comes into play. An actor realizes that he's out front, and
that he might get credit if the movie is a hit or blame if it's a bomb. But he
knows there are people behind him who are working to pull the whole thing off.''

That perspective might well be emulated by future Presidents, whatever their
background. They may also be tempted to learn from Mr. Reagan's political
success. By concentrating on general themes and by projecting an upbeat spirit
he has minimized the political damage that comes with running a government. By
formulating a compelling vision of national purpose and by breathing it into
every act and statement, he has forced critics and would-be challengers to
debate the issues on his terms. He has shown that it is not enough for a
President in the modern age to have such a vision; he must also be willing to
spend most of his time selling it - persuading, cajoling and communicating.

Mr. Reagan may also have altered the experts' perception of the qualities
required for the Presidency. ''We better take another look at the nature of the
job,'' says Mr. Sears. ''We've had an awful lot of intelligent people in the
White House who have done a poor job at it. Sometimes intelligence in a
President can lead to confusion of purpose. Simplicity, on the other hand, has
its merits.''

And its dangers. Some of the President's closest aides, in fact, are concerned
that Mr. Reagan is too insulated. ''His instincts are the right ones, but that
doesn't mean they shouldn't be tested against reality,'' says a senior White
House official. What's more, Mr. Reagan's aloof managerial style has left an
enormous amount of power to be fought over by his staff and led to considerable
confusion in arriving at the final decision.

But there are larger questions posed by Mr. Reagan's first term in office: How
far should a President try to separate himself from the political consequences
of his policies? Is it enough for a President to speak to the yearnings of an
age if he fails to confront the electorate with complex, difficult choices? In
November, the voters may provide some answers.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of former President Carter holding press conference photo of
President Reagan saluting as he leaves the White House photo of President Reagan
visitin with kidsin Anacostia area photo of President leaving White House

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EUROPE'S INTELLECTUALS AND AMERICAN POWER

BYLINE: By John Vinocur; John Vinocur is head of The Times's Paris bureau.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 60, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6138 words


An hour's flight separates Paris and Bonn - less than 300 miles - but the change
in intellectual and spiritual time zones seems so great some days it can leave a
visitor disoriented, mentally jet-lagged. For an American making the trip during
the last 12 months, Europe's unsettled mood was a fault line running down the
middle of Europe at the French-German border, with the Americans astraddle.

On one side, France's nimblest thinkers of the left, after years of treading an
independent high wire between East and West, had turned clearly toward the
Atlantic and the United States, and were talking, without guffaws, of the need
to defend democracy, freedom and Western values. Across the Rhine in West
Germany, where three decades of American officials thought their view of
democracy had taken hold, a comparable group of intellectuals, with a national
audience and national impact, were speaking in another tonality: America as
aggressor; America as polluter, nuclear terrorist and profiteer; America as
the-force-keeping-us-from-the-way-we-want-to-be. The word itself - America -
became a conversational badge, an identifying label.

In Paris these days, the phrase '' a l'Americaine'' specifically refers to
something forward-looking. When Galeries Lafayette, the enormously successful
French department store chain, announced that it was going to rework its
marketing and image, its management meant that it was going to ''Americanize''
itself. Jack Lang, the Minister of Culture, who in the early days of the
Mitterrand regime attacked American ''cultural imperialism,'' found himself
isolated by the intellectual community as a result, and has spent much of his
time since recalibrating his language, giving awards to American performers and
making sure he is available to photographers at exhibits like ''Masterpieces of
American Painting,'' which opened at the Grand Palais in March.

Across the border, a West German soft-drink company, Afri Cola, recently tried
to increase its sales through an advertising campaign whose message was that it
was not American. The advertisement was, in a sense, the commercial successor of
an article a few years ago in the official West German Social Democratic Party
newspaper that condemned McDonald's for foisting a ''primitive'' food culture on
the German nation. Intellectuals such as G"unter Grass, in the heat of the
debate over the deployment of new NATO missiles, said they felt shame for
America, which they depicted as an oafish, discredited bully. The view trickled
through the layers of the mass media. A typical book of pop politics, written by
Peter Merseburger, until recently a West German television correspondent in
Washington, presented the United States as a reeling, incalculable force from
which the Germans must keep their distance.

It is not just that ''America has a permanent taste for violence,'' that it has
a ''lower horizon of political expectations'' than Europe, that it admires Walt
Whitman, ''the bard of American imperialism,'' that it is a ''disturbed,
rudderless'' place, but that - by the television reporter's definition - it is
deeply, organically flawed, dangerous.

In a singular turnabout in postwar Europe, France - long the home of Europe's
most reflexively anti-American intellectuals - is now a place where American
diplomats confess to embarrassment, so strong is the pro- American embrace. At
the same time, West Germany, while electing a conservative government, is also
producing a vocal minority of intellectuals who see the United States as the
repository of Wrong, who turn the defense of democracy against totalitarianism
into a secondary consideration, and have begun to question whether their
country's place is in the West.

Leading French intellectuals, separating themselves from the influence of the
Communist Party only in the 1960's and 1970's (significantly later than most of
their Western European counterparts), now look with active contempt at any
political position that would seem to work in favor of the Soviet Union. In West
Germany, for a comparable group of intellectuals, the Soviet Union seems to be a
subordinate problem to that of the United States - the factor they claim has
smothered their identity, and, in the process, made their country's democracy
one they sometimes seem barely to respect.

During 1983, anti-Americanism had periods of intensity throughout Europe with
the deployment of Pershing 2 and cruise missiles, and the United States invasion
of Grenada: In a Christmas Eve speech on Danish television, a Copenhagen pastor
denounced ''America's peace'' based on ''hidden control and corruption.''And The
Times of London reported on a London schoolteacher explaining to a class that
the United States held the world in an imperialist and militarist stranglehold.
But the focus seemed to be West Germany. Politicians acknowledged the existence
of anti-Americanism. One of them, Gert Bastian, a member of the West German
Parliament for the pacifist-oriented Green Party, abandoned the party after
accusing the Greens' leadership, of, among other things, being rife with it.

Arthur F. Burns, once the chairman of the United States Federal Reserve Board
and currently the American Ambassador in Bonn, took the extraordinary diplomatic
step of speaking publicly about the issue. In a speech adapted as an article in
The New York Times, he said that anti-Americanism was a symptom of what he
believed was a rejection among ''the more activist members of Europe's educated
classes . . . of Western society itself and its values.''

The discussion swelled at a nervous, insecure time in Europe. The idea of
European political unity has deteriorated to what President Francois Mitterrand
calls ''exhaustion.'' The comfort and ease of life taken for granted for three
decades in Western Europe have been threatened by the disintegration of
industries that may never return to international competitiveness. It is a time
when many Europeans, according to the German film director Volker Schlondorff,
''just seem to want to hibernate.''

More than any other issue, the deployment of nuclear missiles has divided
Europe's intellectuals, particularly the Germans and the French. The former are
absolutist, damning the ''cynical reasonablenes'' of Europe's governments in
accepting the missiles, and sounding very anti-American. The French, hardly
admitting to being pro-American, accept deployment, insisting - as former
Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. once did - that more important things
than peace exist, that a planetary gulag is a final, worse alternative than the
risks of stationing nuclear weapons.

Anti-Americanism is, of course, not a new phenomenon in Europe and has, for
decades, operated on several levels.

There is the America-is-everywhere, Feds-under-the-bed notion, the idea that
whatever goes wrong, does not please, broadens the game, creates competition,
acknowledges risk, or just provides a little inconvenience has an American root.

The United States, its appearance of rediscovered vitality, its doggedness, its
creative confusion, its comfortable relationships with technology and modernism,
can be a particularly inviting target for some of the Europeans who hear again
and again that the technology gap is now so great that Europe may never catch
up. The critical phrases are often ''American incoherence'' or ''American
unpredictability,'' but the feeling behind them is sometimes one of envy.
Talking in Paris to a friend about the vanished German leadership in optics, the
film director Schlondorff said, ''Since we don't have Leica and Zeiss anymore, a
lot of people say, 'Let's drop the whole race.' ''

And the blame must go somewhere: multinationals that cut across borders, a
currency that - for the time being, at least - seems too strong, a culture that
you can eat and watch and wear without seeing a single American, ideas that run
loose, collide and conquer or disappear with such speed that they leave the
local competition breathless.

In a period of insecurity, this has led to a type of reasoning, according to
Arthur Burns, that transforms America into the ''bulwark of everything they
despise.'' This attitude, he says, cannot be dismissed alone as growing out of
Reagan Administration policies, missiles or the American role in Central
America. It is here that the link can be made between a variety of
anti-Americanism and what the Ambassador called ''the alienation of certain
European intellectuals from the values and institutions of their own democratic
society.''

Although anti-Americanism, particularly in West Germany, was a topic of
considerable passion last year, it appears to be less strident today. This can
be attributed in part to the more subdued phrasing of President Reagan's
speeches in recent months. Excesses on one side of the Atlantic thrive in
relation to exaggeration on the other, so runs this argument. As the tone of the
United States moderates, then it is proportionately more difficult to sustain a
furious discourse against the United States as the starting point of all that is
debased, including Western society. The argument is made as well that signs of
an upswing in the economy on both sides of the Atlantic can have a calming
effect.

Nevertheless, the fact remains that in West Germany, at least, the idea that the
United States is in the way of the country's finding a truer, purer identity now
has new institutionalized roots.

It is not just that overtly anti-American groups like the Greens are members of
Parliament with constant access to the media. Or that, after a few years of
high-pitched debate, a class of teachers, editors, intellectuals and the like
has developed with reputations and arguments to defend.

The battles waged by politicians and intellectuals over the proper role of the
United States in German lives have had an effect on the ordinary citizen. In a
recent poll, groups of Britons, Swiss and West Germans were asked about which
countries they thought had a lot of freedom. Majorities of 70 percent and 80
percent in Britain and Switzerland replied their countries had it, and the
United States too. But in West Germany, there was no majority to agree that West
Germans or Americans had freedom in great amounts.

It is this kind of response that raises the most troubling questions. If people
have trouble recognizing freedom, particularly their own, won't they have
trouble recognizing its absence?

A West German best seller, ''Where Germany Lies,'' published last year by
G"unter Gaus, who was Bonn's chief diplomat in East Germany under former
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, contains a partial answer. In writing about East
Germany, Gaus makes a virtue out of living under totalitarian rule in the sense
that he says the East Germans have retained a kind of Germanness that their
Western cousins have lost. The confused evaluation of freedom and democracy is
apparent when the author states, ''People in the East kept what the West Germans
gave up.''

The argument dovetails with that of the anti-American faction: The United States
bought West Germany's soul with the Marshall Plan, and has prostituted it once
again with the deployment of the missiles. West Germany, therefore, cannot
become an ''individual'' while it maintains its present relationship with the
United States, or even the European Common Market, which in the Greens'
manifesto for elections for European Parliament in June, subordinates Europe to
the United States and big business.


West Germany has come a long way from the deliberate modeling of the
Constitution of the Federal Republic on that of United States in 1949 to the
near- unanimous election of Rudolf Bahro to the executive board of the Green
Party about 30 years later. Bahro, an East German exile and renegade Marxist
whose guru status was sanctified within the party by a jail term in East Germany
(for criticism of the regime there), dreams of an apocalyptic collapse of West
German industrial society and Germany's reunification from the ashes of the
West's ''have-have theology.''

In an interview early last year with James Markham of The New York Times, Bahro
charted his course, one that he says cannot be tainted by compromise. ''I am for
an anti-investment strategy,'' he said. '' I am for the demolition of industrial
civilization. The ecological crisis is the final expression of the kaput
industrializaton of the world, with the bomb as the tip of the iceberg.''

For the young people who find Rudolf Bahro's notions attractive, for those in
West Germany who elected Green Party candidates to Parliament for the first time
in March 1983, the United States, the symbol of industrialization, can only be
the ultimate aggressor. Gert Bastian, still a sharp critic of the deployment of
Pershing missiles in West Germany despite his resignation from the Greens,
recently defined for an interviewer the attitude among many of the young people
he has dealt with in the party since 1982 as ''anti-American and anti-West.''
There is no special emotional charge when he says it; that is the way things
seem to him.

''I don't think they like to hear much about a Western community of shared
values. That makes them aggressive. They feel thay cannot develop as they'd wish
because this West keeps Eastern Europe under pressure. They think 'West' means
something elitist, something arrogant. For them, it means developing Western
superiority, the domination of the third world, the poor. They're absolute; they
make a lot of judgments. For them, politics is hardly the practice of the
possible. I don't see it as a great danger - they don't represent a majority -
but they do influence things.''

The presence of the United States is central to the development of this attitude
in Europe, particularly in West Germany, because there more than anywhere else
in Europe a country has defined itself in relation to America. In the years
after World War II, West Germany sought an identity, and a moral refuge, in
being as American as it could manage. But by the 1970's, although no West German
politician ever defined it this way, West German interests were seen (often
intuited, really) as best represented, most easily developed in counterpoint to
what had the appearance of a decline in American strength and influence.

The period from 1970 to 1980, when West Germany achieved a kind of associate
superpower status - it participated in its first Western Big Four summit meeting
in 1979 - was also a time, most intensely during Jimmy Carter's Presidency, when
the United States was quietly denigrated. There was the ignominous withdrawal
from Vietnam. Followed by Watergate. Then the taking of American hostages in
Iran. The dollar fell. America's inflation rate was 14 percent while West
Germany's was 3 percent. The American car industry tottered.

Helmut Schmidt's publicists, while repeating his latest stinging remark about
Jimmy Carter's incompetence, also spread the word about all the European
politicians who were suddenly asking him to play a world leadership role. At the
same time, pursuing Ostpolitik (better relations with Eastern Europe) meant
turning criticism of the Soviet Union into a taboo, as some moderate Social
Democrats now describe it. Suddenly, the Russians did not seem so bad. Midway
through the Carter years, a poll showed a plurality of West Germans (45 percent)
agreed with the idea that the Soviet Union wanted reconciliation with the West.

Over the space of most of those years, West Germans were told that detente was
irreversible, and that their country had found a remarkable path: one that would
take it both around the superpower confrontations, and in a direction that would
not frighten the Soviet Union. If public-opinion polls suggest that most West
Germans are indifferent to the prospects of German reunification, West German
intellectuals of the left are not. For them, the road away from the United
States, away from being perceived as a threat by the Soviets, is also argued as
leading to a united Germany.

But something collapsed in the last year of the old decade, well before Ronald
Reagan took office in January 1981. Detente evaporated with Poland and
Afghanistan. The West German economy went bad and the Social Democratic
Government sought to scale down its expenditures, ending an era when it was
ready to fund anyone's reform of anything. The United States, which was thought
to be in a weakened state that would leave West Germany alone forever, began,
under Jimmy Carter, to press the West Germans for reaction to Soviet
misbehavior.

The reaction, articulated by intellectuals of the left, was one expressing West
Germany's sense of victimization. The Americans were pushing the West Germans
around, asking them to behave in a way they no longer thought necessary.

In the vocabulary of the 1968 generation (now teachers, editors,
opinion-makers), the rise of Solidarity in Poland should have been called a
liberation struggle, yet it left them extraordinarily cold. Rather than to
Warsaw, the Greens sent a delegation to inspect the revolution of Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi.

For Ehrhard Eppler, a left-wing Social Democratic member of the Schmidt Cabinet,
and now a party gadfly from his home base in Stuttgart, the explanation was that
the military regime of Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski in Poland was really much more
humanitarian than the one in Guatemala supported by the Reagan Administraton.

Eppler's view of the democratic process is such that he has called for a
plebiscite to overrule the Bundestag's decision to accept deployment of Pershing
and cruise missiles. But he does not like the idea of plebiscites on restoring
the death penalty or expelling Turkish immigrants, perhaps because the results
might not fit his political viewpoint.

By 1982, with an important assist from Ronald Reagan's incautious talk about
fighting a limited nuclear war in Europe, there was a unique new confluence of
high and low political thinking at the edge of the mainstream in West Germany.

The low group was the residue of antinuclear-power movements, ecologists,
extreme leftists, people overwhelmed by the competitiveness of industrial
society or frightened in particular by a scarcity of jobs for young graduates.
It insisted that the most democratic state in German history had accomplished
little and that its tarnished model and mentor, the United States - with the
exception of the nuclear-freeze movement, the American Indians, Daniel Berrigan
and Daniel Ellsberg - spelled disaster.

Its notions of democracy were baffling. The German novelist Peter Schneider
wrote an essay in which he told of coming across a handbook for peace-movement
participants in which a vague notion of forming a consensus (''melting all ideas
and suggestions together'') was held out as a method for democratic decision
making that superseded voting or majority rule.

High politics - almost a metaphysical political science in West Germany, with
its schematic discussions of the German future - followed a line moving in the
same direction: removing the American model from its pedestal.

A fashionable truism developed from the argument that the allies, essentially
the United States, were responsible for the division of Germany. The Marshall
Plan - according to Dorothee Solle, a leading West German theology professor,
Helmut Gollwitzer, another vocal West German clergyman, and Petra Kelly, a
leader of the Greens - was a swindle designed to place Konrad Adenauer in power
and turn Germans from forming a noble society and toward addiction to consuming
and possessing.

At a nuclear reworking of the Nuremberg war-crimes tribunal last year, in which
the Greens played an important role, the Allies were accused of breaking the
laws of warfare protecting civilians with their decision, at Casablanca in 1943,
to bomb German cities. For the prosecution, the horrors of war proceeding from
that point are the crimes of the West alone, those of total inhumanity. The
extermination of Europe's Jews, decided in January 1942, fell through the
floorboards of history in the process.

Separating themselves from the West, washing down the blackboard of the German
past, isolating nuclear America as the prime danger to civilization - the people
who reason this seem to feel they are freed for a new German future.

That future has its political outlines in ''The End of the Ideological Age,'' an
intriguing book on remaking East- West relationships, which Willy Brandt and
Egon Bahr of the Social Democratic leadership praised lavishly. In its
conclusion, the author, Peter Bender, traced a diagram of how ''Europe'' - he
seemed to mean Germany - could find itself once again:

''That Europe could Europeanize America is excluded, so it must rather make sure
that it does not become more Americanized itself. What does seem possible is to
support the century-long process of Russia's Europeanization, and to assist it
in a way so that it doesn't degenerate into Americanization.''

For Peter Bender, American civilization is demagoguery. If Europe would ease up
sufficiently on the Soviet Union, he assures his audience, the Soviet Union
would let democracy come to its door. One of West Germany's main failings,
Bender suggested in an article in Die Zeit this year, is that it continues to
see itself as a ''West European'' country.


Thinking along similar lines, Dorothee Solle, who is active in her country's
antimissile movement, characterized (in a debate published last year by the
magazine Der Spiegel) Europe's peaceful post-1945 history as a ''Pax Americana''
based on exploitation and repression. She rejected the possibility of
nuclear-arms reductions through negotiations as a ''businessmen's peace,'' and
demanded unilateral Western disarmament.

Europe must be free of atomic weapons from Portugal to Poland, she said, leaving
the Soviet Union out of her equation. West Germany's alliance with the United
States, a democratic country notable for its absence of democracy, she went on,
is its ''Ungl"uck,'' or downfall - a word with the ring of the 1930's when the
alleged causes of German Ungl"uck'' were dealt with in concentration camps.

''Evil has an address, a telephone number,'' Solle insisted when she was at full
speed. ''You can name it. We know who liquidated Hiroshima, not to mention
Nagasaki. You can point out the American senators who are for arming and earn
dividends on it.''

Solle and many of the people involved in the West German peace movement likened
the situation in West Germany in 1983 to that of 1933, the year of Hitler's rise
to power. For them, the act of placing American missiles on German soil was a
monstrous step. Solle and the others simply did not like the Christian
Democrat-led Parliament that the Germans elected a year ago. Voting was a
limited exercise, they said, and representative democracy in an ''American
military colony'' just wasn't good enough.

At the time of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, G"unter Grass, the country's
most visible intellectual, had said the United States was disqualified from
making moral judgments about anything. Now, he disqualified service in the West
German military as a legal obligation, saying that resistance to the Bundestag's
decision to deploy the missiles should be expressed by refusing conscription.

This was a minority attitude in West Germany, but it came from a man of great
stature. In attacking remarks like it, Trutz Rendtorff, a theologian, said, in a
debate with Dorothee Solle in Der Spiegel: ''This is a disregard for the
political maturity in our country when you say that the voter is dumb,
incorrectly informed, or uninterested, and that the peace movement alone knows
what things are about. I think there's a certain contempt for the people
there.''

Rendtorff also attacked Solle for painting the Americans ''in the color of the
enemy,'' an accusation taken up by Bastian. But other Germans and Europeans
found more deeply troubling aspects in this kind of discourse because it
suggested that a number of intellectuals, and the teachers, students and
professional people they appeal to, had slipped their democratic moorings - not
in their opposition to the missiles, but in the conclusions they drew about
American and European society as a whole.

The German-born author Manes Sperber, who spent most of his life in France and
who died in February, went further in an acceptance speech last fall when he was
awarded the Frankfurt International Book Fair's prize. What Sperber, who once
fled Hitler's Germany, said in substance was this:

''What is happening in Germany today, with its so-called 'alternative'
movements, all acting in the name of liberation - and, perhaps, also a kind of
liberty that borders on license - is really something for which the dictatorship
of the 1930's paved the way. An appeal is being made to 'the masses' to oppose a
state whose governmental leadership was fairly elected, whose freely constituted
majority comprises openly registered voters casting secret ballots - what is
this but an attempt to replace that which we know as democracy with an
ochlocracy, mob rule? In the name of passing emotions and passions, elites are
arrogating to themselves the right to dictate, the authority to make choices for
all.''


For Andre Glucksmann, the French nouveau philosophe who has become a leading
voice in Europe's debate on nuclear responsibility and the obligations of
democracies, there is no little merit in the idea that anti-Americanism now has
the contours of classic anti-Semitism - power unseen; dark, violent forces
beyond all control.

''The reproaches are the same,'' he said in an interview in February.
''Einstein, Freud, Rothschild. The words are just different. They're everywhere.
They're behind everything. For me, it's rejection of the Greek tradition, the
West. You can add an additional crime now. In much of the antinuclear logic, the
armed citizen becomes a criminal. The poor guy who wants to defend himself is no
good. The American, the Jew in Israel, he will fight. He's 'a dangerous man.' ''
Glucksmann has become a central figure along Europe's intellectual fault line:
the French-German border. A leader of the 1968 student revolt, he believes the
United States has become a malevolent symbol of the West to some of his friends
in West Germany. ''The new line there is that the West is bad,'' he says. ''This
is a rejection of all that is technical and modern. What is technical obliges
you to choose. You use it or you make way.''

He points to the resistance by the West German left, notably the Social
Democratic Party and the Greens, to cable television as a ''profound and
revealing refusal of an experiment in freedom.'' This comes in part, he says,
because of a yearning for a simpler world, and partly, he feels, because choice
- lack of regimentation - is synonymous with disorder in Germany.

Although he does not argue the point, Glucksmann seems to believe that the
German experience with democracy is so thin, and so involved with economic
success, that some German intellectuals have little understanding of how to deal
with less- than-perfect results, with diminished yield, with compromise.

''The choices offered by a democratic system have created a great sense of
anguish in that country,'' he insists. The Americans, the West, he seems to say,
represent, as the Jew once did, a lack of order, of uncertainty, an unseemly
ability to thrive within the insecurities of democracy. ''In his way,''
Glucksmann says, ''Mr. Andropov was less frightening to them.''

The German reply has been contemptuous. At a German-French seminar in Strasbourg
this year, Freimut Duve, a Social Democratic member of Parliament and a peace
activist, answered that without the support of intellectuals detente in Europe
is impossible. ''In France, they've caved in,'' he said, presumably referring to
the Socialist Government's support of missile deployment.

G"unter Grass has been equally dismissive of the French intellectuals, like
Andre Glucksmann, who insist that the Soviet system, and not the American
missiles, is the greatest threat to democracy. Francois Mitterrand's warning
before the Bundestag that refusing to counterbalance Soviet missiles was to
gamble with peace was ''not the position of a Socialist, but that of a man
thinking in strictly nationalistic terms,'' Grass said.

As for all the talk on the non-Communist French left of freedom and democracy,
and opposition to Communism and the Soviet Union, Grass explained to a French
interviewer for Le Nouvel Observateur last year, ''I suppose it's just a kind of
emancipation process. All through the postwar years, they had to deal with
Sartre, God the Father Himself. The time came to rebel against him and they
abandoned one extreme for another. On the intellectual level, I don't see
anything very interesting or exciting there. What was set up instead? Anti-
Communism founded on pseudopsychological principles that don't take us very
far.''

Grass's choice of the word ''emancipation'' seems correct: French intellectuals
have largely ended their deep involvement with the French Communist Party. The
books of Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn, the boat people, Pol Pot's reign of terror
in Cambodia, the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan severed the final links between
much of the intellectual communtiy and the Communist Party. Revolutions that
have brought authoritarian governments have also turned them away from
glorifying the third world, and the formulas used to justify its weak
involvement in democracy.

Perhaps because the United States was never exalted beyond recognition, because
French diplomacy has always made international power politics a relatively
unemotional reality in France, an event like the overthrow of the Allende
Government in Chile is considered ugly business, but not a sign of the hopeless
decomposition of American democracy.

The extent of the change from the thinking of the 1950's and 60's to the present
has been startling. Dr. Bernard Kouchner, a physician who heads Medecins du
Monde, a group of doctors working in third-world countries, said in an interview
that there had been an almost instinctive attitude among French intellectuals of
the left - he called it a connivance - never to consider democracy or freedom as
criteria for judging what takes place in developing countries.

The United States, by reflex, he said, was evil - Soviet influence in the third
world was acceptable. ''We thought poor countries couldn't vote. We thought we
could supply an excuse. But you can vote in the desert - Senegal and India do -
and if you realize it, this changes your whole basis of reality.''

If the issue is the United States, there is almost total polarity, in the Gluck
smann-Grass viewpoints. Grass, in whose frame of reference the United States has
become one of two largely identical superpowers, was quoted in the French weekly
magazine Le Nouvel Observateur as saying, ''I note with shame that the present
Government of the United States is no longer capable of the slightest democratic
reflex, and since I belong to the West, I cannot refuse taking the path of
resistance.''

By Glucksmann's definition, ''this is really the West committing suicide when
you say that the United States is stinking up the world.'' He went on to say
that practicing anti-Americanism meant supporting Nicaragua and the Salvadoran
guerrillas more vigorously than the Solidarity trade unionists next door. It
meant ignoring Argentina's return to democracy because no break with the Reagan
Administration was involved.

With some slyness, Glucksmann added that if the West's suicide attempt fails,
then intelligent anti- Americanism is yet to come. ''Why did they allow so many
massacres, so many genocides?'' he asked. ''They could have done something - the
Biafrans, the Tutsis (in Africa), the boat people. In the end, people will say
that America was egotistical, capitulating and nonhumanitarian.''

In a sense, it is as if many of the leaders of the intelligentsia in France and
West Germany have been driven to opposite corners: the French fearing the
Germans again, talking about the anti-Western, neutralist, pacifist slide of
their neighbors, and as master tasters of the wind themselves, leaning toward
the United States, as if to re-establish the balance of a listing ship; the West
Germans looking for an identity submerged by the past, fearing, resenting and
being obssessed with the Americans, insisting that they must set Germany down on
what they consider to be the moral side of the ''great'' debate on the missiles.


In taking the unusual step of talking publicly about anti-Americanism, and
suggesting that it involved a rejection of Western society by some European
intellectuals, Ambassador Burns also offered an optimistic prognosis. Talking
specifically about the United States and Germany, Burns said he was sure ''that
the voices of anti-Americanism will fade away.'' The process, he said, involved
a better understanding of totalitarianism and of democracy's ability to heal its
imperfections.

A few years ago, Helmut Schmidt answered a complaint about him - that he was a
man lacking vision - with the reply that Germany had its share of visionaries:
people who in the course of history had great missions for the German people. It
could do better without, he said. A kind of visionary attitude has returned to
the German scene, and the surest measure of its presence is the French reaction.
Manfred Rommel, the Mayor of Stuttgart and the son of the Desert Fox, said
recently that the difficult thing about the Greens, the pacifists and their
friends is not a contempt for democracy but a disgust with pragmatism.

The cult book of the year in West Germany, he was told, has a title that roughly
translates to ''A Critique of Cynical Reason,'' by Peter Sloterdijk. The problem
here, Manfred Rommel said, ''is that democracy is pragmatism, and we have a
tendency, a strong one, in our young people toward ideology. Hitler didn't
destroy democracy. He came to power on its ruins.''

The people like Manfred Rommel who agree with Arthur Burns say the retreat from
the passions of 1983 has already begun. But if the past year demonstrated
anything at all conclusive, it was that the Europeans - the French and West
Germans in particular - themselves did not agree on how free their lives were,
and how much of a role the Americans would play in them in the future. A poll
made public early this year produced startling results, perhaps more in the area
of national psychology, but perhaps an insight as well into the behavior of
Europe in relation to the United States in the future. In this poll, American
allies such as Japan, France and Britain were asked which countries would be
more important and powerful in 20 years. Only the West Germans replied that
America would become a diminished force.

Well before the demands this winter that the Bundestag be overuled on its
decision to deploy the NATO missiles, and the crowds battled the police at its
door, another canvass of West German public opinion offered a special message.
Of course, no one was anti- American, but out of a group of 16- to 29-year-olds,
only 25 percent said that democracy was worth defending if the choice was
between Communism and democracy. If war meant the Soviet Union taking over
Western Europe, 56 percent wanted to avoid the war at all costs.

It is here, and not in putting X's in boxes about whether Americans are liked as
individuals - inevitably, they are - that the most troublesome questions appear.
If a nation is alone among its friends in thinking the leading Western power is
on the decline, what does this mean? And how should its allies react when its
young people don't seem to find democracy worth protecting? When these results
are paired with the poll that shows that the idea of freedom is wrenched - a
majority of West Germans do not agree with the proposition that great amounts of
freedom are enjoyed in their country or the United States - then the combination
is disturbing. The results are more than balanced out by the strength of West
German institutions such as its Parliament and courts, but the polls show an
important current of opinion, as Arthur Burns suggests, whose confidence and
involvement in the West is something short of certain.

Peter Schneider, in a remarkable essay that seems addressed to his friends, has
asked what it means when a group of intellectuals demanding peace, questioning
every aspect of society, fails - as he said the peace movement did - to develop
a concept of freedom. He provided an unhappy answer. ''This is the way,'' he
wrote, ''you gradually move toward accepting any situation short of atomic
war.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of French philosopher Andre Glucksmann p.73 photo of G"unter
Grass at peace camp near Pershing 2 base p.71 photo of Jerry Lewis with French
Minister of Culture, Jack Lang drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SIMPLE COMPASSION

BYLINE: By Henry Kamm

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 755 words


Henry Kamm is the New York Times correspondent in Rome. He won a 1978 Pulitzer
Prize for his coverage of Indochinese refugees.  SENSING THE ENEMY

An American Woman Among the Boat People of Vietnam.  By Lady Borton.
Illustrated. 176 pp. New York: The Dial Press. $14.95.

LADY BORTON (an American Quaker, not a titled Englishwoman) is a rare person.
She is one of those compassionate Americans who gave flesh to her sympathy for
the people of Vietnam - the victims of all the powers, domestic and foreign,
that brought them to their present unhappiness - by going there to bind their
wounds. The Quaker medical team with which she worked during the American war in
the featureless and dusty Central Vietnamese town of Quang Ngai, a short bus
ride from My Lai, did not ask which side had caused the wounds that its members
worked to heal.

Rarer still, Miss Borton does not belong to the great majority of those who
opposed the American intervention and lamented the plight of the Vietnamese
people but failed to rise to the renewed moral challenge from Vietnam that was
flung at the world by the unending flow of refugees from the reunited, pacified
Vietnam governed from Hanoi. Were their consciences immobilized by unwillingness
to reconsider the unthinking war- long assumption that because the Vietnamese
people resented the brutal American presence and had contempt for Saigon's
corrupt regime, they looked forward to Hanoi's victory?

Miss Borton was not one of those who denied their sympathy to the boat people
because by their very existence they challenged comfortable assumptions. She did
not write them off, as did so many Americans who earlier had professed
compassion for the victims of Vietnam's struggles, by denigrating them as
pro-American war profiteers who fled from a ''liberation'' that deprived them of
ill-gotten privilege. Faithful to her continuing commitment to help the victims,
she left her farm in Appalachian Ohio and signed up to work under the auspices
of the Malaysian Red Crescent Society as a health administrator on Pulau Bidong.

By 1980, when Miss Borton arrived there, the tiny, previously uninhabited island
off Malaysia's east coast had served as a refugee camp for about 18 months and
had taken on some of the aspects of a permanent settlement. Toilets and a
rudimentary hospital and a storehouse had been built, while a jetty made landing
on Bidong less hazardous. Moreover, a more generous American refugee policy had
reduced the constantly changing population from about 20,000 to 13,000.

And still, what Miss Borton found was a rat-ridden and overcrowded superslum
that could be steered to as a goal, and accepted as even temporarily habitable,
only by men, women and children who had come straight out of hell. With sober
restraint and understatement, the author allows the reader to begin to
understand that hell.

Wisely, because Miss Borton clearly did not wish to write a political tract, she
does not address the central question of what made people as deeply attached to
their ancestral soil as the Vietnamese, people who remained in their country
when war raged and getting out was comparatively easy, reach the anguished and
dangerous decision to emigrate when peace had finally come. She simply presents
the fact that hundreds of thousands braved - and continue to brave - the known
risks of being detected by Vietnam's ever present security forces while
escaping, of entrusting their lives and those their children's lives to boats
that were not built to resist the open sea, of being passed at sea by heartless
captains of freighters, of running the gauntlet of Thai fishermen who rob and
rape, only to arrive (if they arrive anywhere) on inhospitable shores whose
guardians might well push them back to sea.

In artless words that stem from compassion, Miss Borton illuminates the refugee
experience, not the reasons that turned physicians and fishermen, teachers and
traders into exiles. She dwells on the pains of that experience, because the
people on Pulau Bidong had not yet reached the countries of asylum, where, one
hopes, rewards awaited them for their pains. She illustrates the simple nobility
of goals and the exceptional resources of spirit and determination that the
refugees bring with them as their principal capital. They are gifts that they
offer to those who let them come and stay. She does not make clear who the
''enemy'' of her title is. Could it be he who drives out bearers of such gifts
and he who refuses to receive them?B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lady Borton

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 32, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2579 words


TO LIVE AND DIE IN L.A.  By Gerald Petievich. (Arbor House, $14.95.) Susan
Sontag once remarked that, for escape, ''I love to read the way people love to
watch television.'' With ''To Live and Die In L.A.,'' reading is just like
watching television; its characters and plot are straight out of an amiable,
time-killing made-for-TV movie. Ace counterfeiter Rick Masters rules Southern
California, but two treasury agents (among many others) are determined to put
him behind bars. Richard Chance is a kamikaze cop who owes more than a little of
his personality to Hicks in Robert Stone's ''Dog Soldiers.'' He's not above
stealing money as well as classified evidence in order to assure that Masters
gets his comeuppance. Also on the case is Jim Hart, a diligent, burned-out
treasury officer who plugs away despite remorse over his wife's death. What does
distinguish the story from a television melodrama is its liberal dose of sexual
activity, some of it kinky. ''To Live and Die In L.A.'' is very much a
male-dominated narrative. Men reflect on the mean streets they walk down; at one
point a doomed crook muses, ''If there was anything he'd learned, it was that
one simply could not be too cautious when dealing with the scum-of-the-earth.''
The bottom line here is that in Lotusland the good guys and the bad guys get all
mixed up in the scum, and this world view makes Gerald Petievich's final
resolution decidedly ambivalent. - Mason Buck

* THE COMMISSAR'S REPORT. By Martyn Burke. (Houghton Mifflin, $14.95).  ''The
Commissar's Report'' is the flip side of ''Gorky Park,'' a novel with a young
Russian diplomat as its hero. Dimitri, however, is not a sober homicide
inspector but a dedicated hustler who dreams of the good life in ''Enemy Number
One'' (the United States) by reading contraband copies of Life magazine. He gets
himself assigned to New York City in the 1950's, becomes a Brooklyn Dodger fan
and a secret investor in Wall Street through a genius broker who makes him a
multimillionaire. As a closet capitalist, Dimitri must conceal his wealth from
his fellow diplomats at the Soviet Embassy. But to himself he keeps repeating,
''And me, just a poor boy from the steppes.'' His young wife causes lots of
trouble by falling in love with Saks Fifth Avenue, Bergdorf Goodman and designer
labels. GUM, the Moscow department store, was never like this. And so Dimitri
and Katya live it up, loving the freedom and consumer goods as advertised in
Life. Cut to Moscow, the detention camps and the Gulag. Lurking in the
background are the secret police. Old Stalinist feuds are being played out by
canny survivors of the purges. The son of another diplomat is trailing Dimitri
to seek revenge for his family's death, which was caused long ago by Dimitri's
father. The reader knows that something bizarre is going to happen in the last
reel of this cinematically constructed novel. Martyn Burke, a Canadian novelist
(author of ''The Laughing War,'' a novel about Vietnam) and a Los Angeles
screenwriter, can write lively dialogue and has an outrageous plot to manipulate
in ''The Commissar's Report.'' But his humorous thriller has ''soon to be a
major motion picture'' written all over it.- Herbert Mitgang
NONFICTION

* WE ARE YOUR SISTERS: Black Women in the Nineteenth Century. Edited by Dorothy
Sterling. (Norton, $22.50.) Dorothy Sterling, the author of ''Freedom Train: The
Story of Harriet Tubman'' and several other books, has edited a striking,
prodigious documentary of the experience of black women in 19th-century America.
In accounts culled from personal correspondence, court papers, memoirs and other
primary sources, including transcripts of more than 1,000 interviews with former
slaves, the often heroic conduct of these women is conveyed with stunning
immediacy. ''When women was with child they'd dig a hole in the groun' and put
their stomach in the hole and then beat 'em,'' one former slave recalls, and
this image is emblematic. From slavery through emancipation, as chattel and as
freedwomen, black women endured the dual subjection of race and sex. In the
words of the educator Fanny Jackson Coppin, ''During my entire life I have
suffered from two disadvantages. First, that I am a woman, second that I am a
Negro.'' For women, especially, abolition did not necessarily eliminate
servitude. Freedmen's Bureau reports record the exploitation of those who
remained in the post-bellum South as indentured laborers, while advertisements
placed in Northern newspapers chronicle the efforts of black women to support
themselves and their families as washerwomen. Alongside these stalwarts of daily
life, Mrs. Sterling introduces some of the most intrepid women of the century,
''schoolmarms'' like Charlotte Forten and Mary S. Peake. These women followed
the advance of the Union Army into the South, establishing schools in slave
pens, army barracks and church basements. Their trials and propitious view of
the future make more poignant the rapid genesis of Jim Crow and the emergence of
the Ku Klux Klan, both of which are dramatically documented here. Although ''We
Are Your Sisters'' is presented as a sourcebook and sampler, not a definitive
history, its manifold narratives raise a singular voice. - Sue M. Halpern

* THE INTELLIGENT UNIVERSE. By Fred Hoyle. (Holt, $18.95.) Fred Hoyle, the
distinguished theoretical physicist, has developed (not for the first time) some
ideas of the universe that have failed to win widespread acceptance from his
fellow scientists. Now, in ''The Intelligent Universe,'' handsomely printed and
illustrated, he offers them to the rest of us. It is mathematically impossible,
he contends, for life to have arisen on earth by random processes; the age of
the earth (1,350 billion years, Mr. Hoyle says) is not enough time. Therefore,
life came from outer space. In fact, it is still there; the cosmic dust is, in
fact, great clouds of bacteria. Bacteria falling from space brought to earth the
basic genetic codes still used by current forms of life, and microorganisms
still fall in from time to time, causing outbreaks of disease (notably hepatitis
and influenza). More elaborate forms of life, such as ourselves, developed on
earth, but not by Darwinian evolution, which, Mr. Hoyle argues, is also
mathematically impossible. He also contends that the universe is intelligent and
it keeps telling us so through our instinct to make religious structures that
point toward the heavens. Most readers (including this one) will be as powerless
to evaluate Mr. Hoyle's arguments as they are those of more orthodox
cosmologists. But what is finally most provocative about the book is neither the
theories it propounds nor those it impeaches, but the apparent necessity that
brings such theories into existence. Why should anybody care where the universe
came from and how? But nearly everyone cares, and many can become passionate
about it. If the universe is so smart, perhaps it knows why. - Tom Ferrell

* WOMEN'S CLAIMS: A Study in Political Economy. By Lisa Peattie and Martin Rein.
(Oxford University, Cloth, $29.95. Paper, $9.95.) Lisa Peattie and Martin Rein,
professors in the Department of Urban Studies and Planning at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, want to clarify what they see as the singular process
by which rights and resources are distributed within the family and the
workplace and by the state. The process is, they suggest, one of ''claiming.''
Various classes and interest groups press their claims for political and
economic power and, in doing so, help shape policy-making and the prevailing
conceptions of the natural order. As demands are met, they are institutionalized
as rights and become part of the way we think things are or ought to be. The
women's movement is a convenient example of the claiming process, because it
challenges what have long been considered ''natural,'' gender-based divisions of
labor and wealth; feminism is, in part, an attempt to renegotiate the natural.
And, if women's liberation begins at home, in the bedroom and the kitchen, it
makes clear that personal relationships among family members are also political.
There are some sound if not startling ideas here. Few feminists will be
surprised to hear that traditional female roles in the home and the workplace
are complementary, based on the same notion of ''women's work,'' and as one
changes, so must the other. The trouble is that whatever insights ''Women's
Claims'' offers are buried deep in rambling, jargon-ridden prose. The authors
seem unwilling to say in five words what can be stretched to 10, and the
''language of political economy'' they are intent on developing confuses more
than it clarifies. You can't just read their book; you have to decipher it. -
Wendy Kaminer

* THE MEDICAL INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX. By Stanley Wohl. (Harmony, $14.95.) The recent
emergence and rapid spread of corporate medicine - publicly traded chains of
hospitals and other health-care dispensers - has been one of the more worrisome
developments in health care. Stanley Wohl, a staff member of the Stanford
University Medical Center and the head of his own health-care research firm,
offers a biting critique of big business's entry into medicine. Though he allows
that corporate interlopers have their benevolent side, he roundly criticizes
them for their deliberate overutilization of facilities, their predilection for
well-heeled patients and their emphasis on the most profitable treatments. In
his view, stockholders, not patients, are the corporations' primary concern. He
is troubled that insurance companies and pharmaceutical giants might swallow up
one of the big hospital chains, like a Hospital Corporation of America or a
Humana Inc., resulting in the grouping of manufacturers, distributors and
prescribers of drugs under one roof. Dr. Wohl manages to cover a lot of ground
in a short space. Among other things, he provides capsule summaries, of uneven
depth and analysis, of 35 key health-care companies. Though he doesn't want to
drive big business out of health care, he advocates stronger scrutiny and
regulation of the industry. He ultimately envisions some sort of universal
prepayment system, administered by the Federal Government but involving a major
role for corporate medicine. Dr. Wohl warns that, failing radical changes, our
health-care system will ''remain rampant with technical controversy, stock hype
and misinformation while providing mediocre medical care at inflated costs, all
necessary byproducts when medicine and monopoly mix together.'' - N. R.
Kleinfield

* SO SPOKE THE UNCLE: Ainsi Parla l'Oncle. By Jean Price-Mars. Introduced and
translated by Magdaline W. Shannon. (Three Continents, Cloth, $22. Paper, $10.)
Say the word voodoo and images from 1930's Hollywood horror movies come to mind
- zombies, blood sacrifices, black magic. How odd that this should still be so,
half a century after cultural relativism has become the dominant mode for
understanding the differences between peoples. Jean Price-Mars (1876-1969), a
Haitian physician and diplomat, was the first person to set voodoo in its full
cultural context. But he wrote in French, and only now, some 50 years after its
original publication, is ''So Spoke the Uncle,'' his major work, available in
English. In a series of essays both difficult and rewarding, Dr. Price-Mars
traces voodoo to its African roots, demonstrates its similarities with the
dominant Western religions and documents its central role in Haitian folk
culture. He quarrels with the racism of Westerners and the Haitian elite who see
black culture as inherently inferior to that of Europe. His aim seems to be an
early version of ethnic pride, that attempt to recapture one's history and
identity that has become such a prominent part of the third-world movement in
recent years. This message may be familiar by now, but a good deal of thanks are
owed Magdaline W. Shannon for translating this historic volume and at last
giving us an understanding of both voodoo and the Caribbean culture that it
represents. - Robert A. Rosenstone

* THE TECHNOLOGY EDGE: Opportunities for America in World Competition. By Gerard
K. O'Neill. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) ''The Technology Edge'' resembles an old
Charles Atlas ad - Japan has been kicking economic sand in America's face for
the last decade, but if only we'd take Gerard K. O'Neill's fiscal fitness
course, we could clobber the bullies. Mr. O'Neill, the author of ''The High
Frontier,'' describes six industries he feels have boundless potential -
microengineering (including computers, ultrasonics, lasers and fiber optics),
robotics, genetic engineering, high-speed trains that zip along magnetized
rails, private aircraft and the exploitation of outer space. He argues that the
United States could take the lead in these areas if it weren't for taxes,
unions, an undereducated populace and executives out for fast profits. His
arguments are familiar but well taken. Still, it's difficult to know what
readers he hopes to reach. His discussions of Japanese manufacturing techniques
and ''American venture capitalism'' will be familiar to anyone who reads
business literature. And the technologies he champions have been covered by
popular magazines like Science Digest. His book's chief value is its
identification of promising technologies, but novice science readers will find
his descriptions of these occasionally murky. Along the way, I was made uneasy
by the discussion of Geostar Corporation, of which Mr. O'Neill is chairman of
the board. Geostar wants to launch a satellite system that will help airplanes
navigate. Mr. O'Neill gives the system only a few pages. But the sudden
introduction of his own project more than halfway through the book, even though
it's germane, made at least one reader feel he had been trapped in a public
relations ploy. - Henry Weil

The drama of man's first powered flights has been reconstructed in so many
books, articles and films that even an airplane buff might hesitate at one more
exposure. But WIND AND SAND: The Story of the Wright Brothers at Kitty Hawk
(Abrams, $19.95) is such an enthralling addition to the accounts of what the
Wright Brothers wrought at Kitty Hawk that no one should be turned off by fear
of some repetition. Lynanne Wescott and Paula Degen have balanced words that are
mostly those of the sensitive geniuses from Dayton, Ohio, with photographs that
are as much works of art as they are historic documents. The combination
achieves an uncanny evocation of what it must have been like on the bleak
coastline of North Carolina when Orville and Wilbur Wright were perfecting the
knowledge that led to the breakthrough of Dec. 17, 1903. The Wrights'
brilliance, humor, tenacity and courage, intellectual and physical, are
highlighted on page after page - Wilbur telling his brother, after frustrating
gliding tests in 1901, that he thought it would be a thousand years before man
learned to fly; Orville writing his sister that the mosquitoes had been so bad
that ''lumps began swelling up over my body like hen's eggs.'' The authors'
contributions to the text, connecting ample quotes from the brothers' letters
and lectures, are smooth and apt. They would have been improved by a little more
technical precision and amplification, but that shortcoming aside, ''Wind and
Sand'' is a rare account of awesome invention. - Richard Witkin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Harriet Tubman and her husband

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 29, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS April 29, 1984Fiction 118

SECTION: Section 7; Page 52, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 749 words


THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  233

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  334

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  427

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about the
nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  555

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  695

ONE MORE SUNDAY, by John D. MacDonald. (Knopf, $15.95.) Behind the scenes with a
charismatic television preacher.  768

LORD OF THE DANCE, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) In
seeking her long-lost cousin, a teen-ager probes the mysteries of life and
death.  8712

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  9826

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  101112

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  111235

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  12 1

DESCENT FROM XANADU, by Harold Robbins. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A man who
has everything - power, money, women - seeks to obtain immortality.  121445

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  141035

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?  created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain. (Morrow, $9.95.) The publisher offers a $10,000 prize to the reader
who submits the best answer.  15 1

WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W. Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What follows
the first nuclear war in 1988.


 Nonfiction 1432

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2111

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.

327

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W. Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.

438

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty. (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  5526

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a California preacher.  665

MAFIA PRINCESS, by Antoinette Giancana and Thomas C. Renner.  (Morrow, $15.95.)
Growing up in the family of the mobster Sam Giancana.  7710

LINES AND SHADOWS, by Joseph Wambaugh. (Perigord/Morrow, $15.95.) Adventures of
the San Diego police force that stalks bandits along the Mexican border.  81311

TOUGH-MINDED FAITH FOR TENDERHEARTED PEOPLE, by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $14.95.) More inspiration from a California preacher.  9 1

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' TV series.  101117

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  1193

FURTHER UP THE ORGANIZATION, by Robert Townsend. (Knopf, $15.95.) Business
strategies for the 1980's.

121584

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  12835

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from an Iranian prison.  141112

PEOPLE OF THE LIE, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
psychiatrist's prescription for ''healing human evil.'' 15 1

KNOCK WOOD, by Candice Bergen. (Simon & Schuster/Linden Press, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the actress, daughter of Edgar Bergen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TEXANS SEEM UNCERTAIN OVER CENTRAL AMERICA

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 941 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex., April 27


A television commercial for Bob Krueger, a candidate for the Democratic
senatorial nomination, shows a voter musing over his choices. An off-camera
voice says Mr. Krueger was once ambassador at large for Mexican affairs and is
an expert on Latin America.

''That's important, real important,'' says the voice, as the voter marks his
ballot for Mr. Krueger.

The issue of Central America, of the Administration's handling of the matter, is
starting to bubble to the surface in Texas as the May 5 primary election
approaches. The territory south of the Rio Grande is still a distant and murky
place to many voters, but the Krueger campaign operates on the conviction that
public concern is growing.

''It's an edge-of-the-plate issue now,'' said George Shipley, Mr. Krueger's poll
taker here in the state capital. ''But it's on the plate.''

Clearer Lines Expected


Moreover, Mr. Shipley believes that Central America will continue to grow in
importance, as the lines between Democratic and Republican candidates become
more clearly drawn.

''President Reagan will certainly be called upon to defend his policies in the
state of Texas,'' he said. ''I really do believe that Democrats and Republicans
are not going to support interventionist policies for too long. There's a time
fuse on this thing, and it's not only the money, it's the lack of results. The
President may be mining more harbors than Nicaragua. He may be mining his own.''

Texas is not a typical state in which to assess the impact of the Central
America issue, for it shares a long border with Mexico and close economic and
cultural ties with the entire region. But the mood here described by Mr. Shipley
mirrors the findings of the latest New York Times/CBS poll.

Forty-three percent disapproved of Mr. Reagan's handling of Central America, as
opposed to 30 percent who approved. Moreover, almost half the electorate
expressed fears that the President might drag the United States into war in that
region.

Financing Blocked in Congress


This finding has important legislative as well as political implications.
Congress will soon resume debate on a bill allocating $62 million in military
aid for El Salvador and $21 million for rebels fighting the Government of
Nicaragua. House Democrats blocked the measure before the Easter recess, and Mr.
Reagan has voiced hope that public pressure will dislodge the funds.

Moreover, reports that the Central Intelligence Agency directed mining of
Nicaraguan harbors have raised the question of how closely Congress can or
should monitor the agency's secret operations.

Many voters in Texas seem troubled about the Central America issue. In dozens of
interviews here last week, probably the most common view expressed was
ambivalence. While many Texans seem reluctant to spend much United States money
or any lives to counteract leftist insurgencies in the region, few want to see
any more countries fall under Communist control, ''I kind of vacillate between
thinking we're involved too much and involved not enough,'' said Sandy Simpkins,
a lawyer in Waco. ''Then I don't know what to think. I've worried that we've
never really gotten the straight line from anybody, and I'm afraid we'll get
drawn into something. It's so difficult to know who is the good guy.''

 The Bad Versus the Bad


''If we were responsible for the mining of the harbors, that sounds like an
extreme move,'' said Kip Antene, a salesman who supports Mr. Reagan. ''On the
other hand, Nicaragua is in the hands of extremists, and maybe that's the only
thing they understand. It sure looks like we're supporting a bad group of people
against another bad group of people.''

Because so many voters, and their representatives in Congress, are uncertain
about American involvement in the region, many of the Reagan Administration's
proposals for increased aid have been trimmed or sidetracked. But these
Administration efforts remind some voters of the way the United States became
enmeshed in Southeast Asia.

''We should either get it done or get out; we shouldn't go in halfway,'' said
Ray Lesko, a data processor for an insurance company.

''No more Vietnams,'' added his wife, Kay, a computer programmer.

''It's one of those things where you're damned if you do and damned if you
don't,'' said Red Edmonds, a feed salesman. ''It's like swatting a wasp's nest
with a toothpick. The odds are pretty good you'll get stung.''

At the same time, Mr. Reagan's determination to oppose Communist expansionism in
Central America has garnered strong support among many voters here, who feel a
renewed pride in their country and in their President.

'In Your Own Backyard'


''Lebanon was too far from home, but this is like someone fighting in your own
backyard,'' said Eliseo Cotto Jr., who sells plumbing supplies. ''Reagan's shown
that we can't be pushed around. I was always proud of the fact that we were the
strongest nation on earth, and when Carter was President that kind of went to
pot.''

''I wish we could walk away,'' said Bob Stokes, an insurance broker and
part-time minister. ''But could we stick our head in the sand and let the
Communists take over?''

Given these conflicting signals, many politicians from Texas are uncertain how
to approach the question of increased aid. Representative Charles W. Stenholm, a
conservative Democrat from West Texas, says his constituents do not like foreign
aid or the mining of the Nicaraguan harbors.

''But you'd hate to vote against the aid and have another country fall,'' he
said. ''That's the bottom line. It's not an easy vote.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 1, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN ENDS TRIP AS THOUSANDS JAM SHANGHAI STREETS

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1397 words

DATELINE: SHANGHAI, Tuesday, May 1


Hundreds of thousands of Chinese jammed the streets of this old commercial city
to greet President Reagan Monday as he completed his six-day visit to China.

Mr. Reagan used the occasion to reiterate American readiness to help the nation
modernize and prosper.

Workers, many apparently granted time off, gave Mr. Reagan the biggest reception
of his career, an outpouring that some said was reminiscent of the one accorded
President Nixon when he traveled here to sign a communique opening relations
with China in 1972.



'Opportunity for Fruitful Journey'

At Fudan University, Mr. Reagan received enthusiastic applause from students as
he spoke of American willingness to help China develop skills in science,
technology and management techniques.

''My young friends, history is a river that may take us as it will,'' Mr. Reagan
told 700 students at the university on Monday. ''But we have the power to
navigate, to choose direction and make our passage together. The wind is up, the
current is swift and opportunity for a long and fruitful journey awaits us.''

Mr. Reagan also visited a model commune on the outskirts of Shanghai that is
frequently visited by dignitaries. The commune produces vegetables and grows
livestock, and is starting factories to produce farm machinery, plastics,
furniture and handicrafts.



'Many Warm Memories'

Before he left today for Fairbanks, Alaska, Mr. Reagan spoke by telephone with
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, who told him, ''I think that your visit has enhanced
understanding and improved relations between our two countries.''

''So I would like to congratulate you on the success of your visit,'' the Prime
Minister said. Mr. Reagan replied that he was leaving ''with many warm memories
and a warm feeling for you and your people.''

White House aides say the visit has been highly successful, despite the absence
of diplomatic breakthroughs on several issues.



'Important and Enlightening'

''My trip to China has been as important and enlightening as any I've taken as
President,'' Mr. Reagan told diners at a lavish banquet Monday night at the
Shanghai exhibition hall.

Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said earlier that Mr. Reagan had been
''amazed'' by his greeting here, and Secretary of State George P. Shultz said
that, over all, the trip had been ''a very big plus for the United States.''

The Secretary and others said, however, that China and the United States had
failed to bridge continuing differences on the sovereignty of Taiwan, and that
China remained uncomfortable with Mr. Reagan's public denunciations of the
Soviet Union while here.

The President reached agreements to eliminate double taxation of American
business in China, engage in cultural exchanges and enable American corporations
to build nuclear reactors in China.

Mr. Reagan held eight hours of meetings with top Chinese leaders. Their talks
were said to have defused tensions over disagreements on more than two dozen
topics, without necessarily ending them. Aides said the President had renewed
his conviction that billions of dollars in trade and investment with China are
in the offing.

Chief Diplomatic Goal

His chief diplomatic goal was to obtain more understanding from China on his
actions against Soviet ''aggression'' in Central America, the Middle East and
elsewhere, according to Presidential aides, who say that it will take months
before anyone can be sure this goal is reached.

As the trip drew to a close, White House officials defended Mr. Reagan's use of
several public forums - including Fudan University - to denounce Soviet behavior
and extol ''my own values'' of free markets, faith in God, compassion and
fairness.

''The President says what he thinks,'' Mr. Shultz said. ''He's the same man
whether he's in Washington, Peking, London or wherever he is. And personally, I
like it that way.''

Mr. Reagan's visit to the Shanghai commune today was all the more festive
because it was the May 1 labor day holiday. The courtyard was festooned with
balloons and lanterns. Kindergarten children performed a traditional dance, and
the President dabbed his eye with a handkerchief, apparently touched by the warm
greeting.

Other signs suggested that the visit was strictly for show. Buildings were
freshly painted. The farmers hoeing nearby fields of eggplant arrived shortly
before Mr. Reagan and left a few minutes after he departed for the airport.

The speech at Fudan University received lengthy news coverage, and it was
broadcast live in Shanghai without translation.

The President, who had been showing signs of exhaustion early Monday at a
farewell ceremony in Peking, seemed to rebound later in the day in Shanghai -
possibly because of the reception.

Stunning Contrast to Peking

Speeding through the heart of the city, he saw throngs lining the street several
rows deep. At intersections, crowds of hundreds of pedestrians gathered quietly
to catch a glimpse. Although Shanghai is normally crowded at the hour Mr. Reagan
passed by, the crowds today seemed genuinely curious about the city's unusual
guest on the eve of May 1, the Communist Party's labor day.

Shanghai offered a stunning contrast to Peking: whereas the capital had been
drab and filled with dust storms, Shanghai was a hubbub of color, neon signs,
stylish outfits and blaring traffic. The city retains its European flavor left
over from the days when commerce was dominated by international banks and
trading companies.

Mr. Reagan's first stop Monday was at the Shanghai Foxboro Corporation, China's
first industrial joint venture with an American partner, the Foxboro company of
Massachusetts. There Mr. Reagan borrowed a soldering iron from one of 40 workers
in white smocks and tried his hand at soldering chips onto a circuit board.

Mr. Reagan then traveled to a classroom at the 79-year-old university, where he
seemed to warm to the role of avuncular visitor dispensing advice. ''Be very
careful,'' he said, urging his audience not to ''throw away the values that have
been tested through time'' as they modernize.

'We Invite You to Know Us'

His comments were a reflection of the Administration conviction that increasing
student exchanges and joint business ventures would quietly change
Chinese-American relations.

''We invite you to know us,'' Mr. Reagan said, presenting a personal account of
the United States as a nation of immigrants displaying fairness, idealism,
compassion, optimism, religion and love of peace.

Much of what he said was aimed at showing sensitivity to an audience nervous
about being cast in the role of strategic partner. This sensitivity caused
China, officially nonaligned, to censor from its television coverage Mr.
Reagan's earlier passages denouncing Moscow.

On Monday, after saying that he had a ''dream in my heart that we perhaps have
started a friendship here between two great people,'' Mr. Reagan added: ''Not an
alliance. I admire the position of being nonaligned that you have. But being
friends and neighbors.''

In addition, Mr. Reagan again attacked the Soviet Union, but indirectly. He said
China and the United States shared such ''political concerns'' as opposing
Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia and the ''unlawful invasion of Afghanistan.''

Speech Is Well Received

Referring to the United States and China, Mr. Reagan said: ''Neither of us is an
expansionist power. We do not desire your land, nor you ours. We do not
challenge your borders. We do not provoke your anxieties. In fact, both the
United States and China are forced to arm themselves against those who do.''

Nowhere did Mr. Reagan mention the Soviet Union by name.

The thematic nature of his speech was well received by the audience. But it was
apparent the students were more interested in his talk of further economic
cooperation leading to the tapping of American investment, training and other
resources.

In addition, the issues dividing China and the United States were not far away.
The president of Fudan University, Xie Xide, said after Mr. Reagan's speech that
China desired peaceful relations with all countries, ''including the United
States.''

Any further friendship, she said, would have to observe the principle of ''not
interfering in each other's internal affairs.'' This was apparently an allusion
to Taiwan.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 1, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

FEELING OF RELIEF IS SEEN IN MOSCOW

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 724 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 30


Western diplomats here say the Kremlin appears to be quietly relieved that
President Reagan did not score greater successes on his trip to China,
particularly in his effort to encourage China to take a more anti-Soviet
attitude.

Compared with President Nixon's trip to Peking in 1972 the Reagan visit found
the Russians in a relatively composed mood about their position in the
Moscow-Peking-Washington triangle - although the Soviet press has been, as was
predictable, hostile in its coverage of the Reagan trip.

The diplomats said the Soviet leaders' own efforts to improve relations with
China, though bogged down over differences on Afghanistan, Vietnam and Cambodia,
have yielded enough movement on trade and other issues that Moscow can be
considerably less fearful than it was about a threatening alliance of the United
States and China.

The tentative confidence the Kremlin has been showing on this matter appears to
have been increased somewhat by events in Peking, the diplomats said. In
particular, there has been a scarcely concealed delight at the manner in which
Chinese censors trimmed anti-Soviet remarks from the versions of Mr. Reagan's
speeches that were published and broadcast in China.

'Odious Pronouncements'

Tass, the official press agency, said Saturday of Mr. Reagan's last day of talks
in Peking, ''Newsmen covering Reagan's visit to Peking noted that the U.S.
President went so far in preaching his imperial course that the Chinese side was
compelled to delete his most odious pronouncements when his speeches were
televised and published in newspapers and magazines.''

The agency's dispatches on the visit have given the impression that Mr. Reagan's
primary purpose in visiting Peking, apart from helping his re- election
prospects, was to further his anti-Soviet crusade.

In this area, Tass has implied, the trip has fallen well short of the aims of
the President and his advisers, even if Mr. Reagan has been able to find some
echoes of his own attitudes in his conversations with Chinese leaders.

The Tass coverage has been closely watched here in the absence of any formal
comment from the Government. The most authoritative publications, including
Pravda, the Communist Party newspaper, have also avoided direct assessments,
informing their readers about the visit through the Tass reports.

U.S.-Soviet Relations

Diplomats say they believe that the Kremlin is awaiting the end of the visit
before offering more substantial comments. One tentative conclusion being drawn
from the Tass reports by diplomats here is that Mr. Reagan's remarks in Peking,
if not the fact of the visit itself, may have further retarded prospects of an
early improvement in Soviet-American ties.

While Mr. Nixon's 1972 visit was still being planned the Kremlin countered by
arranging a Presidential visit to Moscow that produced a raft of Soviet-
American agreements, but the diplomats predict that the Soviet reaction to this
trip is more likely to be one of still more wariness toward Washington.

Tass has reported that Mr. Reagan has tried in China ''to set up a strong
community of nations to the east of Soviet territory, as to the west of it,''
and that he has trampled on diplomatic protocol by using his Peking speeches for
''calumnious attacks on the U.S.S.R.''

This, Tass said, ''shows one more time the real worth of his 'peacemaking'
assurances about striving for dialogue with the U.S.S.R.''

Kremlin Staying Aloof

There have been indications here for some time that the Kremlin had already
decided to remain aloof from Mr. Reagan's efforts to produce some movement in
the relationship between Washington and Moscow.

Chinese reaction to the Reagan visit is seen by the diplomats as likely to have
strengthened the view that there is no need to rush into talks with Washington.
Tass reported that Deng Xiaoping, the Chinese leader, told Mr. Reagan that
Peking ''was not opposed to the U.S. arms buildup, and always supported such
measures by the U.S.A.'' But much of the Tass coverage pointed up the
differences that had emerged in the talks.

Tass emphasized the disagreement over Taiwan, saying that Mr. Deng's appeals to
Mr. Reagan had failed to produce American assurances about arms sales to Taipei,
''or any other assurances, for that matter.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 1, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOSTON PUBLISHING QUIETLY BUT RAPIDLY MODERNIZES

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1633 words


BOSTONBeacon Press will mark its 130th anniversary in May, but the celebration
will be appropriately low-key. One reason is that publishing appears to be much
more subdued here than in New York. But another reason for not blowing one's
horn too loudly is that in this historic city, Beacon is a relative
Johnny-come-lately.

Houghton Mifflin, which published the works of Nathaniel Hawthorne and Ralph
Waldo Emerson, traces its lineage to 1832. And Little, Brown, which published
Louisa May Alcott, and which for many years gave each of its married employees a
ton of coal at Christmas, opened for business in 1837.

But the placid atmosphere is deceptive, for beneath the surface, Boston
publishing is undergoing changes whose impact will be felt far beyond the
borders of New England.



Some Changes Listed

For example:


- The Atlantic Monthly Press, a quality small publisher whose best sellers range
from ''Drums Along the Mohawk'' in 1936 to ''Blue Highways'' in 1983, is in the
process of severing its 59-year-old joint publishing relationship with Little,
Brown. At year's end it will strike out on its own.


- In recent years such newcomers as David R. Godine and the Boston Publishing
Company have carved out important niches in the city's publishing industry,
while Addison-Wesley, a 41-year-old educational publisher in nearby Reading,
Mass., has in a short time built a successful trade-book department. (Trade
books are general- interest books sold through bookstores.)


- At the restaurants and clubs frequented by editors and publishers, the talk is
not only about authors and agents, but also about software and electronic
publishing.


- For the last year or so, 14 female publishing executives have been getting
together on the first Monday of each month to discuss subjects of common
interest. The 14 represent most Boston publishers, including some that until
recently considered high-ranking women as novelties.



'Things Have Loosened Up'

''Boston publishing is changing rapidly,'' said Anne W. Eldridge, an editor at
Addison-Wesley. ''Things have really loosened up, compared with the old days.''

But change has not eroded the camaraderie among the city's publishers. ''We take
a certain pride in being part of the Boston publishing scene,'' said Arthur H.
Thornhill Jr., chairman of Little, Brown, the company that his father also
headed. ''We don't get together here regularly, but we have an immediate feeling
of kinship whenever we meet at booksellers' or publishers' conventions.''

Part of that stems from pride in tradition, another part from satisfaction at
having succeeded even though the center of trade-book publishing long ago
shifted from here to New York. But there is more. ''As a born New Yorker,'' said
William B. Goodman, editorial director of David R.  Godine, ''I was always aware
of the extraordinary advantages of Boston - the city itself. It's a very
congenial town. Lewis Mumford said it still has the human scale.''

What helps make it congenial to publishers are the number of bookstores in the
metropolitan area, plus the intellectual tradition nurtured by Harvard, the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and many other universities. ''In the days
when I used to be a book sales manager, Boston was a distinct leader in
per-capita purchase of trade books,'' said David R. Replogle, director of
general and international publishing for Houghton Mifflin.

It still is a leader - first among all other major cities in per-capita
purchases in bookstores, and seventh overall, behind only such smaller
university towns as Ann Arbor, Mich,, Madison, Wis., and Austin, Tex., according
to the Bureau of Industrial Economics of the United States Department of
Commerce.

Yet despite their quiet pride in being proper Bostonian publishers, none of the
companies considers itself a regional publisher.

''When Simon & Schuster and Dutton publish books about New York, does that make
them a regional publisher?'' asked Mr. Goodman. Godine, he pointed out, has
evolved from a small publisher with a special interest in books on New England,
typography, photography and printing, ''to a moderate-sized, undermanned trade
house with a general trade list that includes a continuing deep commitment to
our original interests.'' He added that the house was committed to ''a big
series of books on Latin America.''

Even some of the venerable Boston publishers were never regional. As far back as
the 1860's, Beacon Press was publishing such abolitionist works as ''The
Children's Anti-Slavery Book'' and ''Women's Rights Under the Law.'' In recent
years the nonprofit Press, founded by the American Unitarian Association, has
published many books on feminist concerns and has published a number of black
writers, including Paul Robeson, the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., James
Baldwin and the poet June Jordan.



Formal Ties to New York

Moreover, many Boston publishers cut their publishing teeth elsewhere. John
MacLaurin, general trade manager at Little, Brown, began his publishing career
selling paperback books to newsdealers in the London subway system. Mr. Replogle
worked for Doubleday. Wendy J. Strothman, director of Beacon Press, came from
the University of Chicago Press. Peter Davison, a senior editor at the Atlantic
Monthly Press, which he headed for 15 years, through 1979, is a poet published
by Atheneum in New York. He is also the poetry editor for the press, whose
recent volume of poetry ''American Primitive'' won a 1984 Pulitzer Prize for its
author, Mary Oliver.

Moreover, most Boston publishers have strong formal ties to New York. Little,
Brown, for example, has been owned since 1968 by Time Inc. Time also owns the
New York Graphic Society, the Boston-based publisher of art and photography
books, and Boston Publishing, a six-year-old company that it purchased last
year.

In addition, several Boston companies already have a strong trade-publishing
presence in New York and the others are considering setting up offices in
Manhattan. ''We're thinking about adding a New York editor and maybe a publicity
person there,'' said Upton Birnie Brady, director of the Atlantic Monthly Press
(whose books will continue to be distributed by Little, Brown).



Split Between the 2 Cities

Little, Brown was one of the first tenants in New York's Lincoln Building in the
mid-1930's, and it still has its sales, publicity and subsidiary rights
departments in New York, as well as executive editor Roger Donald and two other
trade editors. Its college division and medical and legal publishing are still
in Boston, however, in the corporate headquarters on Beacon Street overlooking
Boston Common.

Houghton Mifflin has offices in a number of cities, and the home office is
heavily involved in reference books and software products for business,
tutorials and educational and communication aids. But its trade division is
largely in New York, as is Ticknor & Fields, the small trade- book subsidiary
founded in the mid- 19th century and revived in 1979.

''Trade publishing is a dwarf relative to our textbook industry,'' said Harold
T. Miller, chairman of Houghton Mifflin, ''but I in no way view it as a distant
relative. Publishers have to contribute to society, and our textbooks publishing
would all be kind of in vain if we didn't care about providing people suitable
things to read.''

Nevertheless, Mr. Replogle made it clear that the company keeps a close eye on
profitability, noting with satisfaction that the $1.2 million paid for paperback
rights to Judith Rossner's ''August'' was the most paid for any fiction title in
1983.



'Publish Practically Everything'

Addison-Wesley started its trade- book department in 1974, largely with money
earned from sales of ''Born to Win'' by Muriel James and Dorothy Jongeward, a
book that began as a textbook for courses in corporate management, and has sold
more than 1.5 million copies. Now the company publishes about 40 adult trade
books a year, plus another 40 microcomputer books, and has had such recent best
sellers as ''Theory Z'' by William Ouchi, ''Corporate Cultures'' by Terrence E.
Deal and Allan A. Kennedy, and ''The Mary Kaye Guide to Beauty.'' As it
continues to expand its trade list, along with recreational software, it is
considering adding a New York editor.

''One of our strengths is that other than fiction and children's books, we
publish practically everything,'' said Donald R. Hammond, company president.
''And we market everything through our offices around the world, through which
we distribute our educational books.''

Addison-Wesley also distributes to bookstores several thousand copies of each
volume of Boston Publishing Company's 18-volume series titled ''The Vietnam
Experience,'' most of which are sold by direct mail. Nine volumes have been
published so far in the series, which examines the history of United States
involvement in Vietnam.



Another Multibook Project

''Before Time bought us, the prognosis was that about 150,000 subscribers would
buy seven volumes, now the prognosis is that 600,000 subscribers will buy at
least 10 volumes,'' said Robert Manning, the editor in chief. In addition to
direct mail, Time has been advertising the series heavily on television and in
Time magazine.

By the time the series is completed, Mr. Manning said that Boston Publishing
would be involved in another multibook project, which it is still too early to
discuss. Meanwhile, it is preparing a one-volume history of the Medal of Honor,
based largely on interviews with the 260 surviving recipients. And it recently
started Access, a monthly 12-page newsletter for users of International Business
Machines and Apple personal computers, for which it expects as many as 45,000
subscribers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of logos of various Boston publishers

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 2, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Chinese Say Vietnam Is Massing for Invasion

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 263 words

DATELINE: PEKING, May 1


China's Communist Party newspaper said today that Vietnamese troops were massing
rockets, tanks and heavy weapons for an invasion of China.

Vietnam, meanwhile, charged that three Chinese regiments were mobilized last
weekend to undertake ''land- grabbing attacks'' on three hills in Vietnam's
border province of Ha Tuyen. The report gave no other details and did not say
whether any attacks had begun.

The Vietnamese press agency quoted a report by the Vietnamese Communist Party
newspaper Nhan Dan. The report, monitored in Bangkok, quoted the newspaper as
saying ''the tense and increasingly grave situation along the Chinese-Vietnamese
border must be blamed entirely on the Chinese side.''

In China, the Communist Party newspaper People's Daily said Vietnam began
preparing for an invasion early this year. It said that Vietnamese troops had
occupied some Chinese territory by force and that Chinese troops had struck
back. China's state- run press reported earlier that Chinese frontier guards
''wiped out'' invading Vietnamese in battles Saturday and Monday.

BANGKOK, Thailand, May 1 (UPI) - Thailand protested to Vietnam today about what
it called a ''blatantly provocative'' artillery attack Monday on a Thai village
along the Thai-Cambodian border in which a villager was killed and four were
wounded.

Tran Quang Co, Vietnam's Ambassador to Thailand, was summoned to the Thai
Foreign Ministry and was read a statement condemning Hanoi's forces for firing
an artillery barrage Monday into the village of Ban Charat, 210 miles northeast
of Bangkok.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 2, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 41 words


Because of an editing error, a dispatch from Amherst, Mass., on April 18 about
Amerasian war orphans in the United States incorrectly characterized the racial
makeup of American ground forces in the Vietnam war. They were predominantly
white.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 3, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL KILLED IN NEVADA CRASH FLEW SOVIET JET

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 886 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 2


The Air Force general who was killed in a plane crash last Thursday in Nevada
was flying a Soviet MIG-23 jet that has been used in tests against American
planes equipped with radar-evading technology, according to Air Force sources.

The Pentagon has declined to comment officially on the accident, other than to
say that the victim, Lieut. Gen. Robert M. Bond, vice commander of the Air Force
Systems Command, was killed while flying ''an Air Force specially modified test
craft.''

The accident occurred on the Nellis Air Force Range, part of a wasteland that
also encompasses the Government's underground nuclear testing field. It is the
headquarters for a number of secret programs. One is the Stealth project, which
seeks to develop materials and shapes that will make weapons less detectable by
hostile radar.



Weapons Acquired and Tested

Pentagon sources initially denied news reports that General Bond, who was 54
years old, was flying a plane involved in the Stealth project. The Air Force is
known to be developing designs for a radar-evading strategic bomber and a jet
fighter, but no complete models are thought to exist yet.

Nellis is also the home of a longstanding program to evaluate Soviet weapons
acquired covertly or on the world arms market. Knowledgeable sources in
Congress, the Defense Department and the military industry said all the military
services maintained projects to test such weaponry. After the 1967 war between
Israel and Egypt, there was a huge influx of Soviet arms for testing purposes.

Congressional sources said that of perhaps more concern than the Nellis test
project itself was why a 54-year-old general was permitted to fly a high-
performance aircraft alone. General Bond, an Air Force veteran of 33 years, was
a fighter pilot with more than 5,000 hours of flight experience. But pilots over
the age of 45 are usually not allowed to fly solo in service aircraft.



Radar Used in the Testing


Such regulations may not apply, however, to aircraft given to a commercial
company for testing or to special equipment such as the MIG.

A 51-year-old Soviet test pilot, Maj. Gen. Aleksandr V. Fedotov, who flew early
MIG versions, was killed in a plane crash in April.

Air Force sources said the MIG-23's intercepter radar had been used to
field-test components of the Stealth project in a manner resembling air combat.
The sources said General Bond could have been engaged in such a test or could
merely have been evaluating the performance of the aircraft itself.  Although
various versions of the MIG-23 have been acquired from the Soviet Union by many
countries, including Egypt, Algeria, Iraq, Vietnam, Ethiopia, India and Cuba,
few are believed to have been obtained by the United States. Older and less
sophisticated MIG models are much more common on the world market, according to
industry sources.

The LTV Aerospace and Defense Company recently proposed to provide the Navy with
24 modified MIG-21's for use in combat training.

The MIG-23, known in NATO parlance as the ''Flogger,'' was first displayed in
1967 at a Moscow airshow. Deployment in the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact
countries did not begin on a large scale until the early 1970's. The aircraft
exists in at least seven versions, some of which were designed specifically for
export, and it has become the Soviet Air Force's primary air-to-air combat
plane.

According to the most recent edition of the authoritative Jane's All the World's
Aircraft, the Soviet Union's current front line fighter, the MIG-25 or
''Foxbat,'' entered service in 1971 and soon became the principle tactical rival
to the American F-15 and F-16.

Air Force sources expressed concern that the crash may have compromised what
until now had been a well- shrouded research project. Although the existence of
programs to evaluate Soviet weapons is well-known in military-industrial
circles, Stealth work has been much less visible to the public. Pentagon
spokesmen refused today to comment on the incident.

Stealth technology tested at Nellis is being applied to aircraft mostly by
smoothing the external shape and using nonmetalic materials in airframes.

Soviet Pilot Flew Early MIG's

Maj. Gen. Aleksandr V. Fedotov, one of the leading test pilots of the Soviet
Union, was killed in an air crash in April, according to Soviet newspapers
received in the United States. He was 51 years old.

The papers gave no details of the circumstances of the crash, beyond saying that
it occurred at an airfield near Moscow. Aircraft testing, like most military
activities in the Soviet Union, is secret.

General Fedotov, who had been testing some of the Soviet Union's best known
supersonic jet fighters for 26 years, flew early models of the MIG series - the
MIG-21 in 1950's and the MIG-23 and MIG-25 in the 1960's. He set an altitude
record of 123,490 feet in 1977.

A native of the Volga River city of Volgograd, General Fedotov was graduated in
1953 from the Armavir flying school in the Northern Caucasus and, in 1958,
joined the aircraft design organization headed by Artem I. Mikoyan, the creator
of the MIG fighter series.

For his work as a test pilot, General Fedotov was awarded the title of Hero of
the Soviet Union in 1966. He was also the winner of the Lenin Prize.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of a Soviet MIG-23; photo of Lieut. Gen. Robert Bond

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 3, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

EXCERPTS FROM THE DEMOCRATIC CANDIDATES' DEBATE IN TEXAS

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 4654 words


Following are excerpts from a transcript of a Democratic Presidential debate
last night in Grapevine, Tex., as recorded by The New York Times through the
facilities of Cable News Network.

The participants were Senator Gary Hart, the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Walter F.
Mondale. The moderator was Sander Vanocur of ABC News.



Runoff Primaries

MR. VANOCUR: I'd like to open the questioning tonight with Senator Hart. Do you
support Mr. Jackson's demand that the Democratic convention recommend the end of
second primaries in Southern states, even though this could mean Southern
Democrats might vote Republican? As a potential nominee, how can you support
this proposal and hope to beat President Reagan in November?

MR. HART: Mr. Vanocur, the Democratic Party has lasted for 200 years and has
been the majority party of this nation most of this century because it's been
the party that's been open and invited people in. I fear that we're losing that
position in the political arena because we have adopted exclusionary tactics not
only at the state but at the national level. For example, here in this state the
caucuses are on Saturday night, and in a state of 13 to 15 million people,
perhaps as few as 100,000 will come out.

There is something wrong also, I think, even in primary states where we attract
only 15 percent of the qualified voters. This party must send a signal to the
voters of this nation, the citizens of this nation, that it is the open party.
If there are dual primaries - in any state, not just in the South but anywhere
in the country, New York or anywhere else - that are part of a pattern of
discrimination, then I can't see how this party, the party of civil rights and
openness, can endorse or support that kind of process. I think it does require a
state by state analysis and I think the leaders of our party, Presidential
candidates and officers of our party, have to look at those states, each one
individually.

MR. VANOCUR: Thank you very much. Mr. Jackson, did you give Democratic Party
Chairman Charles Minatt a promise that you will support the Democratic nominee
after the convention and actively campaign for him in the fall election?



MR. JACKSON: It was a ridiculous assertion made by the chairman, because I never
suggested I would walk out of the convention. I spent all of my years trying to
get the right to vote and fighting for the right to get into the convention. I
mentioned this to expand the party and to heal the party. Expanding the party
creates quite a bit of tension because the old wineskins must make room for the
new wine. My candidacy has brought in more new voters, more young voters and
more loyal voters and expansion must take place. I challenge the rules because
the rules had the impact, have had the impact of disenfranchising new voters.

At this point, for example, I earned 18 percent of the popular vote. I only have
7 percent of the delegates. Mr. Mondale has earned 39 percent of the popular
vote. He has 50 percent of the delegates. He has 11 percent more delegates than
his popular vote warrants. I have 11 percent fewer than my warrant. By
enfranchising the delegates that I have earned is a way of epanding the party.
If we expand and make room for new Democrats, that will be the formula for
victory in 1984.

MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Mondale, you've expressed reservations about abolishing runoff
primaries. What do you intend to do when and if this becomes a divisive issue at
the convention in San Francisco?

MR. MONDALE: I think there are two objectives that have to be kept in mind here.
First of all, whenever a dual primary in fact is discriminatory has the effect
of denying, say, a black candidate a fair chance of election, then that's one
thing and we cannot accept discrimination and we never have. And I think there's
a lot of evidence in a lot of circumstances the dual primaries, in effect, the
runoff primary, the majority rule does not have that effect. Bill Winter of
Mississippi only won because of the dual primary. Dale Bumpers of Arkansas and
so on. And in those cases, what it means, is that the person who is finally
nominated on the Democratic ticket enjoys the broad cross- section of support of
the Democrats of the state. And I think we have to draw that distinction.

Fortunately, I believe because of this debate we're starting to develop other
alternatives that may be acceptable to everyone. Recently in South Carolina
Governor Riley and several of the black leaders suggested the possibility, say,
of a 40 percent cutoff, sort of a compromise, and that may permit us to
eliminate any possible discrimination and yet achieve what many of these states
and communities elsewhere in the country have sought to achieve.

a



pick up 200 add

Illegal Aliens

MR. VANOCUR: An issue of major importance here in Texas - indeed in the whole
Southwest and I think in time in the whole country - is the problem of illegal
immigrants. The Simpson-Mazzoli bill now pending in Congress calls for sanctions
against employers hiring illegal aliens, a national identification system, and
amnesty for many illegal aliens already living here. You oppose this, I believe.
But what's your specific position on an immigration policy for the United
States?

MR. JACKSON: First of all, we ought to have the same policy toward Hispanics
coming North from Mexico that we have for Canadians coming South from Canada. We
should play the game by one set of rules.

The idea of Americans walking around with their passports in their pockets as if
this were South Africa is abhorrent and distasteful. We ought to grant general
amnesty to those who are here, and we will not solve this problem on this side
of the border unless we're willing to tackle the crippling poverty on the other
side of the border that serves as an inducement for people to come here.

People fleeing to work and fleeing to eat and fleeing for health care and
education must be welcome in our country. There is a piece of legislation I
would suggest to those who have been here, the cutoff point being 1982. We ought
to accept that. I support that bill. And for those who do come across, there
ought to be humane treatment at that border.

We can not solve this problem unless we deal with the fact that we need as a
nation to have the kind of economic development program in Mexico and in Central
America that will make people be able to have a sense of self-determination at
home.

MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Mondale.

MR. MONDALE: I believe that there's one fundamental flaw in the Simpson-Mazzoli
Bill that requires that it not pass, in addition to the one that Reverend
Jackson mentioned - and I agree with him totally. We can't get into a - as a
nation where you have to carry around a card proving you're an American. We've
never done that, we never should. And that is the employer sanctions.

Those sanctions will guarantee that employers will be very, very reluctant ever
to hire an Hispanic or anyone else who doesn't look like he's an American,
whatever that means. It also asks the employer to be a law-enforcement officer.
And I think that's a totally inappropriate role for an employer to take under
these circumstances. The idea that somehow we'd have a big roundup in this
country and pick people up and send them somewhere suggests that they're cattle
- and they're not. Theyre human beings. And we need to do it responsibly,
humanely.

And the final point is there's something that we haven't really tried and that's
effective law enforcement at the border and the effective enforcement of our
immigration laws throughout this nation. Our border patrol, our immigration
service, is overwhelmed now. I think this Administration has cut funding for law
enforcement. Let's try effective law enforcement and let's do it in a humane
way. Let's have the amnesty program, which I think is crucial if we're going to
be humane people who have lived here for years, whatever the reasons. They've
had their own lives, their own families. They deserve to be treated as human
beings.

MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Hart.



MR. HART: Mr. Vanocur, I voted against the Simpson-Mazzoli bill in the last
Congress and strongly opposed it in this Congress, offered amendments on the
floor - an amendment on the floor of the Senate - to cure its principal defect,
which is, my colleagues have said, the employer sanction provision which
directly jeopardizes civil liberties of minority Americans. I worked very
closely with Hispanic and other minority groups in drafting that provision,
which, had it been adopted by the Senate and the Congress, would have made that
general overall approach in the immigration laws I think acceptable to most
people.

The amnesty provisions I think are balanced and reasonable. The reform of the
quota system that the bill contains is generally reasonable. I agree with
Reverend Jackson and Mr. Mondale that any kind of identification system would
get very close and probably crosses a line of what is and is not acceptable in
this country in terms of our civil liberties. Certainly an employer sanction
provision, which invites discrimination at the outset, is totally unacceptable.
As President of the United States it will be my commitment not to allow that
legislation to pass in its present form.

Use of Force

MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Jackson, let's turn to foreign policy now. What do you see as
the proper use of force by an American President?

MR. JACKSON: Whenever our national interest is in jeopardy and the use of might
is our last resort, we'll have to use it. We have to use our minds as a first
resort. I contend that developed minds, not guided missiles, is our first line
of defense. We're looking now at a pattern of Third World interventionism. The
fact of the matter is whether it is in Central America, or Grenada, or Lebanon,
we need to use more aggressive forms of diplomacy.

I happen to be convinced that we're in a position now where there is no defense
against a nuclear attack upon us by the Russians or vice versa. We have the
capacity to wipe each other out. We're beyond defense now, slipping into the
terror. We must have an aggressive move now to disarm this world. Begin to move
first the Soviet Union to a trade and technology and mutual survival programs. I
would think that that has to be a pattern that we can stop, this idea of
interventionism, if we use more aggressive forms of diplomacy. If our national
interest is at stake, we should use our military force.

MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Mondale, Senator Hart has charged that the Carter-Mondale
Administration was derelict in its use of American power during the Iranian
hostage situation. Do you think that's true, and what do you see as the proper
use of American military power in this world?

MR. MONDALE: I do not think it was true in the case of the hostage problem in
Iran. That was one of the most tragic problems for Americans in modern history.
I lived through that period in the White House. It was terrible for us and it
was terrible for all Americans. And we did everything we could to bring down the
number of Americans there but we had to leave a force there to handle our
diplomatic relations. We were assured by the then- Iranian Government that they
would protect them. They went back on their word and we were left with that
horrible hostage question.

We had to put the lives of our Americans first. And we did. Hindsight is great,
but all those hostages are home now living with their families and I think we
did the best we could under the circumstances.



MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Hart, in a previous debate, you said that you could not see
using American forces to prevent Iran from closing the Straits of Hormuz, and
that caused - because you said it was up to Western Europe, that's where they
got their oil from - caused some concern in Western Europe. Am I quoting you
correctly? You're shaking your head? Or is there a different way to use force?

MR. HART: There are two separate issues, Mr. Vanocur. First, let me just correct
the record. What I said at Texas A&M was in the context of the need to reform
our military institutions and modernize our conventional forces, that in order
to avoid unnecessary loss of human lives and American lives as we did in the
sands of Iran, that we need a different kind of equipment. We needed training
for missions of that sort, and that was the point that was being made there. It
wasn't dereliction of duty or anything else. I supported the rescue mission, and
it had to do with the rescue mission, the remarks that I made.

In any case, there are two issues in the Persian Gulf. One is international
access through the Strait of Hormuz which is an international waterway. The
United States and its allies, particularly its oil importing allies, ought to
band together to have a contingency plan to keep the Strait open, and I, as
President, would cooperate with that plan. We don't need to go it alone. The
British, French and others have naval capabilities to cooperate. We don't need
for Uncle Sam to get a black eye for being the bully of the world.

Secondly, it's the issue of imposition of American land forces in the Persian
Gulf on land to try to secure oil if in fact this nation has become energy
independent, which is my policy. I think this country is in a dangerous
situation now. The policy of this President is to invest American forces to try
to secure oil if it gets cut off, and that is tragically unnecessary. The United
States can support at sea and in the air any international force that seeks to
go ashore. We don't need to lose American lives fighting for oil for West
Germany.

MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Jackson?



MR. JACKSON: All week long there has been a lot of talk about the Iranian
situation. I think that the best thing was done under the circumstances at that
stage of the struggle. The fact is the big mistake was, (A) there was only one
American worker in the embassy that spoke Farsi. That was utter contempt and
arrogance. It's the inability to communicate. Second, our own intelligence
forces told us the Shah was on shaky ground and his time was coming to an end.
We misread that. Now, once the crisis struck, we could not fight back
militarily. It's like a man who's dashing after he's made a mistake trying to
get over a fence and his vital organs get trapped, and the Ayatollah has a
hatchet and breathing fire - that's not a time for a quicker helicopter. You've
got to fake your way out of that situation and have the patience to wait until
your change comes. You have no other capacity. That's not an everyday situation,
but it is a situation where you must use your mind and not fast helicopters.

MR. VANOCUR: President Reagan is a very popular man because he has a very simple
approach - not simplistic - simple - approach. He did not know if American lives
were being threatened in Grenada. He could not take the chance which he saw
would happen to you and President Carter. He went in - that was popular. Now is
the Democratic Party being put in the position where it never seems to want to
use force in legitimate situations?

MR. MONDALE: I have made it clear that in this less-than-perfect world, our
nation must have a strong defense, and we must be prepared, not as a first
resort, which seems to be this President's inclination, but his last resort to
use force where strategic or other vital interests are at stake. One of the
legitimate objectives of the use of American force is the protection of American
lives, and I said at the time that if as President, I thought American lives
were in danger in Grenada, I would have used force to protect them. And I
believe any President would have to do the same.

MR. VANOCUR: But sir, I may say - You took your time, did you not?

MR. MONDALE: No. The next day I said if they're in danger I would have used
force.

MR. JACKSON: Isn't it fair to say that when President Kennedy dared Cuba to put
missiles 90 miles from our shores that was the right challenge. But even there
the President was true to (A) in respecting our neighbors - in respecting the
Organization of American States so as not to move unilaterally and rupture and
violate other long-standing legal relationships. There is the sense of Communist
paranoia by this Administration and use that as justification for mining harbors
and not giving adequate reports to the Congress and bombing the rebels of El
Salvador and using gunboat diplomacy and big stick diplomacy and nuclear threat
as opposed to using aggressive diplomacy and aid and trade. During this period
of rising danger in the world, we must be far more willing to use our real
strength which happens to be our ability to feed the world, our ability to
provide medicine and health care.

MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Hart, I just wanted to point out that you have been an advocate
of smaller, more mobile military equipment - especially in the Navy.  I'm not
advocating using force, but I seem to find in the Democratic Party a reluctance
to use it or even contemplate it.

MR. HART: I think the question, Mr. Vanocur, is if we learned a lesson from
Vietnam. It seems to me the lesson from Vietnam is not whether we should be
strong and dumb or weak and dumb, but how to be strong and smart. The question
of how to be smart is when to know when you should use those forces and whether
they're going to work when you use them. It seems to me the lesson of Iran and
other lessons is that you shouldn't undertake a mission if your forces aren't
properly equipped. Now Reverend Jackson can make as much fun out of fast
helicopters as he wants to but had we had them we might have some Americans
alive today.

Now the President of the United States is also under the Constitution the
Commander in Chief. What I have tried to do in this Presidential debate is
elevate the dialogue away from the conventional rhetoric about the line for a
strong defense. Well, who is for a weak defense? I don't think you're going to
find anybody who's for a weak defense. The question is how to allocate the
usable dollars in the most effective way. And then finally, if you have a strong
defense, when to know when to use it.

Clearly if American lives are in jeopardy or being held hostage, whether in
Grenada or Iran or anywhere else, we not only have the right but probably the
duty to try to rescue them. What we don't have is the right to lose American
lives unnecessarily in the process.

MR. JACKSON: This line of questioning almost backs us up in the corner as if to
suggest that we're not willing to defend the country. To be sure. The problem
now is that we have a trigger-man military budget under Mr. Reagan and it's
rising in peace time. If we keep raising the military budget we will not have
any moneys left to rebuild the infrastructure of our country.



Delegate Committees



MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Mondale, in Illinois you questioned how Mr. Hart could run the
country if he couldn't yank a commercial offensive to you off the air on the
weekend. Is it fair for him to ask you now how you could run the country, if it
took you almost a week to end the questionable practice of independent delegate
committees spending money for your campaign?

MR. MONDALE: I think I did exactly what was right. Those committees were legal
under the Federal commission's regulations, it's right there. What I did to end
the debate was much more than I needed to do. I agreed to accept all this money
as though it were given to me; I agreed to return money that had it been
received by me in the first place, I would not have accepted. I agreed to live
within the ceilings and I called for the disbandment of the committees. I think
I did what was right under the circumstances.

MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Hart, when you say you're the candidate -

MR. HART: I have a certain different view on --

MR. VANOCUR: Thirty seconds.

MR. HART: Well, first of all, the question of whether the practice is legal or
not is still up in the air. The Federal Election Commission has not ruled on
that, and at least one major publication said that there is a strong possibility
the practice was illegal.

Second, the money has not been given back yet. An official in the Mondale
campaign says it may not be until after the primaries are over. So what's the
difference if it turns out it was illegal whether you borrowed it or whether you
kept it. If the effect is to win the primaries it amounts to the same.



Beating Reagan



MR. VANOCUR: You say you're the candidate who can beat President Reagan in the
fall - best beat him. But in the primaries you've not carried one major
industrial state - not Michigan, Illinois, Pennsylvania or New York. And I ask
you, how can any Democrat hope to get elected President if he can't carry those
kinds of states, which are the bedrock of the Democratic constituency.



MR. HART: Well first of all, it's one thing to win a state in the primaries,
it's another thing to win it in the general election. You could reverse the
question and ask how can a candidate expect to win in a general election, who
did not carry one New England state, who has only - at least temporarily -
carried one state west of the Mississippi and lost the largest Southern state so
far.

That's - that argument works both ways. And I think I've demonstrated a broader
geographic base than any candidate in this race. And I will continue to.
There're still industrial states left. But I've demonstrated strength in New
England, in the South, in the West and I'll demonstrate it in the industrial
East as well.




Ties to Farrakhan



MR. VANOCUR: And I wonder how do you think Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. would've
responded to Lewis Farrakhan's message of threats of violence, racism and
religious hatred?

MR. JACKSON: A spirit of redemption, as opposed to punishment. When his home was
bombed in Alabama and blacks came with guns to defend him, he asked them to put
their guns down because he wanted to use another approach.

In part he got it from Jesus. Jesus walked one day upon a group of men stoning a
woman, a whore, adulteress. He asked, ''Why stone this woman?'' They said,
''Because she's committed adultery.'' He said to them, ''Those without a sin,
throw a first stone.'' No rocks moved. He then said to the woman, ''Sin no more
and go in peace.''

Moral leadership in known not for purity and perfection but for redemption. We
must have the capacity, the moral capacity, to reach out and make room for
people, to revive, to forgive and to move on.

MR. VANOCUR: As a journalist, I don't like being threatened and I don't like my
colleagues being threatened. And you have not repudiated that message of Louis
Farrakhan.

MR. JACKSON: I disassociated myself from the message but not the messenger and
there is a distinct difference, you see. It is significant that when I reached
out to George Wallace, a man whose threats and actions became real, that was
considered gross immaturity. I reached out to Gov. Orville Faubus, former
Governor of Arkansas, who supported me in Arkansas. That was considered growth
and maturity.

Well, my spirit of redemption does not stop reaching. And my sense of
forgiveness does not stop. And I have - I do not have the moral capacity to
repudiate. I can disassociate and to me that is a sufficient distinction.

I think, for the record, that one must also deal with the fact that this
statement was made in quite a public forum, was made public 30 days later. It
was not as if there was some quiet conspiracy, and some undercover agent caught
some plot.

You may have been looking at it - you look at it in context but you also say you
hope that no harm would come to this reporter's family. You may look at it
within the context of the apocolyptic message of the Islamic religionist. That's
really what you're looking at. In my judgment, there has been a lot of
exaggerated reaction to that situation, without sufficient context.

MR. MONDALE: I really thought what Farrakhan said was poison. And I thought I
heard him say that he was threatening the life of a reporter. He said some other
things about Hitler and so on. And I'm a preacher's kid, I believe in
redemption. But boy that was going awful far.

MR. JACKSON: Do you believe in capital punishment?

MR. MONDALE: No.

MR. JACKSON: Well, now you want to embrace somebody who has killed people. And
here's a man who you say has simply threatened to kill somebody, and you're
coming out kind of self-righteous, coming inconsistent.

MR. MONDALE: I don't think it's self-righteous to repudiate a statement that
threatens the life of a reporter or raises questions about Adolf Hitler's
qualities and -

MR. JACKSON: In the case of Idi Amin, Idi Amin said he embraced the philosophy,
he was impressed with Hitler. That's one angle. Here's a man who said Hitler was
not a man he embraced, admired, but a man that obviously gained favor amongst
his people. He did not say he embraced Hitler. That was a statement, again, that
is not an accurate portrayal of what the man's point of view happens to be.

I simply bear the marks in my body of reaching out for redemption, I had the
experience last - two weeks ago in Missouri, some small white farmers who
endorsed Reagan in 1980. They had sacks over their head as they endorsed me in
the daytime, maybe for fear that the banks might close on them or for fear that
the agriculture department might punish them.

These men and women had some very ugly beliefs in the past. I reached out for
them. I make no apology about it. I'm glad about it.

And I shall keep bearing whatever scars I must bear to make room for people. I
just believe in that. It's a sacrament of my religion.

MR. VANOCUR: Mr. Hart, as a former theology student, where is there a place in
either your ecclesiastical or your political philosophy for what I took to be a
threat against one of my colleagues?



MR. HART: First of all, I think we ought to leave the fact aside that Mr.
Coleman's a reporter; that's immaterial, he's a human being. If you threaten the
life of any human being it's a violation of the criminal laws of almost every
state in the Union. I don't know why the authorities haven't moved on that. My
own view is that I don't know where the threat was made but I suppose whatever
jurisdiction it was has a law against threatening the life of another human
being. And I must say, with all due respect, Jesse, I don't think it's for you
or me or anyone else to forgive Mr. Farrakhan; I think it's up to Mr. Coleman to
forgive Mr. Farrakhan because he was the one that was threatened. We don't have
that within our power.

MR. JACKSON: As a matter of fact, you don't even know whether or not it was a
threat. You didn't hear the statement, you've not heard the tape, not read the
transcript, you don't know the context.

MR. VANOCUR: Is there any dispute about it?

MR. JACKSON: There is a dispute about it and you're right into a situation that
you're not acquainted with the details of.

MR. HART: Well, I was asked to give an answer and I did.

MR. JACKSON: Well, but you were asked a question without sufficient data to
answer it. I would hope - if you want to further discuss it, we may - in the
meantime, with the few precious minutes here, I am concerned that we're missing
issues even more critical, certainly to me. Under Mr. Reagan, he started with
$30 billion budget deficits, suddenly it's $200 billion. It's threatening our
economic growth. Under this man there are 8 million more people in poverty, 3
million children, now up to 34 million people, and I think that we owe it to
ourselves in terms of what's priority for us to begin to face ways to give
people a way out.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 5, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of a transcription error, excerpts from the Democratic debate in Texas
published on Thursday incorrectly rendered part of a reply by the Rev. Jesse
Jackson to a question about Louis Farrakhan. Mr. Jackson said, ''When I reached
out for George Wallace, a man whose threats and actions became real, that was
considered growth and maturity.''

GRAPHIC: photo of Jesse Jackson nad Gary Hart

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 452 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 4, 1984 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'PURPLE HEARTS,' SET IN VIETNAM

BYLINE: By Janet Maslin

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Weekend Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 566 words


SELDOM has the long arm of coincidence received the workout that it gets in
Sidney J. Furie's ''Purple Hearts,'' as it flings together Dr. Don Jardian and
Nurse Deborah Solomon against the backdrop of war-torn Vietnam. The film begins
with a dedication to the Vietnam War's 347,304 Purple- Heart recipients, though
it also seems aimed at the nation's millions of soap- opera fans. Whenever the
film's war scenes verge on becoming believable, which is often enough, the love
story is allowed to take over.

When we first meet Dr. Jardian, he is speaking fluent doctorese (''Prep him for
O.R., this arm and leg gotta come off right now!'') and is frantically
overworked. Somehow, he then abandons all his other patients to fly one
particular wounded soldier to Da Nang. There, he is watching though the
operating room window while a team of surgeons attempt an emergency operation,
he spots a pair of pretty eyes above one particular surgical mask. That's Nurse
Solomon. Since they are stationed at different bases, Dr. Jardian and Nurse
Solomon spend the rest of the movie trying to arrange free weekends and visit
one another, just as they might in a college romance.

Mr. Furie, who produced, directed and co-wrote ''Purple Hearts,'' does not
appear to be cavalier toward the subject of Vietnam, any more than he did in
''The Boys in Company C.'' Like that film, his current one offers a large cast
of supporting characters in Vietnam and a detailed portrait of life among the
American soldiers there. And Mr. Furie again demonstrates some flair for
bringing out the best in unknown or overlooked actors; Stephen Lee, David Harris
and James Whitmore Jr. are among those who do well in supporting roles here. But
Mr. Furie also reveals a weakness for just the sort of Hollywood hokiness that
can discredit any movie, from the commanding officer who spits out ''The hell
you say!'' at every opportunity to the kettledrum that accompanies Nurse
Solomon's announcement that she, for the umpteenth time, is leaving.

Ken Wahl is great-looking and very photogenic, though his mumbling and his
streetwise manner make him an unlikely choice for the ''million- a-year
surgeon'' of the screenplay. He seems credible and appealing enough in the
combat scenes, but when he and Cheryl Ladd, who plays Nurse Solomon, engage in
their endless banter, the sparks just fail to fly. Both of them do better with
the material's lighter moments, and even with an ending so contrived it may make
your teeth ache, than they do at registering the overall horror and uncertainty
of war. But then, its dedication notwithstanding, ''Purple Hearts'' isn't that
kind of movie anyhow.

''Purple Hearts'' opens today at the RKO Warner and other theaters.

Operating Under Fire

PURPLE HEARTS, directed and produced by Sidney J. Furie; written by Rick Natkin
and Mr. Furie; director of photography, Jan Kiesser; edited by George Grenville;
music by Robert Folk; released by Warner Bros. At the Warner, Broadway at 47th
Street and Tower East, 71st Street and Third Avenue. Running time: 116 minutes.
This film is rated R.

Don Jardian . . . . . Ken Wahl
Deborah Solomon . . . . . Cheryl Ladd
Wizard . . . . . Stephen Lee
Hallaway . . . . . Annie McEnroe
Brenner . . . . . Paul McCrane
Zuma . . . . . Cyril O'Reilly
Hanes . . . . . David Harris
Jill . . . . . Hillary Bailey
Gunny . . . . . Lee Ermey
Lieutenant Colonel Larimore . . . . . Drew Snyder


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Ken Wahl in ''Purple Hearts''

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By William E. Farrell and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 693 words


A Vintage Ceremony

Extra security is being laid on at the Watergate Hotel this afternoon for the
arrival of some very special visitors. There will be an armed guard at the door
of the Riverview East Room and another inside at the elbow of Robert Revelle, a
French cellar-master clad in the traditional smock. For the precious visitors
are 82 bottles of Ch,ateau Lafite-Rothschild, the youngest of them 25 years old,
to be presented by their owners for the enological ritual of recorking, a sort
of midlife renewal rite.

Of the 82 bottles, 22 are from the Watergate and most of the rest are from
restaurants and private cellars in the Washington area. The hotel wine sells for
$220 to $440 a bottle depending on vintage, but the best Lafite is regarded as
more or less priceless, worth whatever a bidder is willing to pay at a given
time.

The Rothschild vineyards are doing this recorking as a sort of pro bono gesture
to insure that their most famous product continues to be suitably preserved. M.
Revelle, whose proper title is Ma,itre de Chai, will remove the old corks, top
off the wine with the same or similar vintage if any has evaporated, recork with
a double- dated cork (original vintage and 1984) and reseal with metal foil.
Some sampling is expected to take place.

L.B.J.: No Troops in Asia

Among the hitherto secret material from the Bay of Pigs era that the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee released the other day was a pregnant pronouncement
by Vice President Johnson in May 1961 after he returned from his first trip to
South Vietnam. ''Asian leaders at this time do not want American troops involved
in Southeast Asia, other than on training missions,'' Mr. Johnson told the
senators in closed session. ''American combat troop involvement is not only not
required, it is not desirable.''

Political Maintenance

The Hatch Act, which prohibits

partisan political activity by

public employees, covers about 4.5 million people. But the only Federal agency
with statutory responsibility for its enforcement, the Office of Special Counsel
of the Merit Systems Protection Board, has only 86 employees, a situation that
tends to spread oversight a litle thin.

So K. William O'Connor, the Special Counsel, has taken what he calls ''a
prophylactic approach'' to enforcement, issuing numerous warnings to potential
violators and offering legal advice by telephone to officials all over the
country whose employees are skirting political involvement. As a result, he had
to file only three complaints of illegal political activity with the board in 19
months in office, until this week when two cases got beyond his preventive
maintenance policy.

One involves a General Services Administration inspector who had been told he
would have to resign to work in the 1981 Virginia Republican gubernatorial
campaign but only took a leave of absence. The other was a Department of Labor
inspector in Pennsylvania who ran for a seat on the local school board in 1983
after being warned that his candidacy would constitute a willful violation of
the Hatch Act. If found guilty by the Merit Systems Protection Board, each would
face penalities ranging from 30 days suspension without pay to discharge.

Faith and Hope

The Speaker of the House,

Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., was invited to comment on the meeting in Alaska between
Pope John Paul II and President Reagan, whose ancestors were Irish and whose
father and brother were Roman Catholic. ''I hope he brings him back to the
faith,'' the Speaker replied, presumably without reference to the fact the
President is a former Democrat.

Paintings From China

As though to celebrate President Reagan's return, the Corcoran Gallery of Art is
to open a show tomorrow called ''Chinese Traditional Painting'' that features
100 scrolls by five of China's greatest painters of the late 19th and early 20th
centuries. Appropriately enough, a week ago, while the President was still in
China, a show of 51 American paintings from the Brooklyn Museum opened in
Peking. The Chinese exhibition will remain here through June 14, then travel to
Indianapolis, New York and New Orleans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A LEADER OF THE 30'S REVISITS ALBANY

BYLINE: By MICHAEL ORESKES

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 899 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, May 3


Abbot Low Moffat was once a big man in this town.

He controlled every piece of legislation that affected New York City. He
proposed a multilane highway from New York to Buffalo and thought up the name
''Thruway.'' He helped shape the current system of state budgeting and proposed
fiscal changes that are only now coming to fruition.

But when he walked out of here in the midst of World War II, a bit bored with
Albany and eager to play a more direct role in the war effort, his power passed
to other men, and his name began to fade from the political memory here.

Until now.

For Abbot Low Moffat, hardly slowed by his 82 years, returned to Albany this
week for the first time in almost 40 years to marvel at how much has changed -
and to recognize much that remains the same.

Cables From Vietnam


His return was a bit of serendipity. When he left Albany, Mr. Moffat set out on
a career in the Foreign Service, where he again made a name for himself,
particularly representing the United States in Asia. He went to visit Ho Chi
Minh in 1946, and the cables he sent back are now interpreted as early warnings
about the course of American policy in Vietnam.

Mr. Moffat, who lives in Princeton, N.J., was interviewed recently for a
documentary for PBS about the Vietnam War, and when the broadcast was seen here,
a few students of legislative history remembered Mr. Moffat.

''We never envisioned he might still be alive until we saw him on the
television,'' said Frank Mauro, who is secretary of the Assembly Ways and Means
Committee. Mr. Mauro knew of Mr. Moffat becuase from 1936 to 1942 Mr. Moffat,
who represented the East Side, was chairman of the committee.

Repeatedly, Mr. Mauro said, when he dealt with budget or fiscal policies, he
would look in the records and come across Mr. Moffat's work.

Era of $300 Million Budgets


So, for the last three days, at the invitation of Mr. Mauro and the Rockefeller
Institute of the State University, an organization that studies state
government, Mr. Moffat has returned to Albany to answer questions about the old
days and catch up on today.

The biggest change, Mr. Moffat said, is the scale of things. The budgets that he
worked on in the late 30's where about $300 million a year. The budget today is
$35 billion.

Mr. Moffat started to comment on state spending on construction. ''Take the $9
million,'' he started to say.

''Nine billion dollars,'' Mr. Mauro respectfully said.

The current Ways and Means chairman, Arthur J. Kremer, Democrat of Long Beach,
L.I., presides over a staff of 42 people. ''I had one clerk and a secretary,''
Mr. Moffat recalled. ''And then I had these two other boys.''

The 1939 Budget Revolt


Mr. Moffat's tenure here, from 1929 to 1943, was under three Governors, Franklin
D. Roosevelt, Herbert H. Lehman and Thomas E. Dewey.

Roosevelt and his new ideas were not much liked by Mr. Moffat's Republican
colleagues, who controlled the Assembly. Besides, he said, Mrs. Roosevelt was
''an awkward hostess'' and a sloppy housekeeper who swept broken Christmas
decorations under a rug at the Executive Mansion.

Mr. Moffat fought his greatest battle with Governor Lehman. He led what
historians of the subject call the 1939 budget revolt, when the Legislature
rewrote the Governor's budget and cut it. The case wound up in court, and the
Legislature lost, in a case Mr. Moffat still says was decided wrongly but which
everyone agrees profoundly strengthened the hand of the Governor in budget
making.

Governor Dewey took office shortly before Mr. Moffat left Albany. He remembers
Dewey as cold and calculating, ''but I was very struck by his vast, brilliant
mind,'' he said.

After Riding on Route 9


Dewey gets much of the credit in history books for the highway that runs from
the New York City line to Albany and then west, to Buffalo. But it was Mr.
Moffat who, years before, while riding to Albany on Route 9, decided that
something better was needed. He called the Public Works Commissioner and asked
him to draw up plans for the highway so he could enact a bill.

''They told me, 'You'll never get that bill through,' '' Mr. Moffat recalled.
''I said, 'If the chairman of Ways and Means says he'll get the bill, he'll get
the bill.' ''

He got the bill. While drafting it, he got tired, he said, of seeing long words
such as superhighway.

''I wanted something with no more than seven letters that could fit on a sign,''
he recalled. The answer was ''Thruway.''

Not Happy Over Renaming


Much of the road was not built until Governor Dewey organized an authority to
issue bonds to pay for it, an act that won the Governor the honor of ultimately
having the highway renamed for him.

''I still begrudge naming it after him,'' Mr. Moffat said. ''I thought that was
a little extreme just because he got the financing going. But that's all right,
except I just call it the New York State Thruway and let it go at that.''

Mr. Moffat was a Republican back then, albeit a liberal one, and the only New
York City legislator among a triumvirate that ran the Assembly. In the 50's, he
switched to the Democratic Party, after years of prodding by his wife, Marion.

Governor Cuomo asked Mrs. Moffat whether that meant that she, as ''the
instrument of his conversion,'' was a Democrat.

She replied, ''I'm still a mugwump.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Abbot Low Moffat in 30's; photo of Abbot Low Moffat and
assembly today

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Letter: On Student Aid Don't Single Out Poor College Men To the Editor:

SECTION: Section 1; Page 24, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 400 words


I couldn't agree less with your May 3 editorial ''Uncle Sam's Campus Bargain,''
on the defensibility of the Solomon amendment, the section of law that denies
Federal aid to college students who cannot certify that they have registered for
the draft.

This law strikes at male students only since only males are required to register
for the draft.

It strikes at poorer students only since only poorer students need aid to go to
college.

It requires, in effect, a ''loyalty oath'' for male students who cannot attend
college without aid.

It adds a gratuitous penalty, for a selected group only, to penalties that
already exist under law for failure to register for the draft.

The reasons offered by The Times for defending the Solomon amendment are
particularly disturbing.  ''If their convictions are strong and sincere, they
can always choose . . . not to register and to live with the consequences.'' Do
we really want to associate ourselves as a nation with those inquisitors
throughout history who, voicing the same argument, punished strong and sincere
rebels while exonerating those who betrayed their personal convictions? And what
is coerced loyalty worth anyway?  ''They (poor men) are not being singled out to
be soldiers.'' Oh no? Take a look at the record of the Vietnam War period if you
don't know that the poor serve in the military in far greater numbers than their
percentage of the population would warrant. Should an actual draft occur, the
wealthier will find the means to evade it, and the draft law will be geared, as
it has been in the past, to help them do so.


''All they, like their peers, are being asked to do is register, something that
97 percent of all young men now do.'' The implication that the rights of a 3
percent minority are something less than they would be if the minority were
larger is, or should be, obnoxious to our country's ethical code.

In the United States, unlike most countries of the world, students are asked to
pay a pretty penny to go to college. But, we are told, don't worry if you are
poor. We have plenty of aid programs for those in need. To make that aid
contingent on something as irrelevant to college study as registering for the
draft puts a stamp of ''second-class citizen'' on poor young men who want to go
to college.

EDWARD C. SULLIVAN

Member of Assembly, 69th Dist.  Albany, May 3, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CHINA TURNS ATTENTION TO TIES WITH SOVIET AND NORTH KOREA

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words

DATELINE: PEKING, May 4


Only a few days after President Reagan's departure after a six-day visit, China
has turned its attention to its northern Communist neighbors.

The Chinese Communist Party leader Hu Yaobang, whom Mr. Reagan saw last Friday,
arrived today in North Korea on an official visit and was met at Pyongyong's
railway station by the North Korean leader Kim Il Sung.

In mid-May the Chinese will also receive First Deputy Prime Minister Ivan V.
Arkhipov, the highest-ranking Soviet visitor in 15 years.

Both visits were expected and have no direct connection with Mr. Reagan's visit
to China. But they underscore the extent to which China is trying to balance
official contacts between Western and Communist countries.

Reagan Visit a 'Complete Success'

Mr. Reagan's visit has been the high point so far of Peking's diplomatic
activity this year. On Wednesday People's Daily quoted Prime Minister Zhao
Ziyang as calling the visit a ''complete success.'' There was no breakthrough on
issues like Taiwan, but a Western diplomat observed that ''the fact that
Reagan's visit was uneventful was significant in itself.''

Some diplomats think Mr. Hu will convey China's view of Mr. Reagan's visit to
the North Koreans, just as Secretary of State George P. Shultz briefed the South
Koreans when he flew to Seoul on Tuesday. Mr. Hu, when he met Mr. Reagan, urged
that United States troops be withdrawn from South Korea, a routine Chinese
demand that the diplomats feel does not accurately reflect Peking's real
concerns about the stability of the Korean peninsula.

The New China News Agency quoted Mr. Hu as saying at a banquet honoring him in
Pyongyang this evening that he had come for a full exchange of views with
President Kim on the international situation and in particular the situation in
Asia and on the Korean peninsula.

Reunification Talks

There had been some speculation that Mr. Hu might convey ideas that Mr. Reagan's
party discussed with the Chinese on the three-way reunification talks proposed
by Pyongyang.

But diplomatic sources familiar with Mr. Reagan's visit said the American and
Chinese sides only stated their respective positions without reaching a
conclusion. The United States does not want to be drawn into the reunification
talks, as North Korea proposed, unless China gets involved, and China has
refused to do so.

Mr. Shultz said at a news conference in Shanghai on Monday that the issue of
Korea came up in at least two meetings with the Chinese during Mr. Reagan's
visit, but he implied that such discussions were not substantive.

Diplomats here see Mr. Hu's trip to North Korea as part of China's continuing
effort to keep President Kim from drifting into the Soviet orbit. According to
reports here, the North Korean leader plans to visit the Soviet Union and
Eastern Europe later this month.

Reference to Korean War

The Chinese press has switched from its extensive coverage of President Reagan's
visit to assertions of Chinese friendship with North Korea that have included
allusions to being comrades- in-arms against the South Koreans and Americans
during the Korean War.

In an editorial today People's Daily called Mr. Hu's visit to North Korea ''a
new page in the annals of Chinese-Korean friendship'' that would help maintain
peace in Asia and the world. Mr. Hu visited North Korea twice in 1982.

The Chinese party chief's delegation includes Yang Shangkun, the deputy chairman
of the party's military commission, which controls the armed forces, and Xu Xin,
the armed forces deputy chief of staff.

China has previously supplied jetfighters and other arms to North Korea. It
recently denied as a ''sheer fabrication'' Western reports that it was selling
weapons to Iran through North Korea.

Mr. Hu is also likely to have to explain to President Kim China's unofficial
contacts with South Korea, including the hosting of a South Korean tennis team
and other sports competition.

Trade Talks With Soviet

The Chinese Foreign Ministry, in formally announcing Deputy Prime Minister
Arkhipov's visit on the eve of Mr. Reagan's arrival in Peking, avoided equating
the two events. Chinese officials have said that Mr. Arkhipov's talks here will
be limited to trade and technical cooperation.

The officials noted that Mr. Arkhipov was in charge of Soviet aid and technical
assistance to China when it was cut off because of the Chinese-Soviet dispute in
the late 1950's. The Chinese may seek Soviet machinery and perhaps experts to
renovate the aging factories that were built with Soviet help.

The last senior Soviet visitor to China was Prime Minister Aleksei N. Kosygin,
who briefly stopped over at the Peking airport to talk to Prime Minister Zhou
Enlai while returning from North Vietnam in 1969.

Just as the Chinese discouraged Mr. Reagan's criticism of the Soviet Union, to
the extent of deleting some of the remarks from his televised speeches, some
Western diplomatic observers think that China may be muting its lack of progress
on the Taiwan issue with Mr. Reagan to let the Russians know that its relations
with the United States have improved.

An Independent Foreign Policy

Mr. Hu lectured President Reagan on the independent nature of Chinese foreign
policy when they met for an hour last Friday. Mr. Hu was quoted as telling Mr.
Reagan: ''We shall never attach ourselves to any country or group of countries.
In no circumstances shall we abandon our good friends.''

Some Peking-based diplomats observe that China has stepped up efforts to play a
more conspicuous role in international affairs. ''We're starting to see a
greater activism and confidence in Chinese foreign policy,'' a Western diplomat
said.

China received Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone of Japan for a four- day visit
in late March that received only slightly less attention here than Mr. Reagan's.

President Li Xiannian visited Jordan, Turkey and Nepal earlier this year. And
Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, who went to the United States and Canada in January,
is scheduled to travel in Western Europe next month.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 5, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Vietnam Orphan Wins Airlift Case Settlement

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 118 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


A Federal jury has awarded $660,000 to a Vietnamese orphan who was injured when
an airplane carrying nearly 150 children crashed after taking off from Saigon in
a 1975 airlift, her attorney said today.

The award was the first to be given to one of the infants who was sent to live
in Europe in April 1975 as Communist troops began to make their final assualt on
Saigon, said Charles Work, the girl's attorney.

Two years ago the Lockheed Aircraft Corporation settled with 52 of the children
who now live in the United States, but no comprehensive settlement has been
reached with any of the children who live in Europe or Canada.

The girl's name has not been released for privacy reasons.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM AGENT ORANGE SUIT BY VETERANS IS GOING TO TRIAL

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1958 words


After years of complex litigation started by a Vietnam veteran dying of liver
cancer, a lawsuit on behalf of thousands of Vietnam veterans and their
dependents against seven manufacturers of the wartime herbicide Agent Orange
will go to trial here tomorrow.

The vast product-liability case, a civil class action embodying potential damage
claims in the billions of dollars, is viewed as the biggest and most complicated
case of its kind ever undertaken.

The case in Federal District Court in Brooklyn marks the first time that such a
large class of claimants has been permitted to sue for wrongful injury, and it
raises a host of scientific and legal questions that strain existing medical
technology and legal precedent.



40,000 Veterans Involved

As a class action, the suit automatically covers all veterans who served in
Vietnam between 1961 and 1972 who claim injury from Agent Orange and who have
not informed the court that they wish to be excluded. About 1,000 have given
such notice of exclusion. Some other veterans remain in the class action but
have expressed displeasure with the way the case has been structured.

The veterans, estimated to number 40,000 or more from as far away as Australia
and New Zealand, contend they and in some cases family members suffered organic
and genetic damage from dioxin, a potent contaminant that they say the
manufacturers knew tainted Agent Orange when they sold it to the military.

The defendants, including the Dow Chemical Company of Midland, Mich., which
produced most of the Agent Orange, deny it could have caused the problems
claimed and say the Government was informed about any possible risks. The
Government has also been made a defendant in the case.

About 12 million gallons of Agent Orange - a mixture of the herbicides 2,4,5-T
and 2,4-D and named for the color-coded orange band around the drums - was
sprayed over millions of acres of South Vietnam between 1965 and 1970 to clear
vegetation considered helpful to the enemy.

In all, about 2.8 million Americans served in Vietnam until 1973. The cutoff
year of 1972 was chosen to cover all veterans who might have been affected by
the spraying. About 80,000 veterans have sought tests at Veterans Administration
clinics for possible injury and from that number the court has estimated the
40,000 figure. However, the number of those who will make claims will not be
known until after this court case ends.

Studies by the Air Force and others have reported no correlation between
herbicide exposure and human illness or death. But 95 additional studies are
under way by various groups and governmental agencies.

500 Potential Witnesses

The list of potential witnesses numbers nearly 500 and includes such figures as
former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Gen. William C. Westmoreland, who
commanded American forces in Vietnam. They have given depositions, but will
probably not be called to testify in person. Millions of pages of company and
Government documents have been filed with the court, and legal fees by the time
the case is over are expected to reach $100 million.

''We welcome the opportunity to go to trial,'' said Garry Hamlin, a spokesman
for Dow. ''For the past six years, claims have been made without any foundation
in fact. This will be an opportunity to bring the facts to bear.''

David J. Dean of Carle Place, L.I., lead lawyer for the veterans, expressed
confidence that his side would prevail and derided defense claims that the
veterans had suffered no lasting health effects from exposure to the herbicide.

''Cancer is sort of lasting,'' he said. ''So is death.''

Judge Speeds Jury Selection

The other manufacturers who are defendants are the Monsanto Company of St.
Louis; the Diamond Shamrock Corporation of Dallas;, Uniroyal Inc. of Middlebury,
Conn.; the T. H. Agriculture and Nutrition Company of Kansas City, Mo.; the
Thompson Chemical Company of Newark, and Hercules Inc., of Wilmington, Del.

In a pretrial hearing Friday before 22 lawyers representing the parties, Chief
Judge Jack B. Weinstein swept aside last-minute appeals for delays and ordered
jury selection to begin tomorrow - a starting date he had selected as far back
as November.

Testifying to the complexity of the case, 372 potential jurors have been
required to fill out a 35-page questionnaire inquiring about their financial,
health and employment histories as well as their views on the Vietnam War and
big corporations. A 42-page questionnaire was recently used to help choose
jurors for the drug trial of John Z. DeLorean in Federal court in Los Angeles.

Lawyers reported some settlement discussions were under way through
intermediaries appointed by Judge Weinstein. But they described these contacts
as preliminary and routine and unlikely to affect the start of the trial.

First Witnesses Are Veterans

The judge, who has made a point of moving the case along quickly since taking it
over last October, has allotted one week for jury selection and scheduled the
start of opening arguments for May 14.

The first two witnesses, lawyers for the veterans have told the court, will be
two veterans. They are Danny Ford, a 35-year-old salesman from Temperance,
Mich., who blames Agent Orange for his soft-tissue sarcoma - a rare form of
cancer - and for rashes and other ailments; and Dan Jordan, a 37- year-old
contractor from Austin, Tex. His two sons, Michael and Chad, were born with
deformed hands and his wife, Donna, miscarried a deformed fetus in 1972.

Three other veterans and the daughter of one of them who was born with multiple
birth defects have also been scheduled as witnesses.

In one of the many unusual aspects of the case, the five veterans and four
family members have been designated representative plaintiffs. The veterans will
seek to persuade the jury that the herbicide actually caused damage to them; the
companies will try to prove that the cause remains uncertain.

Technical Arguments Expected

Each side has marshaled scientists to back up its position and the arguments are
expected to become highly esoteric and technical. Mr. Hamlin of Dow said the
jury would be presented with issues of such ''incredible complexity'' as the
''thresholds'' of injury- causing chemicals and the applicability of laboratory
animal data to human experience.

However, Mr. Dean, representing the veterans, contended that the issues would
not be appreciably more difficult than those of guilt or innocence that juries
must decide all the time. ''It is our obligation as lawyers to lay it all out
simply,'' he said.

Although verdicts in civil cases are often decided by a 10-to-2 vote by the
jury, Judge Weinstein has decided that unanimous votes will be required in this
case. If the jury finds that the herbicide caused injury to one or more of the
nine representative plaintiffs and that it was the fault of any of the
defendants, the judge is expected to ask the jury to recommend a damage award in
each case. The judge need not follow the recommendation.

Any award, however, will only apply to the particular plaintiff - not any other
members of the class, whose claims would still have to be tried or settled
individually.

Far-Reaching Questions

The consequence of the class action, however, is that the broader issues of
liability would not have to be retried in each case. By definition, all members
of the class will be bound by the victories or defeats in the Brooklyn trial.

Among the general issues to be decided are such far-reaching questions as
whether the dioxin in the herbicide could have caused serious health effects,
whether the companies knew of and concealed such danger from the Government and
how much the Government itself knew of any risk.

Internal documents made public as part of the court case have indicated that Dow
and other companies became aware by the mid-1960's of a dioxin danger in the
Agent Orange and took steps to keep the information confidential.

Dow and other defendants have contended that Government representatives knew as
much as companies about the dioxin in the herbicide. This position is crucial to
their defense that as Government contractors, they are shielded from liability.
Under a longstanding principle, known as the Feres doctrine, named for a
landmark United States Supreme Court decision, a serviceman may not sue the
Government for service-related injuries.

Legal Complexities Seen

However, the Government, over its objections, has been retained as a third-party
defendant in the case through a ruling by Judge Weinstein that while the
veterans may not sue the Government, no such prohibition extends to nonmilitary
wives and children.

The case has many legal complexities. For example, the military mixed together
the Agent Orange of different manufacturers that contained different traces of
dioxin, so there is no possible way of saying which company's product may have
caused any veteran's particular problem. Under normal product-liability
litigation, a claimant, to be successful, must identify the company and product
that caused the injury.

But here Judge Weinstein has decided to accept one of various legal theories
that shift the burden of proof in certain cases from the plaintiff to the
defendant. Because, it is reasoned, a defendant may be far better equipped than
a plaintiff to know whether a product may cause an injury, it may then become a
defendant's burden to prove that his product could not have been at fault.

The odyssey of the case goes back to a lawsuit filed in 1978 by Paul Reutershan,
a former helicopter crew chief in Vietnam in 1968 and 1969 who blamed his
subsequent liver cancer on flying through Agent Orange mists. Mr. Reutershan,
who founded a group called Vietnam Veterans Agent Orange Victims Inc., died
several months later and the suit was refiled as a class action by an
environmental lawyer from Patchogue, L.I., Victor John Yannacone Jr.

Trial Was Refashioned

Over the next four years the case was shepherded by Mr. Yannacone and shaped by
Judge George C. Pratt of Federal District Court in Uniondale, L.I., who ordered
a trial on general issues of liability and named a ''special master,'' Sol
Schreiber, to help sort out the intricacies of pretrial issues. Judge Pratt
withdrew from the case last October when he was named to an appeals court. The
action was taken over by Judge Weinstein, who refashioned it to try both general
issues of liability and specific causation in cases of several plaintiffs.

Mr. Yannacone left the case after clashes with colleagues managing the veterans'
case. He now maintains that the original thrust of the suit has been
''trivialized'' by focusing attention on the five veterans' cases rather than
broader issues of corporate behavior and liability.

''It's not the veterans' lawsuit any more, it's the attorneys' lawsuit,'' said
Frank McCarthy, president of the Agent Orange Victims group still loyal to Mr.
Yannacone.

''In Vietnam we didn't know who our enemy was from the allies. Here we know our
enemy. We don't know our allies.''

Demonstration at Chemical Plant


HARRISON, N.J., May 5 (AP) - About 50 friends and relatives of Vietnam veterans
marched today to a plant of the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, a manufacturer of
Agent Orange.

The two-hour demonstration was intended to draw attention to the start of the
trial on Monday, organizers said.  They planned to march again on Sunday.

The demonstrators also included residents of the Ironbound section of Newark,
where heavy concentrations of dioxin were found at the site of a former Diamond
Shamrock plant last summer.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAMBODIAN TELLS OF REBEL DEFENSE

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 718 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 4


A Cambodian rebel leader says a Vietnamese offensive against his troops has been
blunted and is unlikely to be resumed because of the imminent rainy season in
Indochina.

The 72-year-old politician, Son Sann, who heads the rebel coalition opposed to
the Vietnamese-backed Heng Samrin Government in Phnom Penh, asserted here
Thursday that his forces had turned back a major assault on his headquarters
camp at Ampil, near the Thai border. The anti-Vietnamese guerrillas have seven
such camps in Cambodia from which they make hit- and-run attacks on Mr. Heng
Samrin's superior forces.

Speaking in an interview in the basement cafeteria of a shabby hotel off
Cromwell Road, Mr. Son Sann denied reports that Ampil had been captured. He said
the Vietnamese push began April 15, with 105-, 122- and 130-millimeter artillery
fire and human-wave attacks that overran a forward position at Ampil Lake, three
miles away.

But a secondary defense line about two miles from Ampil has been held, he
asserted, despite continuing intense artillery and mortar barrages. On one day,
more than 1,000 rounds were reported fired.

In addition, the frail, courtly politician said, opposition forces under Col.
Prum Vith won a significant victory around the camp of Sokh Sann, farther south.


Strength of Guerrilla Forces

Mr. Son Sann is president of the Khmer People's National Liberation Front, a
pro-Western opposition group allied with the non-Communist party headed by
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former head of state, and with the pro-Peking Pol
Pot forces, which were removed from power by the Vietnamese in 1979. A Cabinet
minister under Prince Sihanouk, Mr. Son Sann is also the Prime Minister of the
coalition's government and heads its four-man military coordinating committee.

He asserted that his organization had 13,000 men under arms. The relatively
well-armed Pol Pot forces claim 35,000 to 40,000 fighting men, and Prince
Sihanouk's forces, which have not been seen in action recently, are thought to
number up to 5,000.

The three groups operate independently, waging their own campaigns under their
own commanders, but the coalition's international standing has been hurt by its
identification with the Pol Pot forces, who have been accused of mass murder in
their four years of rule.

Vietnam Suggests Talks

The Association of Southeast Asian Nations, a non-Communist alliance, has backed
the coalition, but the French Foreign Minister, Claude Cheysson, repudiated it
in March when, during a visit to Bangkok, he said it had not furthered the
search for peace. No Western country is known to have supplied Mr. Son Sann with
weapons.

In a foreign tour that month, the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach,
agreed in talks in Melbourne with his Australian counterpart, William G. Hayden,
to negotiations without conditions between the Asean countries and Hanoi. But
nothing more has been heard on the subject, and Mr. Son Sann expressed great
dubiousness.

''I don't believe it,'' he said, ''and I won't start believing it until the
Vietnamese start conforming their actions to their words.''

Now in the midst of a resumed European trip that he interrupted to return home
when the Vietnamese attacked, Mr. Son Sann met this week with the British
Foreign Secretary, Sir Geoffrey Howe. He was scheduled visits to Bonn and Paris,
seeking support in those capitals. But his main hope is pinned on the United
States and China.

The Goals of the Guerrillas

When President Reagan arrived in Peking late last month, the Cambodian rebel
leader issued a statement appealing for aid, particularly small-arms ammunition
and heavy infantry weapons, of which his troops are woefully short. He conceded
in the interview that ''every time we have a major fight with the Vietnamese, we
run out of ammunition.''

In his appeal, Mr. Son Sann said his forces wanted to restore ''independence,
sovereignty, neutrality and nonalignment to Cambodia.'' He added: ''Ample words
have been spoken. Clear-cut intentions have also been revealed. It is high time
to convert words and intentions into action.''

But he said in the interview that ''American public opinion is apparently not
ready to accept President Reagan's involvement of his Administration with us.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUNDAY, MAY 5, 1984;
 International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 641 words


El Salvador's election officials tried, for the runoff election today, to reduce
the confusion that plagued the last vote. They finished delivering ballots and
ballot boxes for the presidential election that will decide who determines the
Government's policies on resolving the guerrilla war and restructuring the
country's battered economic and social system. The election will also provide a
key test of the Reagan Administration's policy in Central America. (Page 1,
Column 4.)

Sudanese have fled to Ethiopia by the thousands to escape fighting between the
Sudanese Army and rebels in the southern Sudan, according to United Nations and
Ethiopian officials. The United Nations estimates that there could be as many as
70,000 refugees in western Ethiopia. Many are in a refugee camp. (1:5.)

Spain's ''Basque problem'' - the Basques' fight for greater autonomy - will not
go away. It seems to be apparent in Madrid and elsewhere that no other issue is
as important to resolve if the the country's democracy is to thrive. (1:3.)

An opera attributed to Donizetti has turned up in fragments found in London and
Paris. Although there are some gaps in the score, it should be possible to give
the work its world premiere some 140 years after it was written, according to a
music critic who found the bulk of it in London's Royal Opera House. The
three-act opera is called ''Elizabeth.'' (1:1.) National

As the caucuses in Texas began, an effort by Democratic leaders to bring about a
peace agreement among the party's Presidential candidates was disrupted by
renewed threats from the Rev. Jesse Jackson and Senator Gary Hart to provoke
floor fights at the Democratic National Convention. Hart campaign officials also
strongly denounced the plan by the party chairman, Charles T. Manatt, to bring
the candidates into a ''party unity task force.'' (1:6.)

Prospects of another big wheat crop this fall and the lower prices that will
result from it also raises the prospects of political problems for the Reagan
Administration in this election year. The crop's size also points to the failure
of the Government's efforts to induce farmers to harvest less wheat and bring
supply into better balance with demand. (1:1.)

An army of workers in New Orleans rushed to keep the scheduled opening of the
Louisiana World Exposition on time next Saturday. Four years in preparation at a
cost of nearly $360 million, it will be the country's second World's Fair in two
years. (22:1.)

Harry S. Truman's 100th birthday Tuesday is being observed in Independence, Mo.,
with a series of down- home celebrations, starting today with a big parade in
the square. The former President's home in Independence will be opened to the
public as a house museum. (28:1.) Metropolitan

7 makers of Agent Orange herbicide and the Government will go on trial tomorrow
in Federal Dstrict Court in Brooklyn after years of litigation started by a
28-year-old Vietnam veteran dying of liver cancer he attributed to the use of
the herbicide in the Vietnam War. The class-action suit covers all veterans who
served in Vietnam between 1961 and 1972 who claim they were injured by the
herbicide and who have not informed the court that they wish to be excluded. The
claims that may amount to billions of dollars. (1:2.)

A bachelor's degree will suffice for teachers hired by the New York City Board
of Education for the fall term. Because of the teacher shortage, the board has
eased requirements for new teachers. Beginning with the fall term, college
graduates will be able to earn temporary teacher certification without having
having the previously required six credits in education. But new teachers will
still have to earn the six credits and will be allowed to do so during their
first year on the job. (48:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TEXAS: STATE OF QUESTION MARKS AND CONTRADICTIONS

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1370 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex., May 5


Two years ago, when two political scientists, Neal R. Peirce and Jerry Hagstrom,
were putting the finishing touches on ''The Book of America,'' a state-by-state
profile of the nation and its people, they titled the 50 pages on Texas ''The
Perpetual Boom State.''

But before the book went to press, the overheated oil prices that had turned the
Texas economy white-hot suddenly cooled, and ''recession-proof'' Texas found
itself in its worse economic slump since the Great Depression.

Things were not as bad as they were in the industrial North. Booming Dallas, for
example, never came near double-digit unemployment. But for perennially upbeat
Texas, a recession was the unthinkable.

But a recession it was, and even glittering Houston, the Golden Buckle on the
Sun Belt, reached an unemployment rate of 10 percent.

A Slight Change in Title


The authors of the book on America revised the Texas chapter on the basis of the
new realities, but they kept the title. Now there was a significant difference:
They added a question mark. The title became ''Texas: The Perpetual Boom
State?''

So it is with Texas: Just when things seem certain, a question mark emerges.

But one thing remains constant, and that is that Texas is a superstate.

It is the nation's third largest state in terms of people and the second largest
in land area, exceeded only by distant Alaska, a state that, despite its
vastness, has only about half as many people as San Antonio, Texas's
third-largest city.

Even though the heady, oil-fueled growth of the 1970's and the first two years
of the 1980's has slowed dramatically, a study just published at the University
of Texas by the Bureau of Business Research predicts that by the year 2007 the
state's 15.2 million people will grow to 22.1 million, and that Texas will
supplant New York as the second most populous state, behind California.

3 of Nation's Largest Cities


Already, three of the country's 10 largest cities, Houston, Dallas and San
Antonio, are in Texas, and 17 Texas cities have populations of more than
100,000. Two of them, Abilene and Odessa, joined the list from 1980 to 1982.

Even so, the rate of growth is declining at the same time that the state's
economy and its people are becoming more diverse. By 2007, the researchers
predict, the state will be much like the rest of the country, its economy more
dependent on manufacturing and less on oil and agriculture, its population more
cosmopolitan.

Meanwhile, the state's very size and diversity make it bewilderingly complex and
generalities difficult.  It is not a matter of mystery. Texas is not so much an
enigma as a bundle of contradictions.

It is a state of almost mythical wealth, symbolized by the super-rich like H.
Ross Perot, who chartered a plane to cater Christmas dinner to the troops in
Vietnam, or the Hunt Brothers, Nelson and Bunker, who tried to corner the world
market in silver, or Cullen Davis, who declared a million dollars' worth of
ancient Chinese icons to be ''graven images'' and smashed them with a hammer in
the driveway of his Fort Worth mansion.

Poverty Amid the Wealth


But set against these there is poverty of the worst kind. In Starr County, in
the heart of the perennially depressed Rio Grande Valley, half the residents
have incomes below the poverty line, and the county vies with Tunica County in
Mississippi as the poorest in the nation.

Such disparities are also apparent in unemployment figures from around the
state. While booming Austin boasted a figure of just 3 percent, lowest in the
nation, Laredo to the south posted the highest, 22 percent.

That such disparities in wealth should exist virtually cheek-by-jowl in the
state causes no dismay among Texans, most of whom would maintain that one
creates his own economic destiny.

Indeed, it could be argued that no state makes so much of the market economy;
free enterprise is almost a religion here. At the University of Texas, the
Institute of Creative Capitalism, a kind of entrepreneurial research
organization, devotes itself not only to spreading the gospel of free enterprise
but also to making it better.

Being Rich and Liking It


Unlike some of their Eastern counterparts, who regard great wealth as something
of an embarrassment, unless ameliorated by exculpatory philanthropy, Texans
appear in general to believe the rich are rich because they work hard and
deserve it.

They thus see no conflict between big tax breaks for the wealthy through the oil
depletion allowance and a state welfare system that allows $34 a week for a
family of four.

Robert S. Strauss, former national chairman of the Democratic Party, and
well-to-do by Texas standards, likes to say, ''I'm a man who's rich and acts
like he's rich and who's gonna act more like it if he can.''

Nor are Texans particularly prone to share their wealth. Nowhere is that more
obvious than in the state's system of public education, which Texans themselves,
personified by H. Ross Perot, who heads a commission working to improve it,
concede is sadly inadequate for a state so large, so wealthy and so important
nationally and internationally.

Disparities in Education


One of the problems is a system of small, independent school districts that vary
widely in what they spend on education. Wealthy districts, like that serving an
affluent section of Dallas, spend twice as much on education per child as poorer
districts like those in the Rio Grande Valley. There educational problems are
compounded by an influx of illegal alien children, many of whom speak little or
no English.

From 1973 until 1982, when the United States Supreme Court overturned it, Texas
alone among the states had a law against educating noncitizens in its public
schools.

Today, as a result of the Court ruling, every child living in Texas, citizen or
not, is entitled to free public education. Perhaps more significantly, a
proposal to equalize exenditures for education statewide is being advanced, with
wide backing among the state's teachers.

Politically, Texas is evolving from decades of dominance by the Tory Democrats,
who, although not necessarily always devoutly conservative, tended to serve the
interests of commerce and the oil industry.

Texas thus remains the largest and most industrialized state to have a law
prohibiting contracts that require union membership as a condition of
employment. With no state income tax, its taxes are low, government regulation
is minimal and accommodation of minorities often seems grudging.

In 1980 the state's per-capita government expenditures for all purposes ranked
44th among the 50 states, and it ranked 31st in spending for education.

But the state's politics and priorities appear to be changing.

The State Land Commissioner, Gary Mauro, one of a coterie of young, essentially
liberal officeholders in key state government positions, has undertaken a
sweeping review of agreements with once sacrosanct oil companies with wells on
state lands.

The result has been settlements in the millions of dollars in back royalties.

Gov. Mark White, who campaigned on a theme of returning state government ''to
the people,'' has called for a special session of the Legislature to increase
school expenditures.

Hispanic Influence Being Felt


The state's Hispanic residents are also making their political influence felt.
They make up 21 percent of the state's population, but the Southwest Voter
Registration Project says that when noncitizens are eliminated, the figure drops
to a little over 15 percent.

Former Gov. William Clement, the first Republican to hold that office in 105
years, was elected in 1978 despite what was at best a cavalier attitude toward
Hispanic voters.

Asked in his campaign what he intended to do to improve the lot of Hispanic
people, Mr. Clement shot back, ''I'm not running for Governor of Mexico.''

In 1982, Mr. Clement was swept out of office in an upset in which Hispanic
voters, who overwhelmingly backed his opponent, Mr. White, were considered the
decisive factor.

Since then, an agressive voter registration campaign has added some 40,000
Hispanic people to the rolls.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: chart of the people in Texas

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PROPOSAL TOUCHES OFF BATTLE OVER KOREAN WAR MONUMENT

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 66, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 524 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 5


More than 30 years after the Korean War ended, a Federal commission has
suggested that the Government, instead of a private group, build a monument here
to honor veterans of the war.

The American Battle Monuments Commission's recommendation to Congress has
angered a private organization that was formed in 1981 and has already raised
more than $400,000 for the project.

Michael Panayotopoulos, who said he was a paid consultant to the private group,
the National Committee for the Korean War Memorial, said recently he considered
the Federal panel's plans ''an affront, to say the least.''

''It's a sort of interference,'' he said. ''They know of our existence and our
plans to build it by public subscription.''

2 Bills in Congress


Mr. Panayotopoulos noted that two bills now pending in Congress called for the
Federal Government to donate land for a privately built Korean War memorial. One
bill, proposed by Senator Rudy Boschwitz, Republican of Minnesota, has 66
sponsors; the other, offered by Representative Charlie Rose, Democrat of North
Carolina, has 164 sponsors.

But Col. Frederick Badger, the commission's engineer, said the panel's staff
believed it would be best if the Government built the memorial to keep it from
becoming mired in any conflicts between competing parties.

Larry Wright, a commission member, agreed.

''This is for people who gave their lives and it should not be the subject of
controversy,'' Mr. Wright said, addeding that the commission's staff had done an
excellent job building and maintaining other monuments, particularly at
cemeteries abroad.

$2.5 Million Request Expected


The commission, which notified Congress of its intention earlier this year, will
probably ask for about $2.5 million in design funds for the fiscal year 1986,
Colonel Badger said.

The battle monuments commission, with about 250 employees, is charged with
overseeing memorials commemorating Americans who have served their country since
1917.

American veterans of the Korean War, who number as many as five million, are the
only veterans of a major war this century without a memorial to commemorate
their service, the commission said.

More than 54,000 Americans died in the war, which ended in July 1953 in an
armistice between the United Nations command and North Korea.

The most recently completed veterans' monument in Washington was the Vietnam
Veterans Memorial, a V-shaped slab of black granite near the Lincoln Memorial
that was built with $7 million in private funds on Government-owned land.

Goal of Private Group


The private National Committee for the Korean War Memorial has a goal of raising
$6.5 million and building the memorial three years after passage of enabling
legislation in Congress, Mr. Panayotopoulos said.

Congressional staff members said hearings must be held on the bills before they
were considered by the Appropriate Committees.

Mr. Panayotopoulos acknowledged that there had been a dispute within the private
committee and that one of the co-founders had been voted off the board. But he
said the situation had been cleared up.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

UNLIKELY WASHINGTON-PEKING ALIGNMENT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 461 words


To the Editor:


As Winston Lord correctly emphasizes in his April 25 Op-Ed article, ''A Taste
for Sweet and Sour,'' the establishment of Sino-American political strands is a
sine qua non to the maintenance of any significant long-term relationship with
China. Unfortunately, because of a lack of commonality, this is much easier
postulated than accomplished.

Even though Chinese history is replete with examples of political pragmatism for
economic gain, it would be tantamount to rank apostasy for China's present
leader, Deng Xiaoping, to look sympathetically on United States attempts to
decimate what are essentially peasant-backed insurgency movements in backward
areas such as El Salvador or to look with understanding on U.S. attempts to
overthrow left-wing governments such as that of Nicaragua.

Such an attitude would not only provide Maoists occupying important positions in
the Chinese military and civilian bureaucracy with a rallying cry of sellout,
something Deng would not wish to risk; it would amount to a clear surrender of
the ideological torch to the Soviet Union.

Barring a state of absolute national emergency, old-time Chinese leaders like
Deng are poor prospects for any meaningful political alignment with an avowedly
capitalist state. They recall Chiang Kai-shek's volte-face in 1927 and the
destruction of Communist-backed labor unions in Shanghai, the loss of many
thousands of comrades during the course of the 1934-35 Long March and the debt
owed to the memory of the long-repressed and much-beleaguered Chinese peasants
who became the bedrock of the Chinese Communist movement.

However, we in the West can only hazard a guess as to the true nature of the
ideological relationship that now exists between the Chinese and Soviet
leaderships.  When Mao purged Liu Shao-ch'i and his protege, Deng Xiaoping, in
the mid-60's, there was reason to suspect that this was predicated on Mao's
belief that Liu was attempting to maneuver China back into the Soviet orbit.
Even if Deng should adhere to Mao's earlier policy of keeping the Soviets at
arm's length, for Mr. Lord to say that ''the Chinese know that danger comes from
the North and not from us'' is to ignore the vicissitudes of our own recent East
Asian policies, policies that in the past several years have come full circle.
From justifying our earlier military involvement in Vietnam as a means of
stopping Chinese expansion southward (with all the dangers that implied to the
sanctity of Chinese frontiers), we now move to team up with China to deter
Soviet expansion. Who can predict what tomorrow will bring?  While the Chinese
love to gamble, they do have a sense of history when it comes to hedging bets.

JOHN W. DIXON Simsbury, Conn., April 27, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
REAGAN AFTER CHINA

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 5


During his journey to China, President Reagan spoke in hopeful terms about
America's future relations not only with China but also with all of Asia.

But he was careful to note that political and cultural differences would remain
for a long time and that it was essential to increase the traffic of people and
ideas between the two regions in the coming years.

This raises the question of whether we are doing enough to educate the rising
generation of Americans in the varied languages and cultures of Asia in order to
deal with the problems and opportunities that lie ahead in the rest of the
century and into the next.

For example, the Japanese Minister of Trade was in Washington recently and was
being badgered by a few reporters about the barriers Japan was putting in the
way of U.S. exports to his country. ''Yes,'' he said, ''but maybe one of the
main barriers is that while our people are learning your language, not so many
of your people are trying to learn ours.''

The latest available figures indicate that there are about 13,500 Japanese
enrolled in U.S. colleges and universities and only about 240 Americans enrolled
in U.S. college-sponsored programs in Japan.

According to the State Department, between 200 and 300 Americans are now
studying in China, while over 10,000 students from the People's Republic are
studying in the United States. There are 7 college-sponsored U.S. programs in
Taiwan with about 50 students, and over 16,000 Taiwanese enrolled here.

You have to be a little wary about statistics in this field, for they are
recorded in different ways in Washington and Peking and sometimes not recorded
at all. But at least they suggest a conclusion: that the preparation for the
future here is less impressive than the promises of political speeches.

Washington has paid much attention in recent years to our ''missile gaps,'' real
and imagined, and also to our alarming ''trade gaps'' with the rest of the
world, but not much to our ''culture gap.''

Yet one of the reasons for our failures in Vietnam, in Lebanon and in Iran was
that we paid so little attention to the history and religious conflicts in
Southeast Asia and the Middle East.

Have we learned this lesson? In some ways. The Foreign Service language
requirements are a little stiffer than they used to be, but even many
ambassadors in the turbulent nations of Asia, the Middle East and Africa cannot
speak the language of the nation they are supposed to be speaking to.  More
important, there is little evidence that we are preparing for this new awakening
in China and the Asian countries, or even for the new commercial computer and
industrial robot competition with Japan.  In the hardware of high tech we'll
probably do all right, but in the software of language, America is in some ways
an underdeveloped country.  Benjamin I. Schwartz, acting director of the
Fairbank Center for East Asian Research at Harvard University, thinks there is a
kind of ''cultural complacency'' or even ''intellectual isolationism'' in
America today, especially in regard to the mastery of foreign languages.  Many
students seem to think of learning another language, particularly the Asian
languages, not as a tool to an exciting career on a new frontier but as a
tedious intellectual exercise. So, he observes, they tend to go into law or
business, as if the command of a foreign language in a world of multinational
corporations wouldn't help wherever they went.  Maybe the main reason is that
most of them don't want to go to live elsewhere. Their folks came from somewhere
else and they don't want to reverse the process. But there are other reasons.
It takes a long, hard time to learn Mandarin Chinese. But it also takes as much
money as perseverence, and lately the money has been running short from the
foundations and from the Government because of the Reagan cutbacks.  So we're
running short of young men and women and Foreign Service officers and young
business executives who see the nations around the rim of the Pacific Ocean as
the place to go before their children go to outer space.  But not quite. There
are still a lot of adventurous young people in this country who would go
anywhere and learn anything if they had a chance and a little money, and a
vision of the Pacific world.  President Reagan addressed 700 Chinese students at
Fudan University in Shanghai the other day, and he was at his optimistic best.
''My young friends,'' he said, ''history is a river that may take us as it will.
But we have the power to navigate, to choose direction and make our passage
together. The wind is up, the current is swift and the opportunity for a long
and fruitful journey awaits us.'' It was the best paragraph of a successful
trip, but after you come down from the summit, what do you have - a policy for
the future and the young or just a photo opportunity for the Presidential
campaign?


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1350 words


The Spirit Is Mean



''There is not a more mean, stupid, dastardly, pitiful, selfish, spiteful,
envious, ungrateful animal than the Public,'' wrote essayist William Hazlitt in
1821, castigating a group that is rarely reviled. With prescience (considering
the brouhaha about exit-polling that burst forth over a century later) he added:
''It is the greatest of cowards, for it is afraid of itself.''

If Hazlitt had been writing today, he would have used one adjective that now
does the work of those eight: mean-spirited. The rise of this word - paralleling
either an increase of mean-spiritedness or an escalation of the attack on
mean-spiritedness - is a perfect example of the way an old and occasionally-
used term, straggling along behind the march of language, can be rejuvenated and
rushed to the vanguard when the moment arrives for its special meaning. Only a
word can fill a void.

This parasynthetic compound had a religious upbringing: ''Away with that
mean-spirited religion,'' adjured Francis Bragge in 1694, discoursing on the
parables. Five years later, Matthew Henry used the word in his ''Meekness of
Spirit'': ''Meekness is commonly despised as a piece of cowardice and
mean-spiritedness.'' The word was then competing with mean-souled; both meant a
lack of generosity, compassion, charity, or love.

Mean, the adjective, signified ''common, vulgar,'' not far from ''middle'' (a
meaning that is preserved in its noun form in mathematics), with a connotation
of ''narrow, stingy, sickly, stunted.'' Later, mean came to denote ''cruel,''
and people were accused of being ''old meanies'' (in today's slang, mean
conjures ''expert,'' as in ''He throws a mean curveball''). But mean-spirited
retained the ''stingy, narrow'' definition of mean, indicating a smallness of
soul. (This paragraph has been written without using mean as a verb, which would
have led to ''mean means,'' a cause of confusion.)

Then, for a couple of centuries, mean-spirited lay low. Few found it useful:
Poet James Russell Lowell decried ''what is essentially vulgar and meanspirited
in politics,'' dropping the hyphen, which led a lexicographer working on
Merriam-Webster's Third New International Dictionary into listing the word
without the hyphen. (Today, Fred Mish, editorial director of Merriam-Webster,
admits that the preponderance of his citations uses the hyphen, and he promises
to reinsert the hyphen in future printings. You have to watch these guys all the
time.)

For generations, people got along with ignoble, abject and sordid, but ignoble
became bookish, abject became too closely associated with poverty, and sordid
slid over to moral corruption. The linguistic gap opened and quickly widened.
How were we to characterize those who did not have a greatness of spirit -
indeed, who showed a marked lack of compassion in their outlook?

In the mid-1970's, mean- spirited began to take off. Daniel P. Moynihan, then
the outgoing Ambassador to India and always a writer sensitive to words popular
in academies before they become outright vogue terms, wrote in U.S. News & World
Report in 1975 to condemn the United States Congress for ''so many mean-spirited
and inane restrictions in its aid legislation.'' Newsweek that year glommed onto
the word, first quoting Senator Edmund Muskie calling on President Ford ''to put
a stop to such mean-spirited demagoguery'' and then quoting a diplomat in
Vietnam as saying he believed that the Vietcong had become ''too mean-spirited
to ease Saigon's discomfort.''

By the 1980's, the adjective was in full flight, as my computer count shows.
Americans like mean-spiritedness as the new noun; the British prefer meanness of
spirit. The Times of London recently zapped Prime Minister Thatcher for ''the
meanness of spirit displayed to Caribbean leaders and the American
administration over Grenada.''

The mystery is: How come we cannot find the word in any of our best-selling
dictionaries? Webster's New World, the Merriam-Webster Ninth Collegiate,
American Heritage, Random House - zilch. (At least they all have zilch.) Do you
suppose theyre all waiting for the others to go first? (In truth, each wants to
be first out with a new word that is not merely a nonce word; to suggest
otherwise illustrates mean-spiritedness.)

''The term really doesn't have an exact synonym,'' says Dr. Mish, pointing to
two sets of words that come close: small-minded and narrow- minded in one group
and ungenerous, petty, picayune in the other. In his personal judgment, and not
committing the organization yet, he thinks the precise antonym is magnanimous.

Now we have it: The rise of mean-spirited is bottomed on the lack of another
word for ''not magnanimous.'' That's how the language fills in its holes. A word
of caution: If you mean lowly, ill-tempered, corrupt, dastardly, spiteful, or
any of Hazlitt's choices, use those words and give mean-spirited a rest.


Sleaze vs. Teflon

In a recent piece, the sleaze factor, a charge against the Reagan
Administration, was pitted against the Teflon factor, an inability of Democrats
to make sleaze stick to Mr. Reagan personally.

Sleaze-slingers will be pleased to learn that the phrase was probably coined by
Laurence Barrett of Time magazine, as a chapter title in his 1983 book,
''Gambling With History.'' Although it is more difficult to get the originator
of the Teflon factor to stick to the pan, it was Representative Patricia
Schroeder (Democrat of Colorado) who first referred to ''the Teflon- coated
Presidency.'' Under the influence of the sleaze factor, some factotum changed
that to the Teflon factor. (Teflon, a trade name, is capitalized; sleaze, a
back- formation, is not.)


Today's Especial

Some of my special correspondents get especially incensed at the way some
voguish copywriters, especially for specialty stores, are substituting specially
for especially.

''Very specially priced'' is the way Gucci speaks of merchandise on sale. ''At a
specially selected theater near you!'' advertises a moviemaker. ''Specially
sweetened,'' says Manischewitz Wines of its Concord grape blend. Which of these
is correct?

Especially is an adverb that means ''markedly, outstandingly, emphatically,
unusually.'' To be especially incensed is to be moved to write a language maven.

Specially is not the same. That adverb means ''for a special purpose.'' I have
been specially trained to detect obfuscation in political speeches; my readers
are specially prepared to find mistakes in my work. (They are especially happy
to do so - unsuitably gleeful, in fact - but the especially before ''happy''
means ''to a marked degree,'' while the specially before ''prepared'' means
''for the particular purpose of finding grammatical nits to pick.'')

Therefore, when Gucci's salesman heaves a loafer at me with his ''very specially
priced,'' I may duck with a smirk at his unwillingness to use a word so crass as
sale, but I understand that he means that his merchandise is priced for the
purpose of quick sale. In that case, specially is correct; especially priced
would be festooned with price tags.

Same with the Concord grape wine: It is specially sweetened, because the
manufacturer wants to sweeten it for the purpose of appealing to palates that
pucker at the thought of dry wine. As a result, the wine is especially sweet -
that is, sweeter than the roses in May - and I have put an e at the beginning of
the adverb because I have changed the meaning from ''for a particular purpose''
to ''to a large degree.''

What about ''a specially selected theater''? If the advertiser is saying, ''I
have selected this theater because it has a reputation for showing this kind of
avant-garde stuff,'' specially is correct; if he wanted to say, ''Boy, was this
theater selected!'' he would choose especially selected.

Got it? If so, you're a very special person, especially these days.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: cartoon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Novels

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 4; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 351 words


To the Editor:

I was most appreciative of Michiko Kakutani's essay, ''Novelists and Vietnam:
The War Goes On'' (April 15). In it she wrote, ''A large novel that embraces the
entire scene, that deals with the military and political complexities of the
war, its consequences in public and private lives, as well as its reverberations
at home - that novel has yet to be written.'' I would like to question whether
such a ''large novel'' is in fact possible.

Tolstoy's writing about the Napoleonic invasion is, unfortunately or
fortunately, unrelated to any writing about the totality of Vietnam. Historicity
aside, the basic reason for this is, I believe, the many conflicting aspects,
the most basic being the utter lack of any point of view from which to consider
the Vietnam conflict. There was no national consensus as to the necessity of our
participation in the war, which makes a major difference in any literary
treatment of it. There were few similar doubts about the necessity of defeating
Napoleon. In the United States during Vietnam, we had fierce partisans of both
sides. Also, the results of the war (noted mainly in the huge migration from
Vietnam to the United States and the genocide practiced by the new government)
have yet to be assessed.

I do not think that Philip Caputo, or anyone, can state with accuracy that no
experience since the Civil War has affected the life of the nation as the
Vietnam experience did. Nor will that experience ever, I believe, be treatable
as a historical epic, for the simple reason that it was part of an ongoing
international struggle. No one will ever be able to write about Vietnam as
though it was World War I. While ''democratic revolutions'' occur in many
countries, and may seem in each case to be dissimilar, they share elements
common to all that no honest writer could ignore.

No epic has been written about the Cuban Revolution, even by a Cuban
participant. And certainly no epic about Vietnam seems even likely, until we
have a national consensus as to what the term ''People's Republic'' actually
means.  FLORA SADDYQueens


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS May 6, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1352 words


Fiction

19

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  2

24

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  3

48

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  4

35

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) Life on a faraway planet.
5

56

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  6

927

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  7

66

ONE MORE SUNDAY, by John D. MacDonald.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Behind the scenes with
a charismatic television preacher.  8

79

LORD OF THE DANCE, by Andrew M. Greeley.  (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) A
teen-ager probes the mysteries of life and death.  8

813

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  10

1013

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  11

1136

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  12

2

FLOODGATE, by Alistair MacLean. (Doubleday, $15.95.) Terrorists threaten to
flood the Netherlands unless Britain leaves Northern Ireland.  12

1246

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco.  (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Murder in an Italian monastery.  14

152

WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W.  Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What follows
the first nuclear war in 1988.  15

10

NIGHT SKY, by Clare Francis. (Morrow, $16.95.) Three intertwined lives in
occupied France during World War II.  15

6

UNTO THIS HOUR, by Tom Wicker. (Viking, $19.95.) Three days in August, 1862,
when a battle was fought at Manassas, Va.  15

1436

WHO KILLED THE ROBINS FAMILY?  created by Bill Adler and written by Thomas
Chastain.  (Morrow, $9.95.) A prize for the best answer.




Nonfiction1

133

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2

38

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  3

212

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.  4

49

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  5

527

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO! by Robert H. Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a California preacher.  6

812

TOUGH-MINDED FAITH FOR TENDERHEARTED PEOPLE, by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $14.95.) More inspiration from a California preacher.  7

1

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  8

66

MAFIA PRINCESS, by Antoinette Giancana and Thomas C. Renner. (Morrow, $15.95.)
Growing up in the family of the mobster Sam Giancana.  9

711

LINES AND SHADOWS, by Joseph Wambaugh.  (Perigord/Morrow, $15.95.) Adventures of
the San Diego police force along the Mexican border.  10

92

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' TV series.  11

1018

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin.  (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  12

1

CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Secretary of State gives his views on foreign policy.  13

114

FURTHER UP THE ORGANIZATION, by Robert Townsend. (Knopf, $15.95.) Business
strategies for the 1980's.  14

152

KNOCK WOOD, by Candice Bergen. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the actress.  14

1236

ON WINGS OF EAGLES, by Ken Follett. (Morrow, $17.95.) The rescue of two
Americans from Iran.  14

1413

PEOPLE OF THE LIE, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
psychiatrist's prescription for ''healing human evil.''

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE BLOOD OF HIS SERVANTS, by Malcolm C. MacPherson.

(Times Books, $16.95.) The tense, true drama of the obsessive

pursuit by a Jew of the man responsible for the deaths of the Jews

in his Polish village in 1941.

DEMOCRACY , by Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster, $13.95.) A

haunting, cinematic novel about a double murder in Honolulu, the

Presidential ambitions of a man named Harry Victor and the 20-

year love affair of his wife with a C.I.A. type.

FANNY WRIGHT: Rebel in America , by Celia Morris Eckhardt.

(Harvard University Press, $22.50.) A biography of the Scottish-

born, 19th-century crusader in America in behalf of women, slaves

and the poor. A heroine to John Stuart Mill and Thomas Jefferson.

PETER HALL'S DIARIES: The Story of a Dramatic Battle.

(Harper & Row, $25.) The director chosen to succeed Laurence

Olivier as head of Britain's National Theater tells vividly of the

intrigue, betrayal and hatred surrounding his appointment.

SEX AND DESTINY: The Politics of Human Fertility, by Germaine

Greer. (Harper & Row, $19.95.) Extolling the virtues of the

extended family, the feminist author asks: Who are we to impose

our views of sex and family size on all the world?

SLOW LEARNER: Early Stories, by Thomas Pynchon. (Little,

Brown, $14.95.) A writer who has been hiding away for years

paints himself back into the public view with this extremely good

collection of five early works.

THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING, by Milan Kundera.

(Harper & Row, $15.95.) A story about two couples in the

Czechoslovakia of 1968 through which the novelist finds images for

the disastrous history of his country in his lifetime.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

16

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

273

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  3

312

THE JAMES COCO DIET, by James Coco and Marion Paone. (Bantam, $13.95.) A regimen
based on nutritional education, menu planning and behavior modification.  4

4

3

THE LIFE EXTENSION COMPANION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $17.50.)
Advice about improving your health and lengthening your life.  4

5

7

PUTTING THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER TO

WORK, by Kenneth Blanchard and Robert Lorber.  (Morrow, $15.) Increasing your
productivity and that of those with whom you work.  The listings above are based
on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 7, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VOTING FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By Warren M. Christopher ;
Warren M. Christopher, a lawyer, was President Jimmy Carter's Under Secretary of
State. This article is adapted from a recent address in Boston.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 787 words


In 1960, the new Republican Presidential nominee, Richard M. Nixon, assembled 36
party elders at a midnight meeting at the Blackstone Hotel in Chicago to help
him choose his running mate. The Governor of Illinois, William G. Stratton,
offered this advice to the nominee: ''You can say all you want about foreign
affairs, but what is really important is the price of hogs in Chicago.''

But Mr. Nixon chose to run with Henry Cabot Lodge, who had just completed eight
highly visible years at the United Nations. Mr. Nixon explained: ''If you ever
let the Democrats campaign only on domestic issues, they will beat us. Our only
hope is to keep it on foreign policy.''

Back then, the Republicans would run under the banner of keeping us out of war
and would try to shift the debate away from domestic policy, where Democrats
enjoyed a better reputation. The conventional wisdom these days is different. It
holds that foreign policy, while interesting, is not a decisive factor in
Presidential elections. The theory is that Americans are single-mindedly
concerned about their pocketbooks.

History casts doubt on this. In elections since 1944, foreign policy issues have
almost always played a prominent role, and many times a decisive one. In 1944, a
major war, the ultimate foreign policy act, was still under way. The argument
for Franklin D. Roosevelt was that we should not change leaders in midstream.
Four years later, the Republican chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee, Arthur H. Vandenberg, told us, ''Politics stops at the waters'
edge.'' That spirit undoubtedly helped Harry S. Truman.

In 1952, Dwight D. Eisenhower won as a war hero and also as a peacemaker who
pledged to ''go to Korea'' to end the war. In 1956, his overwhelming electoral
strength was probably enhanced by the crises in Hungary and the Suez that same
year. In 1960, economic, generational and personality issues overshadowed
everything else - but Quemoy and Matsu and the missile gap still received
prominent mention in the contest between John F. Kennedy and Mr. Nixon.  In
1964, Lyndon B. Johnson's supporters sought to portray Senator Barry M.
Goldwater as reckless, and a controversial television commercial implied that he
might launch a nuclear war. In 1968, Vice President Hubert H. Humphrey could not
distance himself from President Johnson on Vietnam, and his opponent, Mr. Nixon,
helped his own cause by suggesting he had a plan to end that unpopular war.
George McGovern's 1972 campaign was about Vietnam but probably was not decided
on that issue. Foreign policy successes in China and Moscow enhanced Mr. Nixon's
image of competence. The campaign of 1976 gave us the Poland gaffe in the
Carter-Ford debate.  For obvious reasons, 1980 is a bit more delicate for me to
discuss. Almost certainly national frustration over the hostage crisis
translated into impatience with Jimmy Carter. It is an odd circumstance, but
probably a true one, that in the fall the beginning of some hope in the
negotiations revived the issue and thus hurt President Carter's prospects.

In 1984, foreign policy issues will play a prominent role once again. But the
relevant question is whether our two parties will in fact address these issues.
Are we destined to endure a dialogue of distraction, aimed at the lowest common
denominator and the highest common vulgarity? Will we have to suffer a campaign
testing only who can be the most anti-Soviet or pro-Poland, or anti-Cuba, or
pro- Taiwan? Are we sentenced to a campaign that will assault our senses, pander
to our prejudices, insult our intelligence and exploit our fears?

Or is it possible that for once we can have a campaign in which the candidates
respect the electorate enough to address the real issues? There are plenty of
these: profound issues such as whether we will accept the risks of an arms
control agreement that is less than perfect but will make us safer; intricate
issues as to whether we can see a small country evolve out of a friendly
militarism into a risky but benign neutrality, without intervening and driving
the country into the arms of our adversaries.

There are unglamorous but unavoidable issues, such as whether we are prepared to
assist developing countries through credible and stable programs of aid. And
there are practical issues, such as finding a way to establish a compact of
mutual accommodation and trust to replace the open warfare and recriminations
between the executive and Congress on foreign affairs.  A mature nation must
address such issues; a wise people should demand it. Candidates who are
authentic leaders would not shirk this obligation. This year, why can't America
be enlightened by such a debate?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 7, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING FINDS THE AIRWAVES FILLED WITH UNKIND REMARKS

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 684 words

DATELINE: PEKING, May 6


When President Reagan arrived in China late last month, a radio station
broadcasting in Chinese likened Mr. Reagan's visit to ''the weasel going to pay
his respects to the hen,'' an old Chinese proverb for treachery.

Its broadcast the next day, taking note of Mr. Reagan's smile, warned that ''a
smiling tiger is the most treacherous.''

A broadcast on the third day lamented that the Chinese leaders failed to
understand the danger of receiving an anti-Communist like Mr. Reagan. The radio
likened Mr. Reagan to Hitler.

All the broadcasts came from a station calling itself ''August First Radio,''
after the date the People's Liberation Army was founded in China, and purporting
to speak for disgruntled elements of the Chinese armed forces.

In fact, its broadcasts have been traced to the Soviet Union and are part of an
effort to undermine the policies of China's leader, Deng Xiaoping.

First Heard 5 Years Ago

A monitoring service of the British Broadcasting Corporation discovered in
October 1982 that when the August First radio failed to appear one day, its
frequency carried Moscow radio's domestic programming, ''Mayak.'' The station,
first heard five years ago, is one of many clandestine radio stations around
China's borders.

Another station calling itself ''The Voice of Democratic Kampuchea'' has
reported the successes of Peking- backed guerrillas fighting the Vietnamese in
Cambodia. The station is believed to be based in southern China.

Since last year, other clandestine radio stations pretending to represent
China's armed forces have gone on the air with criticisms of Peking. They use
such names as ''Radio Spark,'' ''Radio October Storm,'' ''The Voice of the
P.L.A.'' and ''The Contingent of Proletarian Fighters.''

Some references to Nationalist ideology led to speculation that they come from
Taiwan, but their signal has prompted theories that they are based in Vietnam.

A Western diplomat said the August First broadcasts were not aimed at ordinary
Chinese so much as at soldiers along the northern border. He said the soldiers -
young, poorly educated and sometimes homesick - were considered ripe targets for
such propaganda.

The August First radio and its companion stations try to sound patriotic,
staunchly Communist, anti-Western and sympathetic to army gripes. They charge
that Peking insulted the armed forces by giving the military last priority in
the four modernizations, after industry, agriculture and science.

Press Anti-Deng Campaign

The broadcasts also articulate the resentments of hard-liners who have had to
yield to Mr. Deng's policies. They have accused him of creating a personality
cult and letting degenerate Western values into China. The broadcasts have also
attacked the party consolidation drive to weed out leftists and criminals from
the rank-and-file.  The sharpest diatribes have been directed against China's
relations with the United States. The clandestine broadcasts have played up the
size of continuing United States military sales to Taiwan and said the promise
of United States technology was meant only to ''bribe and blackmail'' China.

The worst vilification in recent months was voiced by the August First radio
against Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger, whose trip to Peking last
September opened the way for the subsequent exchange of visits by Prime Minister
Zhao Ziyang and President Reagan.

A month later, the August First radio said that Mr. Weinberger and his
delegation had said ''these yellow-skinned dogs of China are all odius and
impolite.'' The radio also accused the Americans of making obscene remarks about
Chinese women.

Not surprisingly, the August First radio also stresses the need for closer
relations with the Soviet Union.

The Chinese press has publicly ignored the clandestine broadcasts, which have
not incited any visible disquiet. But the sensitivity exists. When a Western
military attache paid a courtesy call on a senior Chinese Army officer, he
inquired about the broadcasts. The officer, he said, smiled coldly and changed
the subject.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS ACCEPT $180 MILLION PACT ON AGENT ORANGE

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1461 words


Averting a long-scheduled trial, seven makers of Agent Orange agreed yesterday
to create a $180 million fund for thousands of Vietnam veterans and their
families who said the herbicide had harmed them.

Lawyers representing the veterans, in turn, dropped damage claims against the
Dow Chemical Company and six other defendant companies that had mounted into the
billions of dollars.

The surprise settlement, which was announced in Federal District Court in
Brooklyn, brought to an abrupt end more than five years of tortuous litigation.
The award was the largest ever won by a class of claimants who sued for wrongful
injury, according to lawyers for the veterans.



Court Approval Needed


The terms are still subject to final court approval, and some veterans said
yesterday that they would challenge the settlement as inadequate at a
forthcoming hearing. Those who did not wish to be covered by the settlement
could exempt themselves, but they would in effect have to litigate the case
themselves from the beginning.

In Washington, Federal officials said that, despite the settlement, the
Government remained liable for millions of dollars in compensation claims. On
Wall Street, reaction to the settlement appeared to be favorable. (Page B4.)

Under the settlement, the companies denied any liability for the veterans'
health problems, but lawyers for the veterans said the large sum amounted to an
admission that the companies bore responsibility. How the seven defendant
companies split up the payment and how much was put up by insurance carriers was
not announced.



'Final Battle' of War


''The veterans have won the final battle of the Vietnam War,'' said Victor John
Yannacone Jr., the Long Island lawyer who first filed the class action suit in
1979. Mr. Yannacone - who withdrew from the case in a dispute last year but who
is regarded as a hero by many veterans - said that the amount was
''insignificant in view of the damages'' but that the point had been made.

Now, he added, ''I hope that the President of the United States directs the
Veterans Administration to honor the claims of the Vietnam combat veterans and
recognizes that chemical bullets are just as deadly as lead bullets - they just
take longer to kill.''

The fund, which began accruing interest immediately at current rates of about
$61,000 a day, or $21 million a year, was envisioned as lasting 25 years, long
enough to cover illnesses and genetic damage to yet-unborn children of Vietnam
veterans.

How soon the payouts would begin, who would get priority and how the veterans
and dependents would establish their claims were among the many difficult
questions that lawyers said remained to be resolved. Fees for the lawyers have
also not been decided.

In addition to Dow Chemical, whose headquarters are in Midland, Mich., the
defendants were the Monsanto Company, St. Louis; the Diamond Shamrock
Corporation, Dallas; Uniroyal Inc., Middlebury, Conn.; the T. H. Agriculture and
Nutrition Company, Kansas City, Mo.; Hercules Inc., Wilmington, Del., and the
Thompson Chemical Company, Newark.

Together, they had manufactured and sold to the military about 12 million
gallons of Agent Orange and other color-coded mixtures of the herbicides 2,4,5-T
and 2,4-D, used between 1965 and 1970 to defoliate roadsides and jungle areas in
Vietnam that were considered helpful to the enemy.

According to documents made public in the litigation, the Agent Orange was
contaminated by varying trace amounts of dioxin, an extremely toxic impurity
created in its manufacturing that has caused illness and death in laboratory
animals but whose effects on humans remain uncertain.

'Highly Emotional Case'


No company representatives appeared yesterday in court. Robert W. Charlton, a
spokesman for Dow Chemical, said this was because company officials were
preparing responses to questions from the media.

In a statement, Dow said that it ''continued to believe Agent Orange was not a
plausible cause of ill health experienced by some veterans and their families.''

Dow described the settlement as a ''compassionate, expedient and productive
means'' of meeting the needs of all parties. It said that the company had been
prepared to litigate the case but that ''despite the strength of the scientific
case, it would be difficult for the jury to sort out the issues in this highly
emotional case.''

Monsanto said in a statement that it settled the case to avoid years of
litigation.

Thomas Henderson of Pittsburgh, a lawyer on the veterans' management committee,
said that ''the payment of such an enormous sum is a clear recognition of the
high degree of culpability by the companies, both in the manufacturing and sale
of the product.''

But another leading member of the veterans' team, David J. Dean of Carle Place,
L.I., said that while his side was confident of winning before a jury, it feared
being overturned on appeal, which would might force a retrial, further delaying
relief to the veterans.

Three Mediators Named


Settlement talks began quietly about three weeks ago at the behest of Chief
Judge Jack B. Weinstein, who named three special masters, or mediators, to
facilitate contacts between the parties.

They were Leonard Garment, a former counsel and assistant to former President
Richard M. Nixon; David I. Shapiro, a member with Mr. Garment in the Washington
law firm of Dickstein, Shapiro & Morin, and Kenneth R. Feinberg, a former
assistant United States Attorney in Manhattan and a member of the law firm of
Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays & Handler.

The settlement was largely worked out in two days of secret talks at the
Brooklyn Federal Courthouse last weekend. Mr. Shapiro and Mr. Feinberg shuttled
back and forth between the parties and Judge Weinstein until nearly 4 A.M.
yesterday. Word of the agreement only started circulating as lawyers began
arriving at the court a few hours before the scheduled 10 A.M. start of jury
selection for the civil trial.

Arvin Maskin, a Justice Department lawyer representing the Government, was among
those taken by surprise. ''No, it's not true!'' he blurted.

Also among those taken aback, according to lawyers for the veterans, was a New
Zealand lawyer who had come to represent the interests of some of his countrymen
in the lawsuit.

Judge Weinstein announced the settlement shortly after 10 A.M. Striding to the
bench in a gray suit uncloaked by robes, he said: ''The Agent Orange class
action suit by Vietnam veterans, wives and children against the defendant
companies is settled. The clerk is instructed to discharge the jury.''

Actually, jury selection, which was scheduled to begin yesterday morning, had
only reached the preparatory stage of polling 372 panelists who had filled out
35-page personal questionnaires.

The announcement drew mixed reactions from the dozen or so veterans who had come
to court, planning to watch the first day of the trial.

''I don't think they should get off this easy,'' said Al Marcotte, a 35-year-old
former Green Beret from Yonkers who wore his camouflage Special Forces uniform
and walked on crutches.

He attributed his ailments - including nerve damage and chloracne, a severe skin
ailment associated with dioxin exposure - to his exposure to Agent Orange. ''We
bathed in it, drank it and slept in it,'' he said.

''I have no feeling for this country anymore,'' he said. ''They have total
disregard for us when they can plea- bargain behind a closed door without notice
to us.''

A Public Hearing


Judge Weinstein has said that prior to any final certification of the
settlement, he would hold a public hearing at which objections could be voiced.

Another veteran, Frank McCarthy, the 39-year-old president of Vietnam Veterans
Agent Orange Victims Inc., said he had reservations over how the fund would be
administered but was generally pleased by the terms, particularly the
possibility of genetic screening. ''I'm scared to death to have a child,'' he
said.

''It's a start,'' said one veteran, Frederick Fitting, 42, of Brooklyn. But he
said he also thought the companies were let off ''too easy.''

In addition to Mr. Yannacone, other lawyers for the veterans - Eugene Locks of
Philadelphia, Stephen Schlegel of Chicago and Stanley Chesley of Cincinnati -
praised the settlement at a briefing after the court session yesterday.

They described it as far exceeding awards in other mass-damage or liability
cases, including those involving the drug thalidomide, the interuterine device
known as the Dalkon Shield and the MGM hotel fire in Las Vegas.

''Now that this is resolved,'' said Irving Like, another lawyer for the
veterans, ''we can turn our attention to the Government.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing (page B4); photo of Al Marcotte

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TUESDAY, MAY 8, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


Jose Napoleon Duarte declared himself the winner of El Salvador's runoff
Presidential election. Mr. Duarte, the candidate of the moderate Christian
Democratic Party, called on all Salvadorans to work to bring peace to the
country. (Page A1, Column 1.)

Violence marred Panama's election.  Government officials said one person was
killed and eight were wounded in shooting that erupted between backers of rival
candidates who both claimed they had won the presidential election. (A1:1.)

The top Ethiopian diplomat in the United States said he had decided to seek
political asylum here. The diplomat, Tesfaye Demeke, said he based his decison
on what he called the increasingly hostile stance of Ethiopia's Marxist
Government toward the United States and because of death threats made in
Ethiopia against him and his family. (A4:3-4.)

A Moslem Shiite leader who had refused to join the 10-member coalition
Government in Lebanon changed his mind after he was named Minister of State in
charge of southern Lebanese affairs and of rebuilding war-damaged areas.
(A3:4-6.)

The Summer Olympics pageantry begins at the United Nations today when runners
start the Olympic torch on a 9,000-mile, cross-country relay to Los Angeles. The
journey will cover 33 states and take 82 days. (A1:2-4.) National

Veterans won an Agent Orange case.  Averting as long-scheduled trial, the Dow
Chemical Company and six other makers of the herbicide agreed to create a $180
million fund for thousands of Vietnam veterans and their families who said that
Agent Orange had harmed them. In turn, the veterans' lawyers dropped damage
claims against the companies totaling billions of dollars. (A1:5-6.)

The settlement of the lawsuit involving claims against the makers of Agent
Orange did not resolve the Government's liability for paying millions of dollars
in compensation, according to Federal officials. (B4:1-2.)

No changes in Social Security will be sought by President Reagan if he is
re-elected, the White House said. John A. Svahn, the former commissioner of
Social Security who is now Mr. Reagan's assistant for policy development, said
of the Social Security System, ''It's in good shape well into the next
century.'' (A1:4.)

Democratic Presidential aspirants campaigned vigorously on the eve of four
primaries expected to decide whether the party's nomination battle continues or
begins to wind down toward an inevitable victory for Walter F. Mondale. Many
party leaders believe that a Mondale sweep in today's contests in Ohio, North
Carolina, Indiana and Maryland would virtually assure his nomination and deal a
possibly fatal blow to the candidacy of Gary Hart. (A1:3.)

Walter F. Mondale made an extra trip to Cleveland after his polls showed that
his lead over Gary Hart in today's Democratic Presidential primary might have
evaporated over the weekend. For more than two weeks, the Mondale staff has
polled 400 to 650 potential voters by telephone each evening in an effort to
determine where his resources could best be allocated. (A26:1-2.)

Gary Hart has made Indiana a crucial battleground in the Democratic Presidential
race. Senator Hart has had a strong organization in Indiana for more than a year
and, in the last two weeks he has made seven swings through the state, compared
with four by Walter F. Mondale and three by the Rev. Jesse Jackson. (A26:1-2.)

The Chicago Theater, an opulent 1921 movie palace, is the focus of a dispute
between its owners and the city and preservationists. The owners have sued
Chicago, charging that the building's landmark status has caused them to lose
money. (A16:1-4.)

George Balanchine's death last year at 79 years of age has been diagnosed by
means of microscopic studies of his brain cells. The choreographer was afflicted
with one of the world's most unusual diseases - Creutzfeldt- Jakob disease, a
so-callled slow virus disease with an extremely long incubation period. (C1:1.)

Devil's Bag was retired from racing after X-rays revealed a chipped bone in his
right front knee. The 3-year-old colt was an early favorite for the Kentucky
Derby but was withdrawn from the race. (B7:2-4.) Metropolitan

Major crimes increased, ridership decreased slightly and passenger comforts
became scarcer on New York City's subway system, according to transit officials.
They said the number of felonies rose 12.6 percent in the first three months of
1984 over the first quarter of 1983. Meanwhile, a Transit Authority survey
reported that the number of subway cars with inoperative doors, inadequate
lights, illegible maps and excessive litter and graffiti increased from January
to April. (A1:4-5.)

A state trooper was fatally shot on the New Jersey Turnpike at East Windsor
Township after stopping to assist two men in an apparently disabled van, the
state police announced. About one hour later, the two suspects were killed when
a second van they had stolen at gunpoint struck a utility pole and broke apart
after a high- speed chase. The slain trooper was 29- year-old Carlos Negron.
(B2:1-2.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COMPANIES COMMENT ON PACT

BYLINE: By DANIEL F. CUFF

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 274 words


The major companies involved in the out-of-court Agent Orange settlement said
yesterday that the accord would not hurt their 1984 earnings materially.

''The total settlement is not that large relative to insurance coverage,'' said
Willliam R. Young, senior vice president at Dean Witter Reynolds and a
securities analyst specializing in the chemical industry. ''At Dow Chemical,
Monsanto and Diamond Shamrock, insurance will cover substantially all of the
settlement costs. In the case of Hercules, I think it covers about two- thirds.
Hence, this is not going to have a noticeable impact on earnings.''

The size of the five major companies involved dwarfs the proposed $180 million
fund to compensate Vietnam veterans and dependents who said they were harmed by
exposure to Agent Orange. The Dow Chemical Company, for example, reported
revenues last year approaching $11 billion.

On Wall Street, however, concern over the outcome of the suit had been having a
constraining effect on the shares of the companies. The settlement ''removes a
major cloud over many of these companies,'' Mr. Young said.

Stock market results showed that investors were relieved by the settlement. At
the close of trading yesterday, Dow Chemical was up 3/4 to 32 3/8; the Monsanto
Company, up 1 3/4 to 95 1/8; the Diamond Shamrock Corporation, up 1/4 to 21 3/4;
Uniroyal Inc., up 1/8 to 12 5/8, and Hercules Inc., up 1/2 to 33 5/8. All are
traded on the New York Stock Exchange.

Two other small companies were involved, Thompson Chemical, which has since gone
out of business, and the T. H. Agriculture and Nutrition Company of Kansas City,
Mo.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

COAST MAYOR VISITS SCHOOL IN QUEENS

BYLINE: By JESUS RANGEL

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 642 words


Mayor Tom Bradley of Los Angeles went to a Queens high school yesterday with a
''bushel basket full'' of stories about obstacles he had faced in his career.

The students, many of them leaders in the student government or aspiring
politicians, prodded him with questions about Central America, the Olympics and
Mayor Koch's book, ''Mayor.''

The occasion - as lively as any news conference he has attended, the Mayor said
- was an assembly at William Cullen Bryant High School in Long Island City
arranged by the Equitable Life Assurance Society, which has adopted the school
as part of the Join a School program of the Board of Education.

In the program, corporations provide expertise and assistance to high schools,
including providing people to lecture on their professions.

For Mr. Bradley, the presentation was one of several opportunities in New York
to talk about the Summer Games in Los Angeles. This morning, he and Mayor Koch
will welcome the arrival of the team carrying the Olympic torch to the West
Coast.

But Mr. Bradley chose to tell the students about how three obstacles in his
life, while disappointing, had worked to his advantage. Looking around from one
end of the library to the other, Mr. Bradley, dressed in a dark blue suit and
polka-dot tie, spoke with a slow, confident tone.

One obstacle was the counselor at his high school, from which he graduated in
1937. The counselor advised him to forget considering attending college. ''
'You'll never get into college and you'll be disappointed the rest of your
life,' '' Mr. Bradley said the counselor had told him. ''But I rejected the
advice.''

Mr. Bradley went to the University of California at Los Angeles on an athletic
scholarship.

Contest Against Yorty


Next came an obstacle in the Los Angeles Police Department, where he was a
police officer 21 years. There was an unspoken rule that no black would rise
above lieutenant, he said. ''So I went to law school at night and became a
lawyer,'' Mr. Bradley said.

Probably the worst of all, he said, was in 1970, the first time he ran for
Mayor, against the incumbent, Sam Yorty. It was one of two California contests
in which political analysts said race was a major factor. Mr. Bradley lost.

The other was the 1982 gubernatorial campaign, in which Mr. Bradley
unsuccessfully ran to be the first black governor since Reconstruction.

''It was the most racist campaign ever run in Southern California,'' he said.
''The saturation of racial hatred was too much for people to bear. Many who
would have voted for me were scared off.''

Barrage of Questions


The Mayor said, ''You can live an impossible dream.''

Then came a barrage of questions.

''Why are you supporting Walter Mondale over Jesse Jackson?''

''I made my choice, I'll stick to it,'' he responded.

''Do you support U.S. intervention in Central America?''

''No,'' he said. ''With bad luck, we'll get in a shooting war, like in Vietnam.
''

Then several questions on the Olympics, how politics affects family life and
what he thinks of ''Mayor.''

Too Busy to Write a Book


''After the first few pages that were quite critical and full of candor, I was
wondering what he would say about me,'' Mr. Bradley said to laughter.

He was asked whether he would write a book? ''No, I've been too busy,'' he
answered.

Reaction among the students was largely positive.

''He gave good advice,'' said Jennifer Chirianu, a junior who is planning to run
for senior-class president next year.  ''I'm going to follow his advice that in
order to win you have to let people know you and not be egotistic.''

Sandra Krebelj, the vice president of the senior class, who plans to run for the
City Council, said it was the best advice she had heard.

''I think,'' she said, ''I'll get involved in community work.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Mayor Tom Bradley

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LITIGATION CONTINUED FOR YEARS

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 547 words


Following are key events in the Agent Orange case:

1961 to 1973 - More than 2.8 million Americans serve in Vietnam.

1965 to 1970 - About 12 million gallons of Agent Orange, a mixture of the
herbicides 2,4,5-T and 2,4-D, is sprayed over millions of acres of South Vietnam
to clear vegetation considered helpful to the enemy.

April 17, 1970 - United States bans domestic and military uses of herbicide
2,4,5-T, including use of Agent Orange in Vietnam, saying the chemical is
associated with animal birth defects.

Sept. 11, 1978 - Paul Reutershan, a Vietnam veteran, files a $10 million Federal
suit, claiming that he suffers liver cancer as a result of exposure to Agent
Orange. He dies four months hence.

Feb. 14, 1979 - A lawyer, Victor John Yannacone Jr., files new suit as a class
action, saying 40,000 veterans and their families may be involved.

Feb. 28, 1979 - United States Environmental Protection Administration bans most
uses of 2,4,5-T, citing ''alarming'' rate of miscarriages among woman in Alsea,
Ore., who were exposed.

Sept. 24, 1979 - Vietnam veteran files class action Federal suit in Philadelphia
seeking $40 billion from five makers of Agent Orange.

Nov. 20, 1979 - Judge George C. Pratt, in Eastern District of New York, rules
that Vietnam veterans may bring a Federal class action suit against makers of
Agent Orange.

Jan. 6, 1980 - Five makers of Agent Orange file lawsuit charging that the United
States misused it in Vietnam and is responsible for disabilities claimed by
veterans.

Feb. 16, 1980 - Five Roman Catholic and three Protestant religious groups file
shareholder action to force Dow to review hazards of 2,4,5-T.

Feb. 25, 1980 - Group of Australian veterans sue, saying they and their children
were harmed by Agent Orange.

March 18, 1980 - Two Congressmen release Veterans Administration memorandum
dated 1977, describing carcinogenic effects of Agent Orange.

July 25, 1980 - Veterans from Louisiana and Mississippi sue in New Orleans for
$960 million in damages.

Nov. 24, 1980 - United States Court of Appeals in Manhattan, reversing Judge
Pratt, throws out one of main class action suits by veterans.

Dec. 14, 1981 - United States Supreme Court refuses to review Nov. 24 appeals
court decision, closing the Federal courts for a sweeping class action case, but
not affecting other cases still in preliminary phases.

Feb. 26, 1982 - Judge Pratt rules that makers of Agent Orange cannot be held
liable if they show Government knew its hazards when it placed orders for the
chemical.

May 5, 1983 - Dow says Government knew of Agent Orange dangers two years before
it halted use in Vietnam.

May 12, 1983 - Judge Pratt rules that makers of Agent Orange did not tell
Government of its dangers and must stand trial in four-year-old suit by 20,000
veterans.

July 5, 1980 - Court documents show makers of Agent Orange secretly discussed
its extreme toxicity many times as early as mid-1960's.

Dec. 19, 1983 - Judge Jack B. Weinstein refuses to exempt Government from being
defendant in the case.

Feb. 27, 1984 - United States Supreme Court refuses to interfere, ruling in
effect that the trial may begin May 7.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: CHRONOLOGY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. LIABILITY NOT RESOLVED BY VETERANS SUIT SETTLEMENT

BYLINE: By ROBERT PEAR

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 7


Federal officials said today that the settlement of a lawsuit involving
thousands of claims against the manufacturers of the herbicide Agent Orange did
not resolve the Government's liability for paying millions of dollars in
compensation.

The settlement, announced in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, said explicitly
that Vietnam War veterans and the chemical companies both reserved the right to
file claims against the Federal Government.

At the headquarters of the Dow Chemical Company in Midland, Mich., a company
spokesman, Garry L. Hamlin, said, ''We are considering a suit against the U.S.
Government, but it has not been determined that we will go forward with that
option.''

The chemical companies have contended that they manufactured Agent Orange in
strict compliance with specifications set by the Government and that the
Government completely controlled the use of Agent Orange in Southeast Asia.

Disability Compensation


In January, the House of Representatives passed a bill authorizing disability
compensation benefits for Vietnam- era veterans suffering from any of three
diseases thought to have been caused by Agent Orange.  The sponsor of the
legislation, Representative Thomas A. Daschle, a South Dakota Democrat, said
today's out-of- court settlement, far from undercutting the case for his bill,
strengthened it. The Government, he said, ought to follow the lead of the
chemical companies and ''take its share of the responsibility to provide
compensation.''

Mr. Daschle, the chairman of a caucus of members of Congress who served in
Vietnam, said that ''if the companies can do it, the Government can do it as
well.''

The Congressional Budget Office estimated the cost of Mr. Daschle's bill, now
pending in the Senate, at $4.7 million in this fiscal year and $25.5 million
over five years. The bill was opposed by the Veterans Administration, which said
the scientific evidence linking Agent Orange with particular diseases was far
from conclusive.

The bill also authorized compensation for veterans exposed to radiation as a
result of atomic bomb tests or the occupation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki after
World War II.

L. Bradley Marman Jr., a Justice Department spokesman, said: ''The United States
is not a party to the settlement agreement announced in court this morning by
the other parties. We cannot discuss the specifics of the agreement until we
have reviewed its terms.''

In 1980, Mr. Marman said, a Federal judge, George C. Pratt, then in the Federal
District Court on Long Island, ''agreed with the Government's contention that
the United States should not be held liable to the manufacturers of Agent Orange
for damages assessed against them by any court.'' As a result, Mr. Marman said,
the Government was dismissed from the suit.

Birth Defects Cited

But the Federal judge now trying the case, Jack B. Weinstein, reinstated some of
the companies' claims against the Government.

He agreed with Judge Pratt that the Government could not be held responsible for
injuries to the veterans, but he refused to dismiss the companies' complaints
against the Government for the claims filed independently by veterans' wives and
children. The wives said they had suffered miscarriages, and lawyers said the
children had suffered birth defects because of the veterans' exposure to Agent
Orange.

The dispute over Agent Orange comes in the midst of a growing debate over the
Government's responsibility to compensate victims of exposure to radiation and
asbestos and other toxic substances. Officials at the Office of Management and
Budget have warned that compensation for such exposure could become a costly
item in the Federal budget for years to come.

The Government cites a 1950 decision by the Supreme Court, in the case of Feres
v. United States, as a basis for its position that it has no direct legal or
financial liability to the Agent Orange veterans.

In the 1950 case, the Court said the Government ''is not liable under the
Federal Tort Claims Act for injuries to servicemen'' arising out of their
military activities. In 1977, the Court said for similar reasons that a
Government supplier could not sue the Government after the supplier was sued by
a veteran injured on active duty.

In the Agent Orange case, the Government contends that it would harm military
discipline and national security if soldiers could sue their superiors for
injuries that the soldiers say they suffered in foreign wars.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 23 words


''The veterans have won the final battle of the Vietnam War.'' - Victor John
Yannacone Jr., who began the Agent Orange suit. (A1:6.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Companies

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 671 words


Dow Chemical and six other makers of Agent Orange agreed to set up a $180
million fund to compensate thousands of Vietnam veterans and their families who
have said they were harmed by exposure to dioxin in the herbicide. Dow and the
other companies - Monsanto, Diamond Shamrock, Uniroyal, T.H. Agriculture and
Nutrition, Thompson Chemical and Hercules - all denied any liability for the
claimants' health problems. (Page A1.) Both the companies and the veterans
reserved the right to file claims against the Government; the major companies
involved said the accord would not hurt their 1984 earnings materially. (B4.)



MCI is to end monthly fees for long-distance service on July 15. The dropping of
the $5 or $10 fees heightens price competition in the long-distance area between
A.T.&T. and its rivals. (D1.)



E.F. Hutton will shift its headquarters to midtown Manhattan . It has signed a
20-year lease on a building under construction with CBS and the Hines Interests.
(D4.)



R. J. Reynolds shares rose sharply on rumors that T. Boone Pickens, head of Mesa
Petroleum, was buying the stock. The Texas oilman made $500 million in trying to
take over Gulf, and might be interested in Reynolds's Aminoil unit, analysts
said. (D4.)



The Economy



The White House denied plans to alter Social Security benefits.  The statement
came after a comment Sunday by Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan that benefits
for higher-income retirees may be lowered as part of a budget-reduction package.
(A1.)



Lion Capital's Chapter 11 filing has exposed some New York school districts to
losses and raised questions about whether the state had adequately supervised
the securities dealer. (D1.)



The U.S. Comptroller is prepared to threaten Congress with regulatory approval
of non-bank banks if legislation is not enacted by September, according to
banking sources. Such a move would effectively end the Federal ban on interstate
banking. (D1.)



Retail sales at major New York City stores rose 12.4 percent in April from a
year earlier. With suburban stores included, the gain was 13.9 percent. But the
shifting date of Easter from year to year skewed the figures, and combined
figures for March and April did not meet expectations. (D26.)



International



The Customs Service plans to track technology shipments by using sensor devices
imbedded in the equipment. But it remains unclear whether this will keep the
equipment out of hands it is not intended for, or whether other nations will
cooperate. (D1.)



Metallgesellschaft of West Germany has responded to lower demand for industrial
machinery by developing trade and financing packages and expanding its trading
activity beyond metals. (D17.)



Markets



Stock prices were little changed in much slower trading . The Dow Jones
industrial average rose 1.25 points, to 1,166.56. Traders apparently were
waiting to see the effect on interest rates of a major Treasury refunding
auction this week. (D12.)



Interest rates rose in light trading amid speculation that the Fed might soon
raise the discount rate. At the weekly Treasury auction, the three-month bill
was at an average rate of 9.99 percent, the highest level since August 1982.
(D23.)



The dollar closed in Europe at its highest level in three months as fears grew
of higher U.S. interest rates and the possibility of strikes in the West German
metal industry. (D26.) Futures prices for precious metals and copper were
further weakened by the booming dollar. (D26.)



Today's Columns



Champion International has shuffled key executives in its three divisions to
eliminate ''turf mentality,'' and the program has worked, the forest products
company says. Talking Business. (D2.)

The market has been searching for group leadership, and many analysts say
quality stocks with large capitalization and definable profit patterns will be
the next leaders. Market Place. (D12.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 9, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW WILL KEEP ITS TEAM FROM LOS ANGELES OLYMPICS; TASS CITES PERIL, U.S.
DENIES IT;
PROTESTS ARE ISSUE

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1501 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 8


The Soviet Union announced today that it would not take part in the Olympic
Games in Los Angeles this summer.

A statement issued by the Soviet National Olympic Committee said the
particpation of Soviet athletes was impossible because of ''the gross flouting''
of Olympic ideals by United States authorities. In particular, the statement,
distributed by the press agency Tass, cited plans by groups to stage anti-Soviet
demonstrations during the Games and the American refusal to ban such protests.

(The Reagan Administration said the Soviet decision was ''a blatant political
action for which there was no real justification.'' The Soviet charges were
heatedly denied by White House and State Department officials, as well as by
several members of Congress. Page A16.)



Boycott by U.S. Recalled

In 1980, the United States led nearly 60 other nations in boycotting the Moscow
Olympic Games to protest the Soviet military intervention in Afghanistan. The
Soviet statement today and others in recent months have carefully avoided any
suggestion that revenge might be a factor in a decision not to go to the Games
in Los Angeles.

At the time of the Moscow Games, and repeatedly since, Soviet sports officials
have said they oppose sports boycotts in principle.

Apparently to maintain consistency with that position, they have taken to saying
in recent months that although they would not boycott the Olympics in Los
Angeles, they might not send a team, a distinction that they have not further
explained. The announcement today did not use the word ''boycott.''



Other Nations May Follow

The Soviet announcement raised the strong possibility that several Eastern
European nations, as well as Cuba, Vietnam and other countries allied with
Moscow, will also stay away from the Los Angeles Games.

A common front on the issue was suggested when 12 Communist nations met in
Moscow early last month to discuss the issue, and subsequent statements by
officials of several countries involved in the talks implied that they would
align themselves with a Soviet decision not to participate.

Despite official statements mocking the boycott in 1980, it seriously undermined
the efforts that the Kremlin had mounted in playing host for the Games and
considerably weakened competition in many sports, creating deep resentments.



Olympic Ceremony in New York

The Soviet announcement came on the day International and American Olympic
Committee officials gathered in New York for the start of the Olympic pageantry
in the United States. (In a brief ceremony at the United Nations, the Olympic
torch was started on its 82-day cross-country journey to Los Angeles.

Page B13.)

The Soviet statement today appeared to leave little room for maneuver by the
Reagan Administration or by the organizers of the Los Angeles Games, who have
been involved in intensive negotiations to secure Soviet participation.

''It is known that from the very first days of preparations for the present
Olympics the American Administration has sought to set course at using the Games
for its political aims,'' the Soviet statement said. ''Chauvinistic sentiments
and an anti-Soviet hysteria are being whipped up in the country.''

It added: ''Extremist organizations and groupings of all sorts, openly aiming to
create 'unbearable conditions' for the stay of the Soviet delegation and for the
performance by Soviet sportsmen, have sharply stepped up their activity with
direct connivance of the American authorities.''

''In these conditions,'' the statement continued, ''the National Olympic
Committee of the U.S.S.R. is compelled to declare that participation of Soviet
sportsmen in the Games of the XXIII Olympiad in Los Angeles is impossible. To
act differently would be tantamount to approving of the anti- Olympian actions
of the U.S. authorities and organizers of the Games.''

A Qualification Is Seen

Some diplomats said the phrase ''in these conditions'' that preceded the
announcement that Soviet athletes would not participate implied that a change in
conditions might cause the Kremlin to alter its stand. But the prevailing
opinion among Western diplomats was that the Soviet decision was probably
irreversible.

The reasoning among diplomats taking this view was that American authorities
would be sharply limited for Constitutional reasons in what they could do to
meet the primary complaint in the Soviet statement - the likelihood of
anti-Soviet protests in Los Angeles. Under plans announced in Los Angeles,
protesters will be barred from the Olympic Villages and competition sites, but
will not otherwise face any special restrictions.

Moreover, these diplomats said, the Soviet announcement bore the earmarks of a
political decision by the Kremlin that was superimposed on negotiations about
conditions in Los Angeles. If this were so, the diplomats said, the decision to
stay away from the Olympics would probably stand regardless of any changes that
might be made in plans for the Games.

An Effort to Punish

In this interpretation, the Kremlin's decision was inseparable from the deep
hostility that has settled over Soviet- American relations in recent years.

As such, the diplomats suggested, the decision could be viewed as a Soviet
effort to punish Washington, not only for the 1980 boycott of the Moscow Games
but also for the wider disputes between the two nations over nuclear weapons and
other issues, including the crime rate in Los Angeles and the purportedly poor
condition of many of the Olympic venues.

In its reference to the Reagan Administration's using the Los Angelese Games for
its ''political aims,'' the Soviet statement implied that part of Moscow's
thinking was to hurt President Reagan in his bid for re-election.

In several recent commentaries on the Olympics, the Soviet press has said Mr.
Reagan and his advisers hoped to use the Games to foster support in the
election, in which the Kremlin strongly favors a Democratic Party victory.
Another element suggesting that the Kremlin regards the decision as final was
the Tass report of the National Olympic Committe meeting that supposedly
approved the move. Tass said the leaders of all 29 Olympic sports federations in
the Soviet Union, as well as other eligible officials, ''unanimously voted for
nonparticipation'' in the Games. No mention was made of any conditions for a
reversal of the vote.

Apparently a Sudden Decision

The diplomats who saw wider political motives behind the announcement noted that
the decision appeared to have been made suddenly, more than three weeks before
the June 2 deadline for a final confirmation of Soviet Olympic plans.

In addition, the Soviet statement came when differences between Soviet Olympic
officials and the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee appeared to have
narrowed, as reflected in statements by both sides after a special meeting two
weeks ago in Lausanne, Switzerland.

By staying away from the Games, the Kremlin will incur some financial loss, but
on a scale that is unlikely to have weighed in the overall decision. Last fall,
Soviet television and its partners in the 16-nation Intervision group that links
Moscow with allied Communist nations paid $3 million for the television rights
to the Los Angeles Games, a fraction of the amount paid for the television
rights by the United States and Western Europe.

Two weeks ago, the Soviet National Olympic Committee and Intourist, the state
travel monopoly, made an advance payment of $86,000 for tickets to the Games.

Moscow Had Listed Complaints Doubts about Soviet participation in Los Angeles
had been growing for months amid a barrage of bitterly worded complaints from
Moscow about security arrangements for athletes, charges of commercialization of
the Games and other issues, including a dispute with the State Department over
immigration arrangements for Soviet athletes and officials.

But the threat that the Russians would stay away appeared to recede when Marat
V. Gramov, chairman of the Soviet National Olympic Committee, was quoted by Tass
after the Lausanne meeting as saying that it had been ''a great step forward''
toward resolving outstanding differences.

Security at the Games has been a central issue from the start. After initial
reluctance, the United States met several Soviet demands, including the right
for Soviet athletes and officials to be quartered aboard a Soviet ship in the
Los Angeles port, as well as permission for 28 Aeroflot charter flights from
Moscow to Los Angeles.

One issue on which Washington did not relent was the Soviet demand that an
attache, Oleg Yermishkin, be permitted to supervise arrangements in Los Angeles.
As an official who was not formally part of the Olympic squad, Mr. Yermishkin
was deemed to be subject to visa approval, which Washington denied on the ground
that he was a known official of the K.G.B., the Soviet security and intelligence
organization.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of sign at Lenin Stadium at conclusion of 1980 Olympic Games;
photo of Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 9, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Justice, Mercy and Agent Orange

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 607 words


The tentative settlement reached in the Agent Orange trial is not a triumph of
justice, because no one knows what justice in the case might be. It's not a
triumph for the judicial system, because what drove the parties to settle was
fear of the law's costs and delays. But it's the best feasible solution to an
intractable problem. Both the makers of Agent Orange and the Vietnam veterans
who blame the herbicide for their disabilities stand to gain if the settlement
is accepted.

The Agent Orange used in Vietnam was contaminated with fractional amounts of
dioxin, a potent poison. No one knows if that could really have caused the
various diseases that veterans associate with Agent Orange. The pilots who flew
the spray planes were exposed to a thousand times more Agent Orange than ground
troops, but a recently completed survey of their health turned up no clear signs
of dioxin-induced disease. Larger surveys may provide a different answer, but so
far the only veterans' illness clearly causable by dioxin is the rare skin
disease chloracne.

The difficulty of proving cause and effect gave the plaintiffs an incentive to
settle. For the seven chemical companies that made Agent Orange, a buyout brings
certainty and relief from the threat of years of costly lawsuits. The companies
will contribute to a $250 million pool from which the court can dispense prompt,
equitable compensation to the veterans. For the court to validate claims and
issue disbursements administratively avoids the venom and hazard of protracted
litigation.

That's a far better solution than the chaos of the asbestos case, where the
manufacturers have gone bankrupt and the victims still await compensation while
the lawyers squabble over fees. The settlement achieved by U.S. District Judge
Jack Weinstein may provide a model for similar cases involv- ing benzene,
radiation or formaldehyde. But first there are many loose ends to be tied up
about Agent Orange. One is the central issue of the case: Who deserves
compensation?  If only chloracne were to be recognized, few veterans would
receive compensation, and the settlement would certainly unravel. The court will
therefore have to compensate a much wider class of illnesses. Lacking a
scientific basis for doing so, it will presumably let severity of disease be a
major criterion.  The Veterans Administration already treats any illness that a
veteran declares was caused by Agent Orange, and is willing to give compensation
for chloracne. Should a veteran collect damages for a disease that could have
nothing to do with his service? That may or may not be justice, but it's surely
mercy. Those who fought in Vietnam experienced a savage war and an apathetic
homecoming. The veterans who have now fallen ill deserve particular compassion,
and giving them the presumption of validity is one way to provide compensation.
But if society truly means to dispense mercy, there's a strange absence among
the defendants in the Agent Orange case. Devastating crops and forests in
Vietnam was the Government's idea, and the Government's moral duty to the
veterans transcends that of the chemical companies that supplied the herbicide.
Whether or not Agent Orange is a real cause of disease, it has become a metaphor
for the veterans' sufferings.  Washington takes refuge in the doctrine that the
Government may not be sued for injuries incurred in military service. That's a
necessary posture in general. But Agent Orange is a special case. By
participating in the settlement Judge Weinstein has devised, the Government can
show that it, too, knows the difference between justice and mercy.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 9, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE: HOW FUND WILL WORK

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1104 words


The settlement between makers of Agent Orange and Vietnam veterans who said they
were harmed by the herbicide averted what could have been a turbulent court
battle. But it also generated a host of complex new issues that will preoccupy
the veterans and their lawyers for a long time.

The settlement was reached hours before the five-year-old liability lawsuit was
to have come to trial Monday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.

While denying liability, the Dow Chemical Company and six other manufacturers of
the herbicide used in the Vietnam War, agreed to create a $180 million fund for
the relief of injured veterans and their families. The veterans, in turn,
dropped damage claims against the companies potentially rising into the billions
of dollars.

Here are some of the questions, with answers, that have been raised about the
settlement.



Q. When will veterans and their

dependents receive the first payments from this fund?

A. Probably not before late next year. According to Eugene Locks, a lawyer for
the veterans, it will take about 15 months to two years to set up the mechanism
to evaluate claims and make awards. Meanwhile, the fund is generating interest
at the prime rate, currently amounting to about $61,000 a day.



Q. Who is eligible for the money?  A. All Americans, Australians and New
Zealanders who served in Vietnam between 1961 and 1972 and who can establish
injury to themselves or their wives or children from the effects of dioxin, a
toxic contaminant in Agent Orange.



Q. How many people is that?

A. No one knows. About 2.8 million Americans served in Vietnam up to 1973. About
200,000 veterans have called lawyers handling the suit over the years with
questions about the lawsuit and 80,000 have undergone screening by the Veterans
Administration for possible Agent Orange effects. Lawyers have estimated that
the number of claimants, including wives and children, may reach 40,000, but
those with serious injuries may be a fraction of that.



Q. What kind of injury are they

talking about?

A. Various types of cancer, including soft-tissue sarcomas; nerve damage; birth
defects in the children; miscarriages by the wives, and chloracne, among other
conditions.



Q. How can such claims be established?

A. This may be the most difficult question facing the veterans and their
lawyers. Whether a veteran's condition was caused by Agent Orange or some other
factor was one of the key issues at stake in the lawsuit. Now it is no longer a
matter of dispute between the veterans and the chemical companies but a matter
to be decided by the veterans themselves and medical experts.



Q. Will the chemical companies

have any say in who gets the

money?

A. No.



Q. What will the money be given

for - medical treatment? Or compensation for pain and suffering?

A. Both. However, lawyers for the veterans say they hope that now that the
chemical companies have made this commitment to the veterans, the Veterans
Administration may be persuaded to step up genetic screening and other medical
services to Agent Orange claimants. This, the lawyers say, would free settlement
funds for compensatory payments.



Q. Is there a ceiling on how much

any one veteran or family member

can get?

A. That has not been decided.



Q. Who will get priority?

A. That also has not been worked out, but lawyers say that generally the most
serious injury claims would be addressed first. Among these will probably be the
five Vietnam veterans and four members of their families who were to have been
''representative plaintiffs'' in the trial.



Q. If the number of eventual

claimants is not known, how can

there be any assurance that the

$180 million fund, plus interest, will

prove sufficient?

A. There cannot be. But lawyers for the veterans say they will try to meet the
claims of as many veterans and dependents as possible.



Q. Can a veteran still choose to

''opt out'' of the class covered by

the class-action suit and then pursue an independent lawsuit against

the companies?

A. Yes, but lawyers for the veterans say it may be a difficult and expensive
course.



Q. Can a veteran who previously

opted out of the class be allowed

back in now to take advantage of

the settlement?

A. Yes.



Q. How long is the fund supposed

to last?

A. The settlement puts its life at 25 years to cover yet-unborn children of
veterans. But it will be up to those selected to administer the fund to decide
how quickly the money is to be paid out.



Q. If a child who is born in coming years to a veteran has a health

problem that can be attributed to

Agent Orange, is that child bound

by the settlement or may he or she

file a separate lawsuit against the

companies?

A. The settlement cannot bind a child not yet born. The child could decide to
seek relief under the settlement or initiate independent legal action.



Q. Is this settlement final or is it

still subject to some approval?

A. Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein, who presided over the case and helped work out
the settlement, said he would not grant it final approval until after a hearing
at which class members and others could voice objections. The hearing should
come sometime within the next 45 to 75 days.



Q. How much of the $180 million

settlement will go to the veterans's

lawyers?

A. That will be up to Judge Weinstein, who has not yet awarded any legal fees.
About 1,100 lawyers around the country have worked on the veterans' case over
the last five years, many of them without receiving payment to date but in
expectation of being paid out of any damage award or settlement. The lawyers who
managed the case for the veterans have sought to reassure the veterans that the
fund will not be depleted for legal fees.



Q. Has there been anything like

this case or settlement before?

A. Not quite. Only once before, in the case of the Beverly Hills Supper Club
fire that killed 165 people in Southgate, Ky., in 1977, has there been a similar
class action. Claimants in that case shared a $35 million fund created by the
defendants. Claimants in the case of the MGM Grand Hotel fire in Las Vegas that
killed 85 people in 1980 shared a nearly $150 million settlement fund based on
individual lawsuits, not a class action.


Information On Settlement

Two toll-free numbers have been set up for Vietnam veterans and family members
seeking information about the Agent Orange settlement.

Within New York State: (800) 832- 1303.

Outside New York State: (800) 645- 1355.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 10, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BULGARIA FOLLOWS MOSCOW'S EXAMPLE ON OLYMPIC GAMES

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER , Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 850 words

DATELINE: WARSAW, May 9


Bulgaria today became the first Soviet bloc nation to join the Soviet Union in
saying its athletes would not participate in the Olympic Games in Los Angeles.

Diplomats here said East Germany, Czechoslovakia and Hungary were expected to
follow, although no announcements were made.

There was no official word on Polish intentions, but the press echoed the
denunciations the Soviet Union made Tuesday of preparations for the Games, which
are due to begin July 28.

(In Washington, the State Department said the United States would not try to
induce the Soviet Union to change its mind. In Moscow, news of the Soviet
announcement was played down in the press as people celebrated the anniversary
of the end of World War II in Europe. Pages A7 and A9.)

Poles Expect Similar Decisions

The Polish radio said decisions similar to Moscow's could be expected from many
other countries, and P.A.P., the Polish press agency, distributed a commentary
titled ''Reagan policy threatens Poles' participation in Olympics.'' The head of
the Polish Olympic Committee, Janusz Pawluk, said in a telephone interview that
his group would take the matter up in a few days.

Rumania, which pursues an independent foreign policy, was silent on the issue,
although Rumanian diplomats in Vienna were quoted as having said on Tuesday that
Rumanian athletes would compete. But Nicalae Ceausescu, the Rumanian leader, is
abroad, and no major decision is likely without him.

There was no word from Cuba or from Vietnam, two other Soviet allies.

(The Olympic Committee of China said it expected the Games, in which 200 Chinese
are due to compete, to go forward, United Press International reported.)

Yugoslavia, which is not a member of the Soviet bloc and was host nation for the
Winter Olympics, expressed regret at the Soviet withdrawal and said it brought
into question the universality of the Olympic Games.  The Soviet Olympic
Committee said in a statement Tuesday that Soviet athletes could not compete
because the United States authorities had flouted Olympic ideals, particularly
in refusing to prevent anti-Soviet groups from going through with plans to
demonstrate during the Games. The statement said Soviet athletes would be
endangered in Los Angeles.

Today, the Bulgarian Olympic Committee said, according to the Bulgarian press
agency, that it had decided against going to Los Angeles ''because of the
existence of an abnormal situation'' there.

The Polish radio said similarly, ''The decision of the Soviet Olympic Committee
was unavoidable under the circumstances.''

(Western diplomats in East Berlin said, according to Reuters, that East Germany,
with one of the strongest Olympic teams, would be reluctant to follow the Soviet
lead but in the end could be expected to go along.)

Polish newspapers carried front- page articles on the Soviet withdrawal. The
press agency commentary, which was also printed on the front pages, said
''alarming signals'' had been coming from Los Angeles, adding:

''Visits by Polish athletic teams to pre-Olympic contests in Los Angeles showed
that the organizers failed to meet many obligations to insure for the athletes
appropriate conditions of competition and residence and above all their safety
during the Olympics.

''Everyone knows what this means in view of the atmosphere of the growing
anti-Polish and anti-Communist campaign continually stepped up by the Reagan
Administration. This is sheer encouragement for provocations and dangerous
disturbances.''

The commentary said that the Games ''cannot be held in an atmosphere of threat
and uncertainty'' and that organization was being left ''up to private people
who were merely interested in commercialization of the event, being helpless
when it came to issues of insuring order and the participants' safety.''

''In Los Angeles,'' the Polish press agency went on, ''numerous organizations
have emerged whose activities are aimed against the participation in the
Olympics by contestants from the socialist countries.'' It denounced what it
described as ''activities by rightist anti-Communist organizations and United
States special services,'' meaning intelligence agencies.

The Polish youth newspaper, Sztandar Mlodych, said anti-Soviet organizations
planned to set up tables in public places offering ''legal help and shelter'' to
athletes who wanted to defect.

Today was V-E day, marking the defeat of Germany in World War II. The news on
television was devoted almost entirely to pictures of uniformed men in Warsaw
and other East European capitals laying wreaths at monuments.

Soviet-Bloc Games Likely

LONDON, May 9 (UPI) - Viktor Louis, an influential Soviet journalist writing for
the London Evening Standard, said today that plans were under way to stage a
separate Soviet-bloc athletic meet in Sofia, Bulgaria.

''Blueprints for the 'Red Olympics' are apparently already completed down to the
last detail,'' Mr. Louis wrote. ''The alternative games would probably be
announced at the last minute to throw the American organization into chaos.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 10, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIANS, AT LAST MINUTE, CANCEL A VISIT TO CHINA

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: PEKING, May 9


The Soviet Union today indefinitely postponed a visit to China by a First Deputy
Prime Minister the day before he was expected to arrive, the Chinese Government
announced.

The First Deputy Prime Minister, Ivan V. Arkhipov, would have been the
highest-ranking Soviet official to visit China in 15 years, and the last-minute
cancellation took Chinese officials and foreign diplomats by surprise.

The official explanation from Moscow, which Chinese officials said was conveyed
this morning, was that the Soviet side was not fully prepared for the visit. Mr.
Arkhipov was expected to discuss increasing trade and economic cooperation
between the Soviet Union and China.

The Chinese Government officially accepted the explanation. ''Since they say
they need more time to prepare, let them have more time to prepare,'' a Chinese
official said.

'Not a Very Good Excuse'

''It's not a very good excuse,'' another Chinese official said privately.
''We'll have to wait and see whether they're not coming or whether they've just
put it off for a bit.''

A Western diplomat recalled that the Soviet Defense Minister, Dmitri F. Ustinov,
canceled a trip to India in February only days before the death of Yuri V.
Andropov, the Soviet leader, was announced. But he and other Western diplomats
said they were unaware of any developments in Moscow that would have caused Mr.
Arkhipov to stay home.

Western diplomats said they thought the indefinite postponement would slow the
momentum that the Soviet Union has developed in trying to improve relations with
China after their ideological rift a quarter-century ago. But the diplomats were
hard pressed to explain why Moscow had pulled back from a visit that it had
proposed at previous normalization talks with Peking.

''To say they were not fully prepared is a lot of rubbish,'' one diplomat said.
''Everyone knows how the Soviets prepare for negotiations. They're extremely
thorough and meticulous.''

Theories by Diplomats

Speculation by diplomats produced a number of theories. One was that the
Russians did not want to be seen sitting in Peking if new hostilities broke out
between China and Vietnam, which Moscow supports.

The diplomats noted that the Chinese-Vietnamese border remained tense after
periodic clashes over the last five weeks. China and Vietnam accused each other
last week of massing forces and weapons in preparation for an invasion. But a
Chinese official said that in recent days the border had been relatively
peaceful.

Another theory offered was that the Russians were expressing pique over the
cordial reception that the Chinese gave President Reagan on his recent visit and
did not want Mr. Arkhipov's visit to be belittled by comparison.

Surprise at Olympic Pullout The postponement appeared unconnected with the
Soviet Union's announcement Tuesday that it would not take part in the Olympic
Games in Los Angeles this summer. Later today, the Chinese Olympic Committee
issued a statement that expressed surprise at the Soviet decision to withdraw
from the Games but did not blame Moscow directly.

Mr. Arkhipov was considered a shrewd choice for Moscow to send to Peking because
he administered the Soviet aid program for China before it was dismantled in
1960 and had a number of old friends in the Chinese Government.

A new trade protocol between the Soviet Union and China this year put the
turnover in commerce between the two countries at nearly $1.2 billion, a 60
percent rise over last year's. Unofficial contacts between Soviet and Chinese
scholars and athletes have also increased.

But Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang told President Reagan during his recent visit
that there had been no progress in the four rounds of Chinese-Soviet discussions
on improving relations, which first got under way here in October 1982.

The Chinese Conditions

China has said relations cannot improve until the Soviet Union withdraws its
forces from Afghanistan, stops backing the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia and
sharply reduces the Soviet missiles and troops deployed along China's northern
border.

A Chinese official said today that on these three points ''the Soviet attitude
has not changed and the Soviet Union has not taken a step forward on these
problems.''

As late as this morning, Chinese officials were confirming Mr. Arkhipov's
expected arrival here Thursday.

But at a scheduled weekly news briefing this afternoon for foreign journalists,
Qi Huaiyuan, the Foreign Ministry's chief spokesman, announced in a statement,
''At the proposal of the Soviet side on May 9, the planned visit to China in
mid-May by the First Vice Chairman of the Council of Ministers of the Soviet
Union, Ivan Arkhipov, will be postponed for some time.''

'Not Fully Prepared'

When reporters pressed him for an explanation, Mr. Qi said ''the Soviet side
said they are not fully prepared.''

In response to other questions, Mr. Qi said the Chinese were told of the
postponement today at 10 A.M.

Asked when Mr. Arkhipov's visit would be rescheduled, Mr. Qi replied, ''I don't
know.'' He declined to comment further.

Soviet and Eastern European correspondents at the briefing said they had not
known of the postponement earlier and could offer no explanation.

The last senior official to visit China was Prime Minister Aleksei N. Kosygin,
who stopped at the Peking airport in 1969 on the way home from the funeral of
the Vietnamese leader Ho Chi Minh. Mr. Kosygin met then with Prime Minister Zhou
Enlai to discuss problems that included the border fighting earlier that year
between Chinese and Soviet troops, but did not succeed in warming relations
between the former Communist allies.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 10, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESIDENT'S SPEECH ON CENTRAL AMERICA POLICY

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4583 words


My fellow American, last week I was in Beijing and Shanghai - three weeks from
now I will be preparing to leave for Dublin, Normandy and the annual economic
summit in London.

I am pleased that our trip to China was a success. I had long and thoughtful
meetings with the Chinese leadership. Though our two countries are very
different, we are building a strong relationship in a genuine spirit of
cooperation, and that is good for the cause of peace.

This was our second trip to Asia in the last six months. It demonstrates our
awareness of America's responsibility for leadership in the Pacific basin - an
area of tremendous economic vitality. I believe our relations with our Asian
allies and friends have never been better.

But that isn't what I want to talk to you about.

I asked for this time to tell you of some basic decisions which are yours to
make. I believe it is my constitutional responsibility to place these matters
before you. They have to do with your national security, and that security is
the single most important function of the Federal Government. In that context,
it is my duty to anticipate problems, warn of dangers and act so as to keep harm
away from our shores.

Soviet Military Growth Our diplomatic objectives will not be attained by good
will and noble aspirations alone. In the last 15 years the growth of Soviet
military power has meant a radical change in the nature of the world we live in.
This does not mean, as some would have us believe, that we are in imminent
danger of nuclear war. We are not.

As long as we maintain the strategic balance and make it more stable by reducing
the level of weapons on both sides, then we can count on the basic prudence of
the Soviet leaders to avoid that kind of challenge to us. They are presently
challenging us with a different kind of weapon: subversion and the use of
surrogate forces - Cubans, for example. We have seen it intensifying during the
last 10 years as the Soviet Union and its surrogates moved to establish control
over Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Angola, Ethiopia, South Yemen, Afghanistan and
recently closer to home in Nicaragua and now El Salvador. It is the fate of this
region, Central America, that I want to talk to you about tonight.

The issue is our effort to promote democracy and economic well-being in the face
of Cuban and Nicaraguan aggression, aided and abetted by the Soviet Union. It is
definitely not about plans to send American troops into combat in Central
America. Each year, the Soviet Union provides Cuba with $4 billion in assistance
and it sends tons of weapons to foment revolution in our hemisphere.

A Simple Defense Premise

The defense policy of the United States is based on a simple premise: We do not
start wars. We will never be the aggressor. We maintain our strength in order to
deter and defend against aggression - to preserve freedom and peace. We help our
friends defend themselves.

Central America is a region of great importance to the United States. And it is
so close - San Salvador is closer to Houston, Tex., than Houston is to
Washington, D.C. Central America is America; it is at our doorstep. And it has
become the stage for a bold attempt by the Soviet Union, Cuba and Nicaragua to
install Communism by force throughout the hemisphere.

When half of our shipping tonnage and imported oil passes through Caribbean
shipping lanes and nearly half of all our foreign trade passes through the
Panama Canal and Caribbean waters, America's economy and well-being are at
stake.

Right now in El Salvador, Cuban- supported aggression has forced more than
400,000 men, women and children to flee their homes. And in all of Central
America, more than 800,000 have fled, many if not most living in unbelievable
hardship. Concerns about the prospect of hundreds of thousands of refugees
fleeing Communist oppression to seek entry into our country are well-founded.

Consequences of Inaction

What we see in El Salvador is an attempt to destablize the entire region and
eventually move chaos and anarchy toward the American border.

As the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America, chaired by Henry
Kissinger, agreed, if we do nothing, if we continue to provide too little help,
our choice will be a Communist Central America with additional Communist
military bases on the mainland of this hemisphere and Communist subversion
spreading southward and northward. This Communist subversion poses the threat
that 100 million people from Panama to the open border on our south could come
under the control of pro-Soviet regimes.

If we come to our senses too late, when our vital interests are even more
directly threatened, and after a lack of American support causes our friends to
lose the ability to defend themselves, then the risks to our security and our
way of life will be infinitely greater.

But there is a way to avoid these risks, recommended by the National Bipartisan
Commission on Central America. It requires long-term American support for
democratic development, economic and security assistance and strong-willed
diplomacy.

U.S. Efforts for Peace

There have been a number of high- level bilateral meetings with the Nicaraguan
Government where we have presented specific proposals for peace. I have
appointed two special ambassadors who have made more than 10 trips to the region
in pursuit of peace during the last year. And Central America's democratic
neighbors - Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia and Panama - have launched a
comprehensive initiative for peace through what is known as the Contadora
process. The United States fully supports the objectives of that process.

We can and must help Central America. It's in our national interest to do so,
and, morally, it's the only right thing to do. But helping means doing enough -
enough to protect our security and enough to protect the lives of our neighbors
so that that may live in peace and democracy without the threat of Communist
aggression and subversion. This has been the policy of our Administration for
more than three years.  But making this choice requires a commitment from all of
us, our Administration, the American people and the Congress. So far, we have
not yet made that commitment. We have provided just enough aid to avoid outright
disaster but not enough to resolve the crisis, so El Salvador is being left to
slowly bleed to death.

About Nicaragua Part of the problem, I suspect, is not that Central America
isn't important but that some people think our Administration may be
exaggerating the threat we face. Well, if that's true, let me put that issue to
rest.

I want to tell you a few things tonight about the real nature of the Sandinista
regime in Nicaragua.

The Sandinistas who rule Nicaragua are Communists whose relationship and ties to
Fidel Castro of Cuba go back a quarter of a century. A number of the Sandinistas
were trained in camps supported by Cuba, the Soviet bloc and the P.L.O. It is
important to note that Cuba, the Sandinistas, the Salvadoran Communsit
guerrillas and the P.L.O. have all worked together for many years. In 1978, the
Sandinistas and elements of the P.L.O. joined in a declaration of war against
Israel.

The Cuban-backed Sandinistas made a major attempt to topple the Somoza regime in
Nicaragua in the fall of 1978. They failed, they were then called to Havana,
where Castro cynically instructed them in the ways of successful Communist
insurrection. He told them to tell the world they were fighting for political
democracy, not Communism. But most important, he instructed them to form a broad
alliance with the genuinely democratic opposition to the Somoza regime. Castro
explained this would deceive Western public opinion, confuse potential critics
and make it difficult for Western democracies to oppose the Nicaraguan
revolution without causing great dissent at home.

George Washington of Cuba

You see, that's how Castro managed his revolution. And we have to confess he
fooled a lot people here in our own country - or don't you remember when he was
referred to in some of our press as the George Washington of Cuba?

The Sandinistas listened and learned. They returned to Nicaragua and promised to
esablish democracy. The Organization of American States, on June 23, 1979,
passed a resolution stating that the solution for pece in Nicaragua required
that Somoza step down and that free elections be held as soon as possible to
establish a truly democratic government that would guarantee peace, freedom and
justice. The Sandinistas then promised the O.A.S. in writing that they would do
these things. Somoza left and the Sandinistas came to power. This was a
negotiated settlement based on power-sharing between Communists and genuine
democrats, like the one that some have proposed for El Salvador today. Because
of these promises, the previous U.S. Administration and other Western
governments tried, in a hopeful way, to encourage Sandinista success.

Nicaraguan Election Delays

It took some time to realize what was actually taking place; that almost from
the moment the Sandinistas and their cadre of 50 Cuban covert advisers took
power in Managua in July of 1979, the internal repression of democratic groups,
trade unions and civic groups began. Right to dissent was denied. Freedom of the
press and freedom of assembly became virtually nonexistent. There was an
outright refusal to hold genuine elections coupled with the continual promise to
do so. Their latest promise is for elections by November 1984. In the meantime,
there has been an attempt to wipe out an entire culture, the Miskito indians,
thousands of whom have been slaughtered or herded into detention camps where
they have been starved and abused. Their villages, churches and crops have been
burned.

The Sandinistas engaged in anti-Semitic acts against the Jewish community. And
they persecuted the Catholic Church and publicly humiliated individual priests.
When Pope John Paul II visited Nicaragua last year, the Sandinistas organized
public demonstrations, hurling insults at him and his message of peace. On this
last Good Friday, some 100,000 Catholic faithful staged a demonstration of
defiance. You may be hearing about that demonstration for the first time right
now. It was not widely reported. Nicaraguan Bishop Pablo Antonio Vega recently
said, ''We are living with a totalitarian ideology that no one wants in this
country, this country being Nicaragua.''

The Exporting of Terror

The Sandinista rule is a Communist reign of terror. Many of those who fought
alongside the Sandinistas saw their revolution betrayed; they were denied power
in the new Government; some were imprisoned, others exiled. Thousands who fought
with the Sandinistas have taken up arms against them and are now called the
contras. They are freedom-fighters.

What the Sandinistas have done to Nicaragua is a tragedy. But we Americans must
understand and come to grips with the fact that the Sandinistas are not content
to brutalize their own land. They seek to export their terror to very other
country in the region.

I ask you to listen closely to the following quotation:

''We have the brilliant revolutionary example in Nicaragua . . . The struggle in
El Salvador is very advanced: The same in Guatemala, and Honduras is developing
quickly . . . very soon Central America will be one revolutionary entity.''

That statement was made by a Salvadoran guerrilla leader in March of 1981.

Shortly after taking power, the Sandinistas - in partnership with Cuba and the
Soviet Union - began supporting aggression and terrorism against El Salvador,
Honduras, Costa Rica and Guatemala. They opened training camps for guerrillas
from El Salvador so they could return to their country and attack its
Government. Those camps still operate. Nicaragua is still the headquarters for
Communist guerrilla movements. And Nicaraguan agents and diplomats have been
caught in Costa Rica and Honduras supervising attacks carried out by Communist
terrorists.

Sandinistas Are Cuba's Cubans

The role that Cuba has long performed for the Soviet Union is now also being
played by the Sandinistas. They have become Cuba's Cubans. Weapons, supplies and
funds are shipped from the Soviet bloc to Cuba, from Cuba to Nicaragua, from
Nicaragua to the Salvadoran guerrillas. These facts were confirmed last year by
the House intelligence committee.

The Sandinista regime has been waging war against its neighbors since August of
1979. This has included military raids into Honduras and Costa Rica which still
continue today.

And they are getting a great deal of help from their friends. There were 165
Cuban personnel in Nicaragua in 1979. Today that force has grown to 10,000. And
we are being criticized for having 55 military trainers in El Salvador. Manpower
support is also coming from other parts of the terror network. The P.L.O. has
sent men and so has Libya's dictator Qaddafi. Communist countries are providing
new military assistance, including tanks, artillery, rocket launchers and help
in the construction of military bases and support facilities.

Just last week a Soviet ship began unloading heavy-duty military trucks in
Nicaragua's Corinto Harbor. Another Soviet ship is on its way with more trucks
and 155 Soviet jeeps.



Nicaragua's Military Growth

Nicaragua's own military forces have grown enormously. Since 1979, their trained
forces have increased from 10,000 to over 100,000. Why does Nicaragua need all
this power? Why did this country of only 2.8 million people build this large
military force?

They claim the buildup is the result of the anti-Sandinista forces. That's a
lie. The Sandinista military buildup began two and a half years before the
anti-Sandinista freedom- fighters had taken up arms.

They claim the buildup is because they are threatened by their neighbors. Well,
that, too, is a lie. Nicaragua's next door neighbor, Costa Rica, doesn't even
have an army. Another neighbor, Honduras, has armed forces of only 16,000.

The Sandinistas claim the buildup is in response to American aggression, and
that is the most cynical lie of all. The truth is they announced at their first
anniversary, in July of 1980, that their revolution was going to spread beyond
their own borders.

When the Sandinistas were fighting the Somoza regime, the United States' policy
was: Hands off. We did not attempt to prop up Somoza. The United States did
everything to show its openness toward the Sandinistas, its friendliness, its
willingness to become friends. The Carter Administration provided more economic
assistance to the Sandinistas in their first 18 months than any other country
did. But in January of 1981, having concluded that the Sandinistas were arming
the Salvadoran guerrillas, the Carter Administration sent military aid to El
Salvador.

Attempt at Friendship

As soon as I took office, we attempted to show friendship to the Sandinistas and
provided economic aid to Nicaragua. But it did no good. They kept on exporting
terrorism. The words of their official party anthem describe us, the United
States, as the enemy of all mankind.

So much for our sincere but unrealistic hopes that if only we would try harder
to be friends, Nicaragua would flourish in the glow of our friendship and
install liberty and freedom for their people.

The truth is: they haven't. Back in 1958, Fidel Castro pledged that, once his
revolution had triumphed, he would start a much longer and bigger war - a war
against the Americans. That war, Castro said, ''will be my true destiny.'' For
26 years, during Republican and Democratic Administrations, Castro has kept to
his own path of revolutionary violence. Today, Cuba even provides safe passage
for drug traffickers who poison our children. In return, of course, Cuba gets
hard cash to buy more weapons of war.

Kennedy's Grasp of Problem

We are in the midst of what President John F. Kennedy called ''a long twilight
struggle'' to defend freedom in the world. He understood the problem of Central
America. He understood Castro. And he understood the long-term goals of the
Soviet Union in this region.

Twenty-three years ago, President Kennedy warned against the threat of Communist
penetration in our hemisphere. He said, ''I want it clearly understood that this
Government will not hesitate in meeting its primary obligations, which are to
the security of our nation.'' And the House and Senate supported him,
overwhelmingly, by passing a law calling on the United States to prevent Cuba
from extending its aggressive or subversive activities to any part of this
hemisphere. Were John Kennedy alive today, I think he wold be appalled by the
gullibility of some who invoke his name.


About El Salvador I have told you that Cuba's and Nicaragua's present target is
El Salvador. And I want to talk to you about that country because there is a lot
of misunderstanding about it.

El Salvador, too, had a revolution several years ago, and is now struggling
valiantly to achieve a workable democracy and, at the same time, to achieve a
stable economic system and to redress historical injustices. But El Salvador's
yearning for democracy has been thwarted by Cuban-trained and armed guerrillas,
leading a campaign of violence against people and destruction of bridges, roads,
power stations, trucks, buses and other vital elements of their economy.
Destroying this infrastructure has brought more unemployment and poverty to the
people of El Salvador.

Some argue that El Salvador has only political extremes - the violent left and
the violent right - and that we must choose between them. That is just not true.
Democratic political parties range from the democratic left to center to
conservative. Trade unions, religious organizations, civic groups and business
associations are numerous and flourishing. There is a small, violent right-wing
as opposed to democracy as are the guerrillas, but they are not part of the
Government. We have consistently opposed both extremes, and so has the
Government of El Salvador. Last December, I sent Vice President Bush to El
Salvador with a personal letter in which I again made clear my strong opposition
to both violent extremes. And this had a positive effect.

Hope for a Better Future

Land reform is moving forward. Since March of 1980, the program has benefited
more than 550,000 peasants, or about a quarter of the rural population. But many
can't farm their land; they will be killed by the guerrillas if they do.

The people of Central America want democracy and freedom. They want and hope for
a better future. Costa Rica is a well-established and healthy democracy.
Honduras made a peaceful transition to democracy in 1982. And in Guatemala,
political parties and trade unions are functioning. An election is scheduled for
July there, with a real prospect that that country can return to full
constitutional government in 1985.  In fact, 26 of 33 Latin American countries
are democracies or striving to become democracies. But they are vulnerable.

By aiding the Communist guerrillas in El Salvador, Nicaragua's unelected
Government is trying to overthrow the duly-elected Government of a neighboring
country. Like Nicaragua, the Government of El Salvador was born of revolution,
but unlike Nicaragua it has held three elections, the most recent a presidential
election last Sunday. It has made great progress toward democracy. In this last
election, 80 percent of the people in El Salvador braved Communist threats and
guerrilla violence to vote for peace and freedom.

2 Views on Elections

Let met give another example of the difference between the two countries - El
Salvador and Nicaragua. The Government of El Salvador has offered amnesty to the
guerrillas and asked them to participate in the elections and democratic
processes. The guerrillas refused; they want to shoot their way into power and
establish totalitarian rule.

By contrast, the contras, the freedom-fighters in Nicaragua, have offered to lay
down their weapons and take part in democratic elections; but there the
Communist Sandinista Government has refused.

That's why the United Sates must support both the elected Government of El
Salvador and the democratic aspirations of the Nicaraguan people.

If the Communists can start war against the people of El Salvador, then El
Salvador and its friends are surely justified in defending themselves by
blocking the flow of arms. If the Soviet Union can aid and abet subversion in
our hemisphere, then the United States has a legal right and a moral duty to
help resist it. This is not only in our strategic interest; it is morally right.
It would be profoundly immoral to let peace-loving friends depending on our help
be overwhelmed by brute force if we have any capacity to prevent it.


The Choices for U.S.If our political process pulls together, Soviet- and
Cuban-supported aggression can be defeated. On this, the centennial anniversary
of President Harry Truman's birth, it is fitting to recall his words, spoken to
a Joint Session of the Congress in a similar situation: ''The free peoples of
the world look to us for support in maintaining their freedoms. If we falter . .
. we may endanger the peace of the world, and we shall surely endanger the
welfare of this nation.''

The speech was given in 1947. The problem then was two years of Soviet-
supported indirect aggression against Greece. The Communists were close to
victory. President Truman called on the Congress to provide decisive aid to the
Greek government. Both parties rallied behind President Truman's call.
Democratic forces succeeded and Greece became a parliamentary democracy.

Communist subversion is not an irreversible tide. We have seen it rolled back in
Venezuela and, most recently, in Grenada. And where democracy flourishes, human
rights and peace are more secure. The tide of the future can be a freedom tide.
All it takes is the will and resources to get the job done.

Creation of Latin Panel

In April 1983, I addressed a Joint Session of the Congress and asked for
bipartisan cooperation on behalf of our policies to protect liberty and
democracy in Central America. Shortly after that speech, the late Democratic
Senator Henry Jackson encouraged the appointment of a blue-ribbon, bipartisan
commission to chart a long-term course for democracy, economic improvement and
peace in Central America. I appointed 12 distinguished Americans from both
political parties to the National Bipartisan Commission on Central America.

The Bipartisan Commission rendered an important service to all Americans - all
of us from pole to pole in this Western Hemisphere. Last January, the commission
presented positive recommendations to support democratic development, improve
living conditions and bring the long-sought dream for peace to this troubled
region so close to home. The recommendations reinforce the spirit of our
Administration's policies that help to our neighbors should be primarily
economic and humanitarian but must also include sufficient military aid.

Proposal to Congress

In February, I submitted a comprehensive legislative proposal to the Congress
which would implement the commission's recommendations. And because this report
presented a bipartisan consensus, I am hopeful that the Congress will take
prompt action. This proposal calls for an increased commitment of resources
beginning immediately and extending regularly over the next five years. The
program is a balanced combination of support for democracy, economic
development, diplomacy and security measures, with 70 percent of the dollars to
be used for economic and social development. This program can get the job done.

The National Bipartisan Commission on Central America has done its work. Our
Administration has done its work. We now await action by the Congress.
Meanwhile, evidence mounts of Cuba's intentions to double its support to the
Salvadoran guerrillas and bring down that newly elected Government in the fall.
Unless we provide the resources, the Communists will likely succeed.

Let's remember, the Soviet bloc gave Cuba and Nicaragua $4.9 billion in
assistance last year, while the United States provided all its friends
throughout Central America with only a fraction of that amount.

Acting While There's Time

The simple questions are: Will we support freedom in this hemisphere or not?
Will we defend our vital interests in this hemisphere or not? Will we stop the
spread of Communism in this hemisphere or not? Will we act while there is still
time?

There are those in this country who would yield to the temptation to do nothing.
They are the new isolationists, very much like the isolationists of the late
1930's who knew what was happening in Europe but chose not to face the terrible
challenge history had given them. They preferred a policy of wishful thinking
that if they only gave up one more country, allowed just one more international
transgression, then surely, sooner or later, the aggressor's appetite would be
satisfied.

Well, they didn't stop the aggressors - they emboldened them. They didn't
prevent war - they assured it.

Legislation is now before the Congress that will carry out the recommendations
of the National Bipartisan Commission. Requests for interim appropriations to
give the soldiers fighting for their country in El Salvador and the
freedom-loving people of Central America the tools they need also, that awaits
action by the House of Representatives.

Salvadoran Soldiers' Needs

For the last four years, only half of the military aid requested for El Salvador
has been provided - even though total aid for El Salvador is only 5 percent of
our worldwide assistance. I am asking the Congress to provide the funds I
requested for fiscal year 1984 and also to enact the entire National Bipartisan
Commission Plan for Democracy, Economic Development and Peace in Central
America.

As I talk to you tonight, there are young Salvadoran soldiers in the field
facing the terrorists and guerrillas in El Salvador with the clips in their
rifles the only ammunition they have. The lack of evacuation helicopters for the
wounded and the lack of medical supplies if they are evacuated has resulted in
one out of three of the wounded dying. This is no way to support friends -
particularly when supporting them is supporting ourselves.

Last week, as we returned across the vast Pacific to Alaska, I could not help
being struck again by how blessed has been our land. For 200 years, the oceans
have protected us from much that has troubled the world. But clearly, our world
is shrinking. We cannot pretend otherwise if we wish to protect our freedom, our
economic vitality and our precious way of life.

It's up to all of us, the Administration, you as citizens, and your
representatives in the Congress. The people of Central America can succeed if we
provide the assistance I have proposed. We Americans should be proud of what we
are trying to do in Central America and proud of what, together with our
freinds, we can do in Central America - to support democracy, human rights and
economic growth while preserving peace so close to home. Let us show the world
that we want no hostile, Communist colonies here in the Americas: South, Central
or North.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of President Reagan with group members who monitored election in
El Salvador; Senators Pete Wilson and John H. Chafee, Representatives G.V
Montgomery and Mickey Edwards

TYPE: TEXT

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 10, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS DIVIDED ON DAMAGES PACT

BYLINE: By DAVID BIRD

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 887 words


Vietnam veterans expressed a sense of victory but also confusion and bitterness
this week over the sudden $180 million settlement of a class-action suit against
the makers of Agent Orange.

Some veterans who had dismissed unusual maladies in themselves and veterans'
families that had given up on the idea of ever being compensated are now taking
another look at those diseases with the idea of linking them to Agent Orange and
claiming part of the award.

Some say no amount of money could pay for the amage they suffered after being
exposed to the defoliant used to destroy enemy cover in the Vietnam War.

''We're getting thousands of calls,'' said Frank McCarthy, president of the
Vietnam Veterans Agent Orange Victims Inc., a national organization with
headquarters in Stamford, Conn. ''We're inundated. My people are going crazy.
There is not a state, not a community that's not humming.''

Veterans Are Confused


Mr. McCarthy, taking a brief break from his constantly ringing telephone, said
there was ''mass confusion'' among the veterans who had been calling his
organization. He said there was little he could tell them because no decision
had been made on how to disburse the money.  The settlement with the Dow
Chemical Company and six other manufacturers of the herbicide, described as the
largest award won by a class of claimants who sued for wrongful injury, was
reached early Monday, hours before the five-year-old liability lawsuit was to go
to trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.

Mr. McCarthy said some callers were bitter, denouncing the settlement a sellout.

''How could $180 million be a sellout?'' he asked. ''It's an incredible start.
We wanted a trust fund and we got it without going through a trial and opening
old wounds. Let's stop pointing the finger and start dealing with the remedies:
research and genetic counseling. We've got to provide answers for guys who ask
''Mr. God, what kind of a child am I going to have?' ''

Mr. McCarthy, a 39-year-old veteran who has had no children yet, carries that
worry. He said he was in an area sprayed seven times with Agent Orange. At the
time he was happy to see planes spraying Agent Orange. ''That jungle was tough
to hack through with just a machete,'' he said. But since them, he said, two
fellow soldiers who were with him and who he has kept track of over the years
have both had children with birth defects. ''That has scared me half to death,''
he said.

At the Brooklyn office of the Vietnam Veterans Outreach Center, close to the
courthouse where the settlement was announced, Robert Greene said there had been
a lot of questions and mixed feelings.

'A Lot of Guys Are Bitter'


''There is a sense of victory,'' he said, ''but also a sense that this is not
adequate. A lot of guys are bitter. They've got the bumps, the unusual cancers
and they're confused and angry. They say 'why did this have to happen to me?'
and they don't know what to do.''

Mr. Greene said callers have been reconsidering whether certain problems might
be connected with the herbicide. ''Now they're saying 'my wife had a miscarriage
and maybe it was Agent Orange,' '' he said.

George W. Ewalt, one of five veteran plaintiffs in the class-action suit,
described the settlement as ''wonderful.''

Mr. Ewalt, who lives in Philadelphia and works for the telephone company, said
he was ''finally able to sit down and relax with my family, something I haven't
been able to do for the past eight or nine years.''

Mr. Ewalt once worked outside as a lineman. But about a decade ago he began
experiencing numbness in his hands and feet and growths began forming on the
side of his head and other parts of his body. He said he could no longer work
outside and was transferred inside.

Mr. Ewalt also worries about his daughter, Tara, 12. He said she is a chronic
asthmatic, has skin rashes and difficulty with her ears. He feels the disorders
are the result of birth defects because of his exposure to Agent Orange. ''It's
funny my child has all these problems,'' Mr. Ewalt said, ''when the other part
of the family doesn't''

Offering a comparison, he said, ''My wife's brother is married to my younger
sister, and they have two children with no health problems.''

Asked whether he thought the award was adequate he said: ''It's a hell of a good
start, better than anything we've had in the past 15 years. But I don't know how
you can say there's ever enough money to pay for a kid who's deformed or a
father who's died.''

Thomas W. Henderson, one of the attorneys who represented the veterans, said the
award was adequate ''to pay for very substantial claims.'' He based that
statement on his current estimate that some 25,000 veterans were entitled to
money. ''But if the number gets to 75,000 there may be problems.''

Mr. Henderson said the settlement was good because there were serious questions
concerning whether the plaintiffs would win, given such factors as statutes of
limitations and what would be a ''battle royal of the experts'' over whether
Agent Orange caused the disabilities.

''Sure there's something lost in a settlement because you never get to the
actual culpability,'' Mr. Henderson said. ''But now we've got the money to deal
with the problem that needs to be dealt with now.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 10, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NIXON WINS APPLAUSE FROM NEWSPAPER EDITORS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 964 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 9


Former President Richard M. Nixon today won the applause of the nation's most
influential newspaper editors in a speech and question-and-answer session that
touched on his predictions on Presidential politics, foreign policy and his own
personality.

''I have no enemies in the press whatsoever,'' Mr. Nixon told a luncheon meeting
on the opening day of the annual meeting of the American Society of Newspaper
Editors. His performance won nearly a minute of enthusiastic applause from an
audience of more than 400 journalists, many of whom treated Mr. Nixon with
suspicion and hostility over much of his time as a public official.

Earlier today, at the opening of a three-day convention, the Rev. Jesse Jackson
faulted the press for hiring too few black and other reporters and editors from
minority groups, saying racial imbalance in news rooms had resulted in a
misunderstanding of his campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination. His
concern was underlined by a society report that said newspapers were not moving
fast enough toward their stated goals of employing members of minority groups.

Mr. Nixon's comments and conduct were in sharp contrast with his last major
appearance before a press group, the Associated Press Managing Editors
convention in Orlando, Fla., in November 1973, as the Watergate crisis was
growing. ''I'm not a crook,'' he told the editors then.

A New Press Attitude


Today, in what some editors said later was as much a reflection of a new press
attitude regarding Mr. Nixon's competence as President as a change in Mr. Nixon,
nobody suggested that he was.

''There has to be an adversarial relationship'' between the press and public
officials, Mr. Nixon said. But he said those inherent tensions were aggravated
in his Presidency by the real divisions in the country on issues such as the
Vietnam War and by the fact that ''the media disapproved'' of the war.

He declined to talk about Watergate, saying he had already written and spoken
about it ''in excruciating detail.'' He also declined to discuss his Vice
President, Spiro T. Agnew, because ''he has suffered enough.''

Asked whether the level of his affection for the press had changed, he paused,
asked amid laughter that the question be repeated, then said, ''I don't think
the press has changed, and as far as I am concerned I probably have changed
some.''

He said some journalists were friends but ''when they give it to me, I give it
back, in kind, and that's just the way it's going to be.''

In a fast rundown on the Presidential campaign, he predicted Walter F. Mondale
would win the Democratic nomination on the first ballot, but would lose a close
election to President Reagan.

Mr. Nixon also predicted Mr. Mondale would turn to either Senator Lloyd Bentsen
of Texas or Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, his chief rival, for the nomination,
for a running mate. He said Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart would reconcile their
differences.

Mr. Mondale will go through the motion of considering a woman for the ticket, he
added, but will not select one because ''the activist-type women who would
change their vote because of a woman on the ticket are already for Mr. Mondale
and against Reagan.'' He said a woman on the Republican ticket would help that
party.

He said Mr. Reagan would beat a Mondale-Hart ticket in the West because ''Reagan
can wear cowboy boots, too,'' and the critical battlegrounds would be in New
York, Texas and Illinois and in the South. He said Mr. Jackson's ability to turn
out a large vote by blacks could mean a Mondale victory in most of the South.

'Reagan Is Better Candidate'


Overall, he said, ''I think it's going to be a closer election than many of the
optimists, for example, on the Reagan campaign committee, believe. But I think
Reagan will win because he is the better candidate.''

Mr. Nixon devoted his formal speech to the foreign policy issues he has covered
in a new book, ''Real Peace: A Strategy for The West.'' He called for
development of a new relationship with the Soviet Union, replacing confrontation
with ''detente, peaceful competition, a Cold Peace.''

''The United States wants to reduce tension and the Soviet Union needs to reduce
tension,'' he said.

He called, however, for increased military spending to restore the United States
to equality with the Soviet Union in land-based nuclear missiles, for more
''hard-headed'' diplomacy and for better economic coordination with Japan and
European allies. He endorsed the Administration's support for a government under
Jose Napoleon Duarte in El Salvador, saying a Communist victory there would end
any chance for individual freedoms and would give the Soviet Union a missile
site ''eight minutes from Washington.''

Mr. Jackson, speaking at a morning session, said American newspapers ''remain
largely segregated'' and thus did ''not do a good job'' of covering minority
communities and their concerns. That gap, he said, created ''a clash of cultures
between the coverers and the covered.''

He said the shortage of black reporters, photographers and editors had led to
misunderstanding and misreporting of his own campaign, adding, ''I believe I
have earned the right to fair coverage.''

A report from the society's committee on minorities added data to Mr. Jackson's
complaint. The report said the proportion of papers with no members of minority
groups on their news staffs in 1983 was 61 percent, up from 60 percent in the
previous two years.

The committee said daily newspaper employment of 49,600 last year included 2,862
journalists from minority groups. The committee chairman, John Seigenthaler,
said the data meant the society's goal of 17 percent minority employment by the
year 2000 ''remains in doubt.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Richard Nixon and Otis Chandler

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOW JUDGE HELPED SHAPE AGENT ORANGE PACT

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1275 words


It was nearly 3 A.M. last Monday when Judge Jack B. Weinstein summoned to his
chambers lawyers representing Vietnam veterans in the Agent Orange case.

For 40 hours through last weekend, the judge and lawyers for the veterans and
seven chemical manufacturers of the herbicide had been meeting in Federal
District Court in Brooklyn, struggling to reach a settlement that would avert a
trial scheduled to start at 10 that morning.

''This case is over if you take 180,'' a lawyer for the veterans recalls the
judge saying.

Moments later, about 50 lawyers and corporate officials were wedging themselves
into Judge Weinstein's chambers. Two bottles of champagne were broken out and
the weary celebrators hoisted their paper cups in salute.

The six-year-old Agent Orange lawsuit was over, settled for a $180 million fund
put up by the companies to assist veterans and their families who claim injury
from the herbicide that was tainted with toxic dioxin.

While still clouded by unanswered questions and objections by some veterans, the
settlement has been hailed by lawyers on both sides as an alternative to years
of additional litigation.

The agreement marked the culmination of months of behind-the-scenes preparation
by special court-appointed mediators and some unusual straight talk by Judge
Weinstein, the chief judge of United States District Court for the Eastern
District of New York.  Some of the lawyers discussed the proceedings anonymously
because of the likelihood of continuing court action. Judge Weinstein's clerk
said the judge was away and not available for comment.

As one participant remembered it, the judge set the tone Saturday morning by
warning lawyers for the companies that they were ''gambling'' with the law; that
while they might be right on the scientific issues, they would be appearing
before a Brooklyn jury sure to be sympathetic to the veterans.

To lawyers for the veterans, Judge Weinstein was equally blunt, telling them, as
a participant recalled, that he had ''carried them'' for a long time but that no
matter how legally creative he might be, the appeals courts would not be so
adventurous.  The message was that the veterans' case had big problems.

According to accounts by participants on both sides, the settlement process was
set in motion four months ago by Judge Weinstein, who had taken over the case
last October after Judge George C. Pratt's elevation to an appeals court.

With no fanfare, Judge Weinstein asked both sides to agree to his selection of
an unnamed ''special master,'' a court appointee, to explore a possible
settlement. They assented and the judge picked Kenneth R. Feinberg of
Washington, a former special counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee.



Settlement Proposals

Over the next three months, Mr. Feinberg, working for the judge, compiled
settlement proposals as well as ideas on how any money might be distributed to
the veterans.

Mr. Feinberg also suggested that the Federal Government be drawn into any
settlement through stepping up medical care to veterans who contended they had
been affected by the dioxin in Agent Orange.

About 12 million gallons of the herbicide was sprayed over million of acres of
South Vietnam from 1965 to 1970 to defoliate enemy sanctuaries. Of the 2.8
million Americans who served in Vietnam, tens of thousands have claimed injury
to themselves or genetic damage to their children from dioxin formed during the
manufacture of Agent Orange by the companies. The companies, in turn, have sued
the Government over the veterans' claims.

On April 20, the Good Friday holiday, Judge Weinstein introduced Mr. Feinberg to
both sides for the first time. The judge also announced appointment of two other
special masters: Leonard Garment, a former counsel to President Richard M.
Nixon; and David Shapiro, Mr. Garment's partner in a Washington law firm.

While Mr. Garment concentrated on the Government's role in any settlement - a
role not yet clarified - the other two mediators began meeting with the
adversaries to discuss possible settlement terms, largely money. The parties
were still a good distance apart. The companies were talking of $35 million. The
veterans were proposing $600 million.



Intensive Talks Ahead

Last Friday, during what seemed to be a routine pretrial hearing, the last
before jury selection was due to begin on Monday, Judge Weinstein sent word to
both sides to be at the Federal courthouse on Saturday morning for intensive
talks. The defendants were told to bring corporate and insurance executives who
could speak authoritatively for the companies.

The suddenness of the judge's move caught even some attorneys by surprise. David
J. Dean, lead trial attorney for the veterans, had traveled to West Virginia on
Friday to obtain some new data for the case, and he had flown from there to
Ithaca College on Saturday to visit his son. He was tracked down at the Ithaca
airport and urgently summoned back.

The marathon weekend talks began with the judge, in the guise of a stern Dutch
uncle, calling both sides in for a talking-to.

''This was Judge Weinstein's finest moment,'' recalled one lawyer.

He told them he was prepared to try the case - indeed, he had already had the
jury box reconstructed to accommodate 12 jurors and 6 alternates instead of the
usual 2, and he had installed a better sound system in the court. But the judge
also urged the parties, for the sake of patriotism, among other reasons, to
spare no effort in reaching a settlement, according to lawyers. The judge said
he would remain available in his chambers.

The parties were separated - the veterans' side taking over a courtroom across
from Judge Weinstein's, the companies's side taking another down the hall.

For all of Saturday and into the evening, the veterans' lawyers cooled their
heels while the lawyers for the companies argued among themselves over how to
split up payments to any settlement fund. Some of the lawyers wanted the shares
based on the amount of Agent Orange each defendant had supplied; others argued
they should be based on dioxin contamination levels.

Finally, Judge Weinstein broke the impasse by suggesting a compromise. The
sharing formula, by agreement, was not made public.



Size of Fund the Issue

The parties went home Saturday night and returned Sunday at 9 A.M. With the
allocation of the funds settled, the main issue became the size of the fund. The
differences narrowed - the companies offered $150 million, and the veterans
demanded $200 million. The dispute went on all that day, with Mr. Feinberg and
Mr. Shapiro going back and forth between the parties and the judge.

''We took more votes than Carter's has little liver pills,'' said Stanley
Chesley, one of the lawyers for the veterans.

The rooms where both sides met became increasingly messy, awash in sandwich
wrappers, paper cups and other litter.

About midnight, Mr. Dean, increasingly unhappy over the direction of the
settlement talks, held a private meeting with the judge. He left for home soon
afterward.

At 3 A.M., Judge Weinstein called in the parties separately.  He said to us,
'This is it!' '' recalled Henry Miller, a lawyer for the T. H. Agriculture and
Nutrition Company of Kansas City, Mo., one of the defendants. ''One hundred and
eighty. They will not go for 179.'' The judge had the same message for the
veterans.

After the agreement was struck, Mr. Feinberg and Mr. Shapiro broke out the
champagne.

Judge Weinstein drew praise from all sides. ''He's the hero,'' said Mr. Miller.
''He worked us very hard. But he had a vision. He thought large.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: CHRONOLOGY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

HOUSE, 212-208, SUPPORTS ARMS AID FOR SALVADORANS

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 955 words


House roll-call is on page A10.



WASHINGTON, May 10 - The Democratic-controlled House gave President Reagan a
major victory today by approving an Administration request for military aid to
El Salvador that would give the President broad discretion in spending the
money.

The measure was approved by 212 to 208 as the House heeded those who argued that
the United States should support the newly elected Government of El Salvador
with a significant infusion of money without imposing conditions a struggling
new democracy could not meet.  They argued that the loss of El Salvador to a
Marxist regime would be an intolerable blow to the entire hemisphere.

''We are facing a Communist revolution in our own backyard,'' said
Representative William S. Broomfield of Michigan, ranking Republican on the
Foreign Affairs Committee and sponsor of the amendment. ''El Salvador should not
be allowed to slowly bleed to death. The President must have flexibility in
conducting foreign policy.''



Vietnam War Is Recalled

Opponents argued, that the Salvadoran Government's fate would be decided not on
the battlefield but by its ability to promote social justice and make progress
on human rights, judicial and land reforms and negotiations with the rebels.

They evoked memories of the United States involvement in Vietnam and warned that
the vote today would be a first step in an inexorable progression that would end
with United States combat troops involved in Central America.

''The American people don't want any more Cubas in Central America, but neither
do they want any more Vietnams,'' said Representative Stephen J. Solarz,
Democrat of Brooklyn, who opposed the measure.

The vote came less than 24 hours after Mr. Reagan made a television address
urging adoption of the measure, and some believed he had swayed some votes.



Effect of Reagan Speech

''The President's a factor when he's on television, no question about it,'' said
Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., Democrat of Massachusetts. Mr. O'Neill also
attributed the President's victory to members' fears of being blamed for a
collapse of the Salvadoran Government and its replacement by a Communist regime.

Although it is an authorization bill that sets policy rather than appropriating
money, the measure established the House position on the issue and is expected
to influence a House-Senate conference scheduled for next week on a $61.7
million emergency military aid bill for El Salvador approved by the Senate.  The
debate divided the House Democratic leadership. Mr. O'Neill opposed the
increased aid to El Salvador and urged imposition of conditions for any
additional money.



Statement by Majority Leader

But Representative Jim Wright of Texas, the majority leader, told the House that
the money sought was less than one-tenth of 1 percent of the country's military
spending and only 5 percent of what the Soviet Union spent in the region. The
proposed conditions, he said, ''set up a standard we don't require of any other
country in the world.''

Fifty-six Democrats joined 156 Republicans in supporting the measure, which was
opposed by 200 Democrats and 8 Republicans.

It was part of a $10.5 billion foreign aid bill that was approved by a vote of
211 to 206.



$129.4 Million for Region

The measure would give the President sole discretion in spending an additional
$129.4 million for Central America, mostly for El Salvador, for the rest of the
fiscal year that ends Sept. 30. Although the sponsors said the amount reflected
the Administration's request, Larry Speakes, the White House spokesman, said
today that the Administration sought a total of $178 million this year.

The bill would also authorize $132.5 million more in military aid next year.
Half this money would be spent solely on the authority of the President.  The
rest could be blocked by a joint resolution of Congress if the members found
that the Salvadoran Government had failed to make progress in achieving human
rights, land and election changes and negotiations with the rebels. Such a
resolution of disapproval is considered extremely difficult to enact.

House members received last- minute messages from both Jose Napoleon Duarte, El
Salvador's apparent President-elect, and President Reagan, whose aides lobbied
intensively on behalf of the measure.

Mr. Duarte said in a telegram: ''I have pledged to establish peace and justice
in El Salvador through dialogue with all citizens who wish to lay down their
arms and their system of violence and participate in our new democratic process.
Please help the people of El Salvador and contribute simultaneously to the
security and stability of our hemisphere.''

Rival Claims of Victory

Adoption of the aid program was based on the assumption that Mr. Duarte had been
elected. But some opponents noted that the election was being contested by his
opponent, Roberto d'Aubuisson, a right-wing candidate who has been linked to the
death squads.

''Both parties in El Salvador are claiming victory,'' Michael D. Barnes, a
Maryland Democrat and chairman of the Western Hemisphere subcommittee of the
Foreign Affairs Committee, told the House. ''If a week from now it turns out
that Roberto d'Aubuisson was elected President, do you want to be on record as
voting for unconditional assistance to El Salvador?''

The President, in a letter, reiterated his plea for the aid, which he said would
allow the United States ''to initiate and implement a long-term comprehensive
program in Central America based upon self-determination, economic and social
development, respect for human rights and cooperation in meeting threats to the
security of the region.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JOHN PAUL CELEBRATES MASS IN BANGKOK

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Friday, May 11


Pope John Paul II arrived here Thursday in this overwhelmingly Buddhist country
and celebrated mass at a stadium before 45,000 people.

Speaking in his homily of the small number of Roman Catholics in Thailand -
200,000 of almost 50 million people - the Pope said he understood their
problems. But Buddhist tradition, he added, ''provides a fertile terrain for the
seed of God's word, proclaimed by Jesus Christ, to take root and grow.''

Vatican sources who are expert on Southeast Asia said, however, that the Pope's
visit to Thailand, due to end tonight, had a purpose not confined to the
country's borders. They said the Pope wanted to register the Church's concern
over the fate of the Catholic faith in Vietnam, where about 3 million of the
country's more than 50 million people are said to be Catholics.

The informants said the Vatican feared the Vietnamese authorities were trying to
create a national church separated from Rome and dominated by the Communist
Government.

A Message in French

To mark this concern, they said, the Pope recorded a message of encouragement in
French to the Vietnamese Catholics, to be broadcast today from the Radio Veritas
station in Manila. In it, the Pope is said to exhort them to remain close to
their bishops.

Also today, John Paul II visited the Phanat Nikhom refugee camp, the main one
for Indochinese refugees in the Bangkok area. The sources said he would stress
to them and later to diplomats accredited here that there is need for asylum for
those who escape from Indochina.

When the Pope visited the Philippines in 1981, Vietnam urged the Vatican not to
visit a refugee camp. John Paul's insistence on making the visit was said to
mark a major stage in the deterioration in relations and, according to Vatican
sources, led to increased pressure on Vietnamese Catholics.

The step that aroused the Vatican's present sense of crisis was the creation
last November of a so-called Patriotic Catholic Committee in Hanoi. In name and
apparent aim, the sources said, it recalled the ''patriotic church'' in China,
which rejects Rome's authority.

Hierarchy Reacts Strongly

Information reaching the Vatican was said to suggest that the church hierarchy
in Vietnam was reacting strongly and had brought about the formal withdrawal
from the committee of many of the 142 priests who had been listed as members.

Others were reported to have assured their bishops that they joined under duress
and would not be active in the group. The sources estimated that only 20 priests
were active members.

Bishop Nguyen Huy Mai of Ban Me Thuot reportedly ordered those of his priests
who attended the founding meeting to resign. When they obeyed it was reported
that the Bishop was summoned by the authorities and threatened with being
prevented from traveling within his Central Highlands diocese if he interfered
with committee membership.

In Hue, Archbishop Nguyen Kim Dien is said to have suspended from his functions
the only priest of the diocese active in the committee, the Rev. Nguyen Van
Binh. The Archbishop has reportedly been severely attacked in the official press
and broadcasts. Bishop Nguyen Van Lan of Xuan Loc is said to have admonished his
priests who went to Hanoi and forbade them to continue on the committee.

Interrogation by Government

The Government has shown its determination to strike back by calling in for
sustained interrogation the bishops and priests who resist the ''patriotic
committee.'' Church sources said all interrogations were marked by insults to
the Pope and those obeying him.

Before celebrating mass at the national stadium here Thursday, the Pope called
on leading Thai Buddhist figures, including King Phumiphol Aduldet.

Thailand is the last stop of the four- nation Far Eastern tour that the Pope
began on May 3 in South Korea and that also took him to Papua New Guinea and the
Solomon Islands. He is due leave Bangkok for Rome tonight shortly before
midnight.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Pope John Paul IIand Crown Prince Vajiralongkorn

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ELLSWORTH BUNKER AT 90: STILL THE AMBASSADOR



BYLINE:
By B. DRUMMOND AYRES

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1044 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 10


He has been retired for six years and on Friday he celebrates his 90th birthday.
But Ellsworth Bunker is still very much a diplomat, still the Ambassador.

His suit is dark, cut with a European flair that does not rumple as he bends
slightly at the waist and extends his hand in warm greeting. His shirt has a
starched white collar, subtly offset by blue pinstripes. His shoes glisten.

All around his apartment, situated in a high-rent high-rise building in
Northwest Washington, are the objets d'art collected in 35 years of diplomatic
service - vases, screens, paintings, side tables, books. They come from
Argentina, Italy, India, Nepal, Vietnam, Latin America, places where he served
as Ambassador or Presidential trouble-shooter or both. It is hard to picture him
living in a place furnished otherwise.

'Really Retired This Time'


Has he been anywhere else for the Government or done any work for it since
retiring at the age of 84? ''No,'' he replies. ''I really am retired this
time.''

There were five other retirements, the first in 1951 from a lucrative
sugar-refining busines and the others from Government jobs. One way or another,
duty to country kept pulling him away from that 600-acre dairy farm in Vermont,
the place of his dreams.

Retired or not, however, at 90 years of age Ambassador Bunker remains
surprisingly busy. He is seen at dinners and receptions around town with his
wife, Caroline. He converses with former State Department colleagues and reads
widely, and is pulling together some documents and reflections for a book on his
stint in Vietnam, perhaps his bitterest career disappointment. Meantime, he
still travels, which is what he has done most of his life.

Recently he went off to Nepal, where he and Mrs. Bunker, who was once Ambassador
to Katmandu, were honored by the Nepalese Government. He also made a quick trip
a few weeks ago to that farm in Vermont and while there participated in a town
meeting at which a Presidential ''beauty contest'' was held. ''I voted for
Walter Mondale,'' he reports, remaining a good Democrat even though he was an
ambassador under both Democratic and Republican Administrations.

He looks good: spare, lanky, a blush of red in his cheeks. ''I feel pretty
good,'' he says.

Would he care to comment on some of the headlines, say, the situation in Central
America? The region used to be one of his diplomatic specialities. He helped
broker an end to the civil war in the Dominican Republic in 1965 and, in perhaps
the greatest tour de force of his career, was point man in the late 1970's in
the acrimonious struggle for the treaty that gave the Panama Canal back to
Panama.

''Well,'' he finally begins after saying he no longer has access to the facts,
''my feeling is that we ought to have made more use from the start of the
Contadora group,'' the four countries - Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela -
that are trying to negotiate a regional settlement. ''They know the layout and
the psychology down there better than we do.''

What about sending in American combat toops?. ''I'm against that,'' he replies.
''But the troop exercises are a way to indicate our concern. Still, my real hope
is that we'll be able to use the Contadora countries and the negotiating process
to straighten things out.''

Of Trust and Integrity


The negotiating process. In his day, Mr. Bunker was one of its masters.

''The essential element,'' he explains, ''is integrity. You have to convince the
other fellow he can trust you. Then you have to be able to put yourself in his
shoes to determine what's important to him. And then you have to have
flexibility, patience and perseverance. But the essential element is trust,
integrity.''

He provides an example.

''Once,'' he says, ''I was helping mediate a dispute between King Faisal of
Saudia Arabia and Egypt's Nasser. It was primitive shuttle diplomacy, with me
using a DC-3 to go from one side to the other for negotiations. At one point,
Faisal told me, 'I don't trust Nasser but I trust you.' There you have it. We
worked it out.''

Vietnam, where he was Ambassador from 1967 to 1973, the hard time, is 11 years
behind him now. Any reflections?

There is no hesitation. He has been over it and over it and over it. The answer
is in his mind for moments like these. The words tumble forth, unimpeded.

''I think,'' he says, ''it was a great tragedy. I feel very strongly that by the
end of 1972 we had achieved our objective, made it possible for the South
Vietnamese to defend themselves. They proved that in the next enemy offensive,
which is why the North came to talk seriously in Paris. We were committed after
that to provide material support for the South so that it could remain strong.
But with the North continuing to violate the peace agreements, Congress decided
not to put up any more money. The result was inevitable.''

'There's One More Thing'


A few minutes later, in a conversation about the Panama Canal treaty, the
Ambassador suddenly jumps back to Vietnam. ''There's one more thing,'' he says.
''I think experience has shown that in the age of television you have to have
some sort of press control, as the British did during the Falklands War.
Television, naturally enough, goes after the dramatic. And that's what the
American people saw from Vietnam. After the Tet offensive in 1968, I reported
back to Washington that we had won a military victory. But I feared a
psychological defeat.''

As for Panama, the Ambassador has mixed feelings. Without the treaty, he
contends, Panama would be in great turmoil today, with the canal possibly in
jeopardy. ''Any terrorist with a hand grenade can shut the canal for a while,''
he says. ''It's not really defensible except through a partnership where
everybody works together, and that's what the treaty achieved.''

But to win approval of the treaty, he suffered opprobrium that to this day scars
him. ''Everywhere I went to speak out for it,'' he recalls, ''I caught the very
devil.''

Some of the worst came in a letter that closed: ''You don't know what you're
talking about, you old fool.'' After studying the letter, which was unsigned,
the Ambassador concluded that it was from a farm neighbor in Vermont.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Ellsworth Bunker

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FRIDAY, MAY 11, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 863 words


The House gave President Reagan a major victory by narrowly approving his
request for military aid to El Salvador that would give him broad discretion in
spending the money. The measure was approved in the Democratic-controlled House
by a vote of 212 to 208. Proponents argued against imposing human rights
conditions that could not be met by a struggling new democracy. (Page A1, Col.
6.)

The World Court upheld Nicaragua in ruling unanimously that the United States
should halt immediately any attempts to blockade or mine Nicaraguan ports. The
Court, granting Managua's request for a preliminary restraining order, also
asserted by a vote of 14 to 1 that Nicaragua's political independence ''should
be fully respected and should not be jeopardized by any military or paramilitary
activities.'' (A1:5.)

Washington reacted to the World Court's interim ruling on Nicaragua by affirming
it found nothing in the decision it could not accept, including the call for an
end to mining Nicaraguan ports. (A8:1-2.)

Rising interest rates in the United States were criticized by President Raul
Alfonsin of Argentina. In an interview, he said the two half-point rises in the
prime lending rate in the last month had almost overnight added $600 million to
the amount that Buenos Aires must pay over the next year on its $45 billion
foreign debt and could ''jeopardize Argentina's social peace.'' (A1:5-6.)

Far-rightist Salvadoran delegates refused to take part in the official count of
votes in Sunday's presidential election, saying the results were being tabulated
illegally. Nonetheless, officials continued with the count. With ballots from 4
of El Salvador's 14 provinces counted, Jose Napoleon Duarte, the candidate of
the moderate Christian Democrats, was said to have 59 percent of the vote.
(A8:1.)

East Germany joined Moscow in announcing it would not take part in the Olympic
Games in Los Angeles this summer. East Germany has only 17 million people, but
it has become a world power in sports. (A12:3-6.) National

Lower A.T.&T. long-distance rates were ordered by the Federal Communications
Commission. The agency ordered the American Telephone and Telegraph Company to
reduce the rates 6.1 percent, beginning later this month, in a move that is
expected to save consumers about $1.7 billion a year. (A1:1.)

Radioactive fallout from above- ground nuclear tests in Nevada in the 1950's and
early '60's caused nine people to die of cancer, according to a ruling by a
Federal district judge in Salt Lake City. The judge also held that the Federal
Government was guilty of negligence in the way it conducted the tests. The
verdict holds major implications for the outcome of half a dozen related suits
pending in the courts. (A1:3-4.)

New advances in Soviet technology cast doubt on the ability of the MX missile to
destroy the Soviet land- based missile force, according to a new report by the
General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress. The Pentagon said
the conclusion was in error and that the MX was fully able to hold ''the hard
Soviet targets at risk.'' (A1:1.)

Democratic state chairmen declined to act on the Rev. Jesse Jackson's criticisms
of runoff primary elections and of a convention selection process that he
contends deprives him of a fair share of delegates. By unanimous voice vote, the
state chairmen, meeting in San Francisco, reaffirmed a ''commitment to the
principle of affirmative action'' and pledged ''to continue the faithful
implementation of this program.'' (A18:1-2.)

The Clean Water Act would be renewed and amended under legislation approved by
the House Public Works Committee. The statute has been operating without formal
authority since 1982. (A19:1-2.)

The depletion of oil and gas in Texas and other states is changing the face and
economic character of the energy-producing region. By the year 2000, according
to new projections, Texas will begin to experience a net outflow of people, and
the economy will have diversified toward increased manufacturing, construction
and services. (A16:1-2.) Metropolitan

A reporter need not comply with a grand jury subpoena requiring him to disclose
his confidential sources, New York State's highest court ruled. In the first
test of the state's ''shield law,'' the Court of Appeals, in a 5-to-2 ruling,
held that in enacting the measure, the Legislature had made free- speech
concerns paramount. (A1:2.)

An out-of-court settlement in the six- year Agent Orange lawsuit was reached
after 40 hours of negotiations involving Federal Judge Jack B. Weinstein and
lawyers representing Vietnam veterans and seven manufacturers of the herbicide.
The accord marked the culmination of months of behind-the-scenes preparation by
special court-appointed mediators and some unusual blunt talk by Judge
Weinstein. (A1:2-4.)

Espionage charges against a Bulgarian trade official were reinstated by a
Federal appeals court in Manhattan. Reversing a lower court's decision, the
appeals court ruled that the official, Penyu B. Kostadinov, did not have
diplomatic immunity. (B3:4-6.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 12, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE IN SALVADORAN AID

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 919 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 11


On the surface, the House debate that led to approval of President Reagan's aid
package for El Salvador was over a defined and practical issue: Should Congress
tie the aid to performance on human rights by the Salvadoran Government, and if
so, how? Or should the President be given the flexibility to do it his way?

It was not over whether Washington should provide military aid or whether
Communism should be stopped. Virtually all the House debaters agreed on that.

But as the legislators pored through the practical matter of whether to make the
aid conditional or unconditional, it became clear that the debate was about
something much deeper. It was about the nature of change in the third world and
the fundamental direction of United States foreign policy in dealing with it.

It was really a debate about how to avoid the ultimate choice in El Salvador -
losing or intervening. Presidential supporters said give the necessary resources
without strings. Critics argued that without strings to bring about changes, the
resources would be to no avail.

Democrats at Odds

Not since the Vietnam War have Republicans and Democrats, and Democrats
themselves, been so profoundly split on an international issue.

The Administration chose to put the battleground for debating the larger policy
issue on television the night before the House vote.  President Reagan called
Central America a stage ''for a bold attempt by the Soviet Union, Cuba and
Nicaragua to install Communism by force throughout the hemisphere.'' To him,
those who opposed his aid bill were ''isolationists,'' as oblivious to the
nightmare of Communist governments on American borders as Europeans were to the
threat of Hitler in the 1930's.

Democratic legislators such as Michael D. Barnes of Maryland argued that Mr.
Reagan did not understand that what was really going on in the region was not an
East-West confrontation but an internal political and social upheaval. To them,
the Reagan policies could lead only to a wider war and the strengthening of
Communism and direct American military intervention.

William S. Broomfield, Republican of Michigan, spoke of ''Communist revolution
in our own backyard,'' and insisted that Moscow and Havana were behind it.

Unstated but understood was the belief that stopping the threat was so important
that the President should be given resources and freedom of action - short of
direct American intervention, but maybe with it, if necessary.

Stephen J. Solarz, Democrat of Brooklyn, said, ''The American people don't want
any more Cubas in Central America, but neither do they want any more Vietnams.''

Also understood was the belief that in the end the Salvadoran Government would
either have to shape up or lose no matter what Washington did, and that if the
Government did not shape up, better to lose to the guerrillas than to escalate
to American military intervention.

A number of legislators on both sides privately acknowledged that these were
their philosophical premises, but that it was risky politically to state them
boldly and publicly. To most of them, it is simply bad politics to advocate that
in an extreme situation the United States should either send in the troops or be
prepared to lose.

Public opinion polls continue to indicate that the majority of Americans want
neither Communist takeovers nor United States combat involvement. Most
politicians place themselves in that broad and potentially contradictory middle
ground. Most of all, the legislators were looking for a way to avoid having the
choice come down to intervening or losing.

Focusing on the Specifics

Thus Thursday's exchanges on the House floor focused on the specifics of
legislation rather than on philosophy or ultimate intent.

The House had three choices. One was to make all aid to El Salvador contingent
on performance to be certified by Congress and the President. This was defeated
by 287 to 128. The second was an amendment by the House Foreign Affairs
Committee to give one- third of the aid immediately and unconditionally, but
make the remainder dependent on performance and joint Congressional-executive
certification. The third, which prevailed by 212 to 208, was to provide all the
aid now and unconditionally for this year.

Fifty-six Democrats banded with almost all of the Republicans to make a
majority. Of the 56, all except three were from the South and Southwest, almost
precisely the lineup that supported President Nixon in the last years of the
Vietnam War.

The sounds of the Vietnam War rumbled throughout the debate. At one point Jim
Leach, Republican of Iowa and one of the eight Republicans to vote against the
President, warned his colleagues.

To vote for aid without conditions, he argued, ''is to give a blank check to the
executive not unlike that given 20 years ago in the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution.''
That was the Congressional resolution of 1964 that many in Congress came to
believe gave the President the right to do whatever was necessary to stop the
Vietnamese Communists. That led to American bombing of Vietnam and then to
American combat involvement.

But this specter did not frighten a majority of his colleagues, according to
Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., as much as Mr.  Reagan's implicit warning two
nights ago that he would take his case to the American people and that those
voting to deny immediate and unconditional aid to El Salvador would have to
answer to the electorate for its possible loss.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 12, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SHULTZ SAYS SOVIET OLYMPICDECISION IS PART OF PLAN TO 'FREEZE' TIES

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 11


Secretary of State George P. Shultz said today that the Soviet decision not to
attend the Olympic Games in Los Angeles this summer was part of an overall
Soviet plan to put relations with the United States ''in a sort of deep
freeze.''

Today Vietnam and Mongolia, two of the Soviet Union's Asian Communist allies,
joined in the Soviet-backed move to boycott the Los Angeles Games. After the
Russians announced their decision Tuesday not to attend, Bulgaria and East
Germany were the first two nations to follow suit. Others are expected to do the
same soon.

State Department officials said they had received word that Moscow was applying
diplomatic pressure on certain African countries, like Ethiopia, which receive
considerable aid from Moscow, to stay away from Los Angeles.

Reports of Soviet Debate

Some State Department officials said that there were unconfirmed intelligence
reports circulating in the West that the Soviet decision on the Olympics was
made after a spirited debate within the Soviet leadership. According to these
reports, officials said, the Soviet K.G.B., its state security agency, as well
as Dmitri F. Ustinov, the Defense Minister, and Grigory V. Romanov, who has
jurisdiction over the internal security, argued strongly that the risks of
defection and possible harm to Soviet participants made it necessary to avoid
the Games.

State Department officials also said that they had been told by East European
diplomats that the East Europeans were not consulted by the Soviet Union
beforehand and that the Hungarians, in particular, resented being forced into a
position where they will have to go along with the boycott.

Olympic Chief to Keep Trying

In Lausanne, Switzerland, Juan Antonio Samaranch, the Spaniard who is president
of the International Olympic Committee, said he would ''fight to the last
minute,'' which is June 2, to change the minds of Soviet leaders.

He said he was waiting for Soviet permission to fly to Moscow to try to speak
directly with Konstantin U. Chernenko, the Soviet leader. He made public the
text of a letter from President Reagan to him, pledging that the United States
would fulfill all its responsibilities as host of the games.

Addressing the American Society of Newspaper Editors convention in Washington,
Mr. Shultz said the Soviet justifications for staying away from the Games were
not credible because ''tremendous efforts have been made and continue to be made
by the United States to insure the security for the Olympics and a warm welcome
for the athletes.''

''Right now,'' he said, ''we see the Soviet Union engaged in a tactic of
negotiation that involves withdrawal, that involves a kind of scare campaign,
and that involves a sort of deep freeze. We will not be intimidated.''

Election Seen as Factor Other Administration officials said Moscow appeared to
have decided to avoid doing anything that could possibly seem to benefit
President Reagan's re-election.

The decision by Vietnam and Mongolia, two countries heavily dependent on Soviet
military support, to stay away from the Olympics was not unexpected. It is
anticipated that all the Warsaw Pact countries except Rumania will not attend.
It is not known whether Cuba, which also depends on Soviet support, will also
stay away.

Reagan Letter on Olympics

Mr. Reagan's letter to the International Olympic Committee president was dated
Tuesday, the day the Russians pulled out and also the day Mr. Reagan met with
Mr. Samaranch. In the letter Mr Reagan said ''the Olympic Games should not be
used for political purposes.''

''Athletes and Olympic officials of all countries will find a warm welcome in
Los Angeles and will be treated equally and without discrimination,'' he said,
''in accord with the Olympic Charter and Olympic spirit.''

He also said all Federal agencies had been ordered to cooperate fully with
Olympic and local officials ''to insure the safety of all participants.''



Soviet Scorns Reagan Assurances


MOSCOW, May 11 - The official Soviet press agency Tass today scorned assurances
given by President Reagan on the safety of athletes who will compete in Los
Angeles.  ''The U.S. President has issued promises and assurances whose name is
legion,'' a Tass commentary said. ''In reality, however, they proved to be
nothing but a fig leaf to cover Washington's perfidy.''

Efforts to persuade the Kremlin to reverse its decision gained momentum tonight
with the arrival here of Mario Vazquez Rana, president of the Paris- based
Association of National Olympic Committees, who was asked by Mr. Samaranch to
make the trip.



Says Andropov Was Better


LOS ANGELES, May 11 - The head of the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee
suggested today that if Yuri V. Andropov, the former Soviet leader, who died in
February, were still alive, the Soviet Union would be planning to send athletes
to the Games.

''The change in power there has had a very negative effect on these Games,''
said Peter V. Ueberroth, president of the Olympic Committee.

He said several high-ranking sports officials in the Soviet Union were replaced
by Mr. Andropov after he succeeded Leonid I. Brezhnev as the Soviet leader in
1982.

From that point, Mr. Ueberroth said, relations with Soviet Olympic officials
gradually improved. They reached a high point, he said, when Konstantin
Andrianov, head of the Soviet delegation to the International Olympic Committee,
praised preparations for the Los Angeles Games in an I.O.C. meeting at Sarajevo,
Yugoslavia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 12, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 236 words


Limited Health Risks From Dioxin Reported


CHICAGO, May 11 (AP) - Workers exposed to dioxin in a 1949 manufacturing
accident developed no more life- threatening health problems in the next 35
years than workers who were not exposed, a new study says.

But the exposed workers did have higher rates of acne-like skin eruptions and
digestive ulcers than the others, doctors reported in this week's Journal of the
American Medical Association.

Dioxin was the contaminant in Agent Orange, a herbicide used in the Vietnam War
to defoliate jungle areas. Seven manfacturers of Agent Orange agreed Monday to
create a $180 million fund for thousands of Vietnam veterans and their families
who said they were harmed by the substance.

In the latest study, researchers studied 204 workers who were exposed to dioxin
in a cleanup after a runaway chemical reaction on March 8, 1949, at a
manufacturing plant in Nitro, W.Va.

Medical histories of the exposed workers were compared with similar data on 163
workers who had not been exposed, according to the researchers, Dr. R. R.
Suskind and V. S. Hertzberg of the University of Cincinnati Medical Center.

Thirty-five years after the accident, exposed workers showed no higher rates of
cancer or heart or liver disease, kidney damage, nerve problems, reproductive
problems or birth defects than there were among the unexposed workers, the
researchers said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 12, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 647 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week.  Answers appear on
page 28.

1. This was a noteworthy discovery. Explain.

2. In terrorist attacks, an armed man stormed a Government building in one
country and 20 gunmen reportedly stormed a barracks usually used as a residence
in another country. What countries are they and who was the target in each case?

3. ''It opens the Pandora's box that the Government thought it could close,''
Stuart L. Udall, a plaintiff's lawyer, said of a court decision. What opened the
Pandora's box?

4. An exceptionally well-versed assemblage gathered at the Cathedral of St. John
the Divine. What was the occasion?

5. In the settlement of a lawsuit involving thousands of claims by Vietnam War
veterans against the manufacturers of the herbicide Agent Orange, the right to
file claims against the Federal Government was reserved to (the veterans/the
chemical companies/both).

6. The comments and conduct of a speaker at the annual meeting of the American
Society of Newspaper Editors was in sharp contrast with his last major
appearance before a press group, in November 1973. Identify the speaker and
explain.

7. A statement by the Soviet Union deliberately omitted the word that described
the action that was being taken. What was the action and what was the word?

8. The cause of the death of a prominent choreographer, solved through a
microscopic analysis of his brain tissue, was identified as Creutzfeldt-Jakob
disease, a rare affliction, in a discussion held on the anniversary of his
death. Identify him.

9. In Manhattan, some 40,000 guests attended a round of parties to celebrate a
single event. What was it?

10. With tom-toms throbbing in the background, some celebrants chanted ''Mi
laikum yu Pop!'' - ''I love you, Pope'' - at a mass celebrated by Pope John Paul
II. Where was the mass offered and in what language?

11. ''The whole matter is moot, at least as far as the mining is concerned,'' an
official said of a ruling by the International Court of Justice. What was the
ruling and what did he mean?

12. Devil's Bag, the heralded 3-year-old, was retired without running in any
triple crown race. What was the reason?

13. This little boy who, as an adult, never went to college, and failed in a
business venture, was recently honored at a joint meeting of the House and
Senate. Who was he and what was the occasion?

14. A conservative businessman won the Presidential election in one Latin
American nation, but in two others the results of Presidential elections were
contested. Identify the nations.

15. The performance of a Broadway star may have been liked by the Tony Award
nominating committee, but not well-liked. Identify the performance and explain.

16. The number of executives of public companies who received salary and bonuses
exceeding $1 million last year was (16/26/46/56/86).

17. The new edition of a familiar red book is, for the first time, available
both in soft cover and in English. What book is it?

18. There were no white doves at the Green Line. Explain.

19. ''It's hard to believe anyone around here wouldn't know this is not a
subject to be discussed this year,'' said a White House official after the
Reagan Administration rebuted a statement by a Cabinet member. What was the
statement and who made it?

20. Abel Kiviat, at the age of 91, received an honor stemming from an
accomplishment 72 years ago. Explain.

21. ''To say they were not fully prepared is a lot of rubbish,'' a diplomat said
after a surprise announcement. To what was he referring?

22. Participation in a display on Capitol Hill was a snap for some members of
Congress. Explain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 12, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE RESUMES CRITICISM OF HART'S 'FLIPFLOPS' IN FOREIGN AFFAIRS

BYLINE: BY BERNARD WEINRAUBBy GERALD M. BOYD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 804 words

DATELINE: OMAHA, May 11


After several weeks in which he eased his attacks on Gary Hart, Walter F.
Mondale today accused the Colorado Senator, his principal rival for the
Democratic Presidential nomination, of ''unsteadiness,'' ''inconsistencies,''
''flipflops'' and a lack of experience to lead the nation.

''Pick a President who knows who he is, who knows where he's going,'' Mr.
Mondale told a noontime crowd of about 300 people in downtown Omaha. Later Mr.
Mondale flew to two other stops in Nebraska, which holds its primary Tuesday,
and left in the evening for California.

Mr. Mondale's aides said that in the aftermath of the former Vice President's
unexpected losses this week to Mr. Hart in Ohio and Indiana, the Minnesotan had
decided to return to the strategy he used effectively in Illinois, New York and
Pennsylvania.

The strategy, jabbing at Mr. Hart on his ''record and lack of experience,''
will, according to one aide, be fully unveiled as Mr. Mondale campaigns in
California and New Jersey.

Hart Called 'Inconsistent'


The two states, with a total of 467 delegates, hold primaries June 5, the last
day of the primary and caucus season.

In Omaha, Mr. Mondale contrasted what he termed his own ''steady, consistent and
sure-footed'' views on foreign policy, with Mr. Hart's ''inconsistent'' views.

''He has now taken seven basic inconsistent positions on the issue of our time,
arms control,'' said Mr. Mondale.

''Think of what the effects would have been had candidate Hart been speaking as
President Hart over the past few months,'' Mr. Mondale added.

''Mr. Hart said that if Persian Gulf oil were cut off, our allies couldn't
depend on us,'' said Mr. Mondale. ''Then he tried to say they could. Mr. Hart
claimed that Cuba was not a totalitarian state. Then he took it back. Mr. Hart
asserted that America is becoming corrupt like Europe and that Richard Nixon was
our first European President. Then he had to apologize. That's not the kind of
careful thought our allies expect and our nation needs.''

Iran Hostage Crisis


Mr. Mondale, citing Mr. Hart's attack linking him to the Carter Administration's
record in Iran, said:

''Consider the most recent example of Hart's unsteadiness. In Texas he
criticized me for being part of an Administration that he said gave us 'an
America held hostage to the ayatollahs of the world.' But what is Mr. Hart's
record on the hostage crisis?''

Mr. Mondale said Mr. Hart initially supported Carter Administration policies but
then ''did an about-face'' and suggested the United States mine Iran's harbors
and bomb Teheran's generating plant.

''After the hostages were returned home safely, Mr. Hart again reversed himself
and co-sponsored a resolution commending President Carter,'' said Mr. Mondale.

Mr. Mondale's advisers are pessimistic about his prospects in the Nebraska
primary, and the candidate was to spend only a portion of a day campaigning
here.

Hart Campaigns in Oregon



SALEM, Ore., May 11 - Senator Gary Hart brought his campaign to the Northwest
today with a low-key attack on President Reagan. Noticeably absent was an attack
on Walter F. Mondale.

''We must not permit this President four more years in office when he will not
be responsive to the American people,'' Mr. Hart said.

Mr. Hart began two days of campaigning here with an appearance in Salem,
Oregon's capital, before heading to Portland, its largest city.

On Thursday in Omaha, Mr. Hart repeatedly criticized Mr. Mondale for his trade
policies, especially his support for legislation requiring foreign-manufactured
automobiles to contain a certain percentage of American- made parts,

Mr. Hart spoke today to about 100 people at a rally on the steps of the Marion
County Courthouse as the sun peeked through clouds after a morning of rain.

Polls Show Move to Hart


Recent polls in Oregon newspapers show that support for Mr. Hart among
registered Democrats has climbed from 40 percent before last Tuesday's primaries
to 46 percent. The same polls show that support for Mr. Mondale has dropped to
27 percent from 40 percent.

Before leaving Nebraska this morning, the Senator told an audience of several
hundred students at Gross High School in South Omaha that the American people
could be ready to recognize the Government of Vietnam to facilitate the return
of United States soldiers missing in action, or an accounting for them.

Mr. Hart was responding to a question by Jim Nekuda, a junior at the school,
whose uncle, a flier, was shot down over Vietnam.

''I don't know whether that's going to require full diplomatic recognition, but
it may mean that the American people are willing to undertake that in order to
get what Americans are still alive back or at least a full accounting for
them,'' he said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

China Sends Naval Squadron To Disputed Spratly Islands

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 112 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 12


A small Chinese naval squadron has moved to the disputed Spratly Islands in the
South China Sea, possibly prompting a show of naval force from Vietnam and the
Soviet Union, an Indonesian Government official said today.

The Spratly Island group is claimed by China, Vietnam and other governments.

The official said that in the last two or three days four Chinese vessels - two
frigates, a landing craft and an oil supply ship - had approached the islands.
He said the reason for the Chinese squadron's presence was not known.

But he added that there had been reports of Vietnamese and Soviet naval
movements in the area, probably to counter the Chinese presence.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONFLICTING CLAIMS BEFOG CHINA-VIETNAM FIGHTING

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1166 words

DATELINE: PEKING, May 12


For more than a month, China and Vietnam have each reported inflicting
staggering losses on the other in their border conflict while suffering only
modest casualties, all of them civilians.

Neither side has admitted having its soldiers killed or wounded, prompting some
diplomats to suspect that the artillery duels and battles have been exaggerated
and that the biggest casualty of the murky war has been truth.

Over the last week, Chinese frontier guards have been beating back Vietnamese
incursions while being bombarded with thousands of artillery shells, as the New
China News Agency told it.

On Thursday, the press agency said, Chinese frontier guards repulsed the seventh
assault in a week on a 3,300- foot-high position on the Yunnan Province border,
inflicting ''heavy losses.''

A Vietnamese diplomat here called the report ''a total lie.'' And a Chinese
official told reporters the day before that the frontier had been ''relatively
peaceful'' in recent days.

Soviet Visit Is Postponed

The conflicting reports have been treated cautiously by diplomats since
independent observers have not been allowed into the border zone.

The reports are unsettling enough and may have been one reason for the
postponement of a visit to Peking by Ivan V. Arkhipov, a First Deputy Prime
Minister, who would have been the highest Soviet visitor in many years. The
Soviet Union is an ally of Vietnam.

Some border fighting has evidently occurred. A week ago, television showed
footage of Chinese infantrymen advancing under fire, a peasant being treated for
wounds and a few stunned Vietnamese prisoners. Last week, the Vietnamese Defense
Ministry produced two captured Chinese soldiers at a news conference.

But no one can say how extensive the fighting has been. Western and Asian
diplomats here have noted that it follows a pattern of clashes in 1981 and 1983,
and they doubt that it will reach the intensity of the border war of 1979.

The diplomats say the present conflict may be linked to Vietnam's dry- season
offensive against Cambodian rebel forces, including the Chinese- backed
guerrillas of Pol Pot, near the Thai border.

Tying Down Vietnamese Troops

By increasing tension, China can tie down Vietnamese troops who might otherwise
be sent to Cambodia, and help relieve the pressure not only on the beleaguered
guerrillas but also on Thailand.

China has used border clashes before to punish Vietnam for going on the
offensive in Cambodia. Such tactics do not seem to have restrained the
Vietnamese. One diplomat said this had left China with the choice of stepping up
its harassment or losing credibility.

Hanoi has blamed Peking for the border incidents.

''By using their infantry troops to nibble at our territory in the wake of their
artillery shellings, the Peking reactionaries hope to come to the rescue and
crank up the spirit of the Pol Pot remnants,'' Nhan Dan, the Vietnamese party
newspaper, said a month ago.

China said Vietnam fomented the trouble to distract attention from its
activities in Cambodia. But China Daily, an English-language newspaper here,
acknowledged that the two conflicts were intertwined.

''The counterattacks are necessary until Hanoi truly expresses a sincere desire
to withdraw completely from Cambodia,'' it said last month.

Vietnamese Offer Rejected

China has rejected Vietnam's offer to negotiate, saying this is possible only
after Vietnam agrees to leave Cambodia.

The quarrel has ranged well beyond the border. Vietnam has charged that China
used President Reagan's recent visit to mount the attacks, implying that
Washington and Peking were in collusion.

Last week the Soviet press agency Tass said it was ''extremely myopic'' of China
to try to change Vietnam's policy by attacking its territory. The New China News
Agency replied that the Soviet Union was trying to cover up its own role in
abetting the Vietnamese occupation of Cambodia.

The reported clashes have occurred along the rugged 750-mile frontier that
separates Yunnan Province and the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region of China from
Vietnam's northern provinces. The mountains, lush with vegetation and sometimes
shrouded in fog or drizzle, rise up a mile, exposing limestone cliffs. Muddy
streams and red-dirt roads snake through the narrow valleys.

Site of Earlier Clashes Western military specialists note that the skirmishes
have been reported where earlier clashes occurred. An Asian diplomat reported
that Chinese officials told him that the fighting this spring was of about the
same intensity as the clashes last year. A Vietnamese spokesman in Hanoi said
the fighting had been the worst since 1979.

The first significant clash was reported in early April, when China said its
artillerymen bombarded Vietnamese troops for three days in retaliation for
''armed provocations.'' Vietnam then said that it had beaten back Chinese
incursions. China called this a fabrication, but later said its frontier guards
killed or wounded ''large numbers'' of Vietnamese troops.

In mid-April Vietnam said its forces had beaten back new attacks, ''killing and
capturing a number of Chinese intruders.'' The New China News Agency said,
''Chinese frontier troops, driven beyond forbearance, waged counterattacks in
what was an outright just action of self-defense.''

More Accusations

The next week Vietnam said that China had shelled its territory with 3,000
rounds, killing four civilians, and that a Chinese assault on a 4,100-foot hill
had failed. China reported killing or wounding ''several hundred Vietnamese
soldiers.''

On April 28, while President Reagan was in China, the New China News Agency said
Vietnam had fired 10,000 rounds at villages in Yunnan and Guangxi. A dispatch
from the front said Chinese troops had assaulted intruding forces, ''killing all
the Vietnamese in fierce fighting.''

Two days later China said its frontier guards had wiped out more Vietnamese
troops intruding into Yunnan.

''Many attacks launched by Vietnamese troops who tried to retake the border area
were driven back,'' the New China News Agency said.

On May 1, People's Daily said Vietnam was bringing up tanks, rockets and heavy
artillery for an invasion.

'Extremely Tense'

As Vietnam told it last week, its forces killed, wounded or captured hundreds of
Chinese attackers. The newspaper Nhan Dan said China was massing forces on the
border and called the situation ''extremely tense.''

No new clashes were reported until May 4, when the New China News Agency
announced more fighting and shelling involving forces of up to a company in
strength.

Though there have been fears that the conflict could expand, one Asian diplomat
said he expected the tensions to wind down as the rainy season stalled Vietnam's
offensive against the guerrillas in Cambodia.

The shadow war, he said, will fade away, with no more explanation of what really
happened along the border this spring.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of China

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

POPE OFFERS TO GO TO SOVIET IF ASKED

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 19, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 680 words

DATELINE: ROME, May 12


Pope John Paul II returned today from a 10-day, 25,000 mile journey to the Far
East and said he would continue his world travels, even going to the Soviet
Union and China if such trips could be arranged.

Shortly before landing on the last leg from Bangkok, Thailand, the Pope, looking
fresh after a few hours of sleep, strolled among the reporters in the back of
his plane.

The Pope declared his readiness to go to the Soviet Union or China, although no
plans or invitations for such journeys are known to exist.

''Of course,'' the Pope said when asked if he would go to the Soviet Union.
''The people of Russia are my brothers also, like Polish people.''

Pressed further on the possibility of a Soviet trip, he said, ''All is possible
in the plans of Providence.''

Comments on Vietnam

The Pope commented directly on Government pressures on the Roman Catholic Church
in Vietnam. During the trip a papal message to Vietnam was broadcast, but John
Paul did not directly mention the difficulties confronted by the country's
estimated three million Roman Catholics, whose Government is trying to separate
them from Vatican authority.

Asked whether the church in Vietnam was in danger, the Pope replied: ''It is in
difficulties. But it is a very strong church, a very fighting church.''

In reply to a question on whether he expected Hanoi to answer his message of
encouragement to the people, he said, ''I expect respect for human rights and
religious freedom.''

Questioned about his declarations during the journey, which took him to South
Korea, Papua New Guinea, the Solomon Islands and Thailand, the Pope defended
those that had aroused surprise or misgivings.

Defends Korean Speech

In Seoul, for example, the Pope listened to young people ask him questions that
contained pointed criticisms of the state of political and workers' rights under
the Government of President Chun Doo Hwan. The Pope had replied with a speech
that was considered so religious and general as to avoid answers.

''I am aware that between the questions and the answers there is a distance,''
John Paul replied to a question about the Korean speech. ''But this distance is
necessary. They should reflect. I should give them from the Gospels some
principles from which they can get the concrete answers to their questions.''

The Pope was asked whether two speeches on the problem of Indochinese refugees
that he made in Thailand Friday did not carry the risk that the Governments of
Vietnam and Cambodia might take an even sterner attitude toward their peoples.

''This would be unjust,'' the Pope replied. ''I accused no power, no authority.
I underligned a human problem. This aspect must be stressed. I accused no power.
I stated a fact and stressed that there was a moral aspect, which has an
international dimension. The problem must be resolved. If our life in this world
is to be human, we must resolve human problems. The refugee problem is a human
problem.''

Strain Takes Toll

The Pope said that recent Vatican administrative changes would not alter his
carrying out of his duties. He said that like all bishops, a Pope must conduct
his administration but also travel and visit the people. ''I do all,
administration and travel,'' he said.

''I do what I can,'' he told a reporter who inquired after his health in view of
his exhausting travel schedule. ''You see, I am alive and healthy, thanks be to
God.'' Told that many people would like him to take it easier, John Paul replied
with a smile: ''Until now it has been possible. I do what I can.''

John Paul will be 64 years old on Friday and suffered serious abdominal injuries
in the assassination attempt three years ago Sunday.

Those who know him well say that the strain of physical damage and burden of
office have clearly aged him more rapidly but have not diminished his energy or
appetite for work or travel.

The Pope is scheduled to visit Switzerland and Canada this year, and trips to
the Dominican Republic and southern Africa are also said to be in preparation.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

C.I.A. HAS LONG SOUGHT TO SWAY FOREIGN VOTERS

BYLINE: By JEFF GERTH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 12


The report that the Central Intelligence Agency contributed more than $1.4
million to two political parties in El Salvador's presidential campaign is the
latest episode in the agency's history of involvement in foreign elections.

A Reagan Administration official familiar with C.I.A. operations said Friday
that the C.I.A. had given the money to the parties as part of a total of $2.1
million it spent on the election.

Since the 1940's, the agency has played a covert role in elections and in the
affairs of political parties in other countries, according to a variety of news
reports, books, Congressional investigations and secret testimony from C.I.A.
officials.

These involvements were secret at the time, but details emerged and became the
subject of controversy both in the United States and in countries where the
C.I.A. played a role in the electoral process.

Blocking Rightist's Election

The Administration official said Friday that the C.I.A. gave $960,000 to El
Salvador's Christian Democratic Party to support the successful presidential
candidacy of Jose Napoleon Duarte. It also gave $437,000 to the National
Conciliation Party to help its candidate, Francisco Jose Guerrero, the official
said. The money was intended, he said, to prevent the election of Roberto
d'Aubuisson, a rightist candidate.

According to a 1976 report by a Senate select committee whose chairman was
Senator Frank Church, the C.I.A.'s involvement in foreign elections began in the
late 1940's when its Office of Policy Coordination subsidized labor and
political organizations in Western Europe, which were intended ''to serve as
alternatives to Soviet- or Communist-inspired groups.''

In the 1950's, the report said, the agency expanded its efforts to influence
politics in third world countries. ''Financial support was provided to parties,
candidates, and incumbent leaders of almost every political persuasion, except
the extreme right and left,'' the committee report said.

In the 1950's and 1960's political parties in a number of European countries
were actively assisted by the C.I.A., according to the intelligence committee
report and earlier news accounts. In Italy, for example, the C.I.A. secretly
financed the Christian Democratic Party from the end of World War II until 1967,
sending an average of about $3 million annually, according to one published
account.

Similar payments occurred in Greece, according to published news accounts. News
accounts in the early 1970's said that the C.I.A. stopped its subsidies of Greek
political figures in 1972, but that it had actively assisted the efforts of King
Constantine to undermine the liberal Center Union Party until 1967, when the
King was ousted in a coup just before scheduled elections.

C.I.A. payments to Chilean politicians were disclosed in the 1970's during
Congressional hearings into intelligence-gathering abuses. The Senate
intelligence committee listed $3 million in C.I.A. aid in 1964 to Eduardo Frei
Montalva, a liberal member of the Christian Democratic Party who defeated the
leftist candidate, Salvador Allende Gossens, in elections that year.



Covert Operations in Chile

In the 1970 Chilean presidential election, which Mr. Allende won, the C.I.A.
used money in an attempt to discredit Mr. Allende, according to the intelligence
committee report. Between 1964 and 1969, it said, the C.I.A. conducted at least
20 covert operations in Chile, most of them designed to support moderate and
conservative candidates in Chilean congressional elections, the Senate
intelligence committee found in 1975.

In the Vietnam War, according to books published in the United States, the
C.I.A. spent heavily on various elections in South Vietnam. In the 1971
election, for example, the books reported that the C.I.A. poured millions of
dollars into the campaign treasury of Nguyen Van Thieu, who ultimately won the
election. While the C.I.A. was secretly assisting Mr. Thieu, official
announcements from the State Department and elsewhere proclaimed that the United
States was remaining neutral in the elections.

In the 1971 election in South Vietnam, according to one book, the C.I.A. also
helped maneuver Vice President Nguyen Cao Ky out of the race.

In 1974, a book published in Australia said that the C.I.A. had offered funds to
Australian opposition parties in an attempt to defeat the Labor Government in
elections. The author never said whether the money was actually spent. The
United States Ambassador called the charges false.

The Church committee said the number of covert activities, including active
involvement in the politics of other nations, reached a peak in the mid- 1960's.
It attributed the decline in such aid after that to several factors, including
''shifting U.S. foreign policy priorities in the 1970's which have de-emphasized
sustained involvement in the internal affairs of other nations.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW ADAMANT ON OLYMPICS ISSUE

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 12


An international Olympic official met here today with the top Soviet sports
administrator, but appeared to have made little headway in efforts to reverse
the decision to withdraw from the Olympic Games in Los Angeles this summer.

Two more Soviet allies, Czechoslovakia and Laos, announced that they would send
no teams to the Games.

The visitor, Mario Vazquez Rana of Mexico, who heads the Association of National
Olympic Committees, said the Soviet official, Marat V. Gramov, had been ''very
eager to listen'' to the reasons advanced by Mr. Vazquez for Soviet
participation in the two-hour meeting. The Mexican said Mr. Gramov had not given
any indication that Moscow was ready to reconsider.

Mr. Gramov heads the Soviet Government's Committee for Physical Culture and
Sports as well as the National Olympic Committee.

Visit Scheduled Before Decision

Mr. Vazquez, whose visit was scheduled before the Soviet decision to withdraw,
arrived with messages from Juan Antonio Samaranch of Spain, who is president of
the International Olympic Committee. Mr. Samaranch has said that he would like
to see Konstantin U. Chernenko, the Soviet leader, before a meeting of his
committee board in Lausanne, Switzerland, on Friday.

''I advanced thousands of reasons for Soviet participation in the Games,'' Mr.
Vazquez said of his talk, and added, ''Mr. Gramov gave many reasons for Soviet
nonparticipation.''

The Soviet press agency Tass described the meeting as a ''frank talk.'' It made
no mention of the Mexican's efforts to win a reversal, but said Mr. Gramov had
''set forth the motives'' behind the Soviet decision.

After the Soviet Union announced its decision, Bulgaria, East Germany, Mongolia
and Vietnam said they would not attend. Czechoslovakia's announcement today said
the decision came after a meeting of its Olympic Committee. The annnouncement
from Laos was reported by the Soviet press agency Tass. Other Soviet allies are
expected to be heard from.

Political Grounds Suspected

Western diplomats believe that the Soviet decision was taken by the ruling
Politburo on political grounds. Reports in the diplomatic community say that a
hard-line faction demanded the pullout as a rebuff to the Reagan Administration
and that pledges about the security of athletes, the factor cited by the Soviet
Union as its reason for withdrawing, are not likely to make any difference.

After several days of low-key treatment of the issue, Soviet newspapers began
Friday to give front-page display to commentaries, readers' letters and news
from abroad that supported the avowed reasons for withdrawal.

Komsomolskaya Pravda, the youth newspaper, published an article by Vladimir
Vasin, a diving coach and 1972 Olympic champion, who said anti- Soviet groups in
the United States planned to kill Soviet competitors.

''How can you talk about competitive results and friendly rivalry in the
stadiums when, apart from the starting pistol, the athlete can expect a real
bullet from the stands,'' Mr. Vasin wrote.

Teen-Age Gymnast on TV

Olga Bicherova, the teen-ager who won the recent overall title in the women's
world gymnastics competition, said on television, in what appeared to be a
rehearsed appearance, that Soviet athletes had been receiving letters from the
United States threatening them if they went to Los Angeles.

''All this is happening with the tacit assent of Reagan, who has the power to
cut off this anti-Soviet campaign,'' she said.

A separate Tass commentary said anti-Soviet demonstrators had planned to
circulate hundreds of thousands of leaflets and to stage protests that were to
have been ''broadcast to half the world'' by sympathetic television networks.
Tass quoted The Los Angeles Times as having said that the anti- Soviet coalition
had infiltrated the Los Angeles organizing committee as well as agencies
responsible for security.

''Instead of checking these terrorists, guaranteeing the security of all
athletes and creating normal conditions for the games, the United States
Administration actually assumed the protection of the thugs,'' Tass said.



Shultz Repeats Criticism


HOT SPRINGS, Va., May 12 - Secretary of State George P. Shultz today again
called the Russians' withdrawal from the Olympic Games in Los Angeles
''completely unjustified.'' ''The allegations on which they ostensibly based
their decision were flimsy and false,'' he said at an appearance here before a
group of corporation executives. ''In fact, we bent over backwards to meet the
Soviets' legitimate concerns - and had met them.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;

BYLINE: By Margot Slade and Katherine Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 473 words


Veterans Take

A Settlement

On Agent Orange



In a legal war that could have no winners, there can at least be some
compensation now that Vietnam veterans have reached an out-of-court settlement
with manufacturers of the herbicide Agent Orange. The five-year class action
suit, which involved tens of thousands of veterans claiming billions of dollars,
was scheduled for jury trial last Monday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
But settlement talks, spurred by Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein and conducted in
secret by court-appointed mediators, abruptly brought the case to a close.

The veterans as a class dropped their damage charges, although individuals may
still have a chance to drop out and press their own lawsuits against the
herbicide's seven manufacturers. In return, the manufacturers will create a $180
million fund for the relief of veterans and their families, who say they are
suffering the effects of exposure.

Agent Orange, a mixture of the herbicides 2,4-D and 2,4,5-T, was sprayed over
Vietnam to reduce ground cover used by the enemy. Exposure to its toxic
contaminant, dioxin, has been linked to a virulent skin disorder called
chloracne, various cancers, nerve damage, miscarriages by veterans' wives and
genetic defects in their children.

Eugene Locks, a lawyer for the veterans, said it would take between one and two
years to create a mechanism for evaluating claims and making awards. Meanwhile
the fund, which is to function for 25 years, is accruing interest at current
rates of about $61,000 a day.

Dow Chemical Company, one of the defendants, said the settlement was a
''compassionate, expedient and productive means'' of meeting everyone's needs.
For the chemical companies, those needs included denying liability and avoiding
years of unsettling litigation. Though insurance will cover much of the cost of
the accord, Dow and another defendant, Diamond Shamrock Corporation said they
plan to sue the Federal Government to share the burden since, they argue, the
herbicide met Government standards.

Among veterans, elation was mingled with confusion over who would qualify for
compensation and bitterness over the inadequacy of a monetary response to loss
of life, health and peace of mind. ''They've got the bumps, the unusual cancers
and they are confused and angry,'' said Robert Greene of the Vietnam Veterans
Outreach Center in Brooklyn. ''They say, 'Why did this have to happen to me?'
and they don't know what to do.'' Frank McCarthy, president of Vietnam Veterans
Agent Orange Victims Inc., which is based in Stamford, Conn., advised people to
''Stop pointing the (accusatory) finger and start dealing with remedies:
research and genetic counseling. We've got to provide answers for guys who ask,
'My God, what kind of a child am I going to have?' ''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judge Weinstein

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD;

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 424 words


'Mi Laikum Yu,'

Pope Is Told



Pope John Paul II last week took his message of compassion, consolation and hope
to thousands of destitute refugees in Thailand, to joyous tribesmen in Papua New
Guinea and, by radio, to 1.7 million Roman Catholics in Vietnam, where the
Communist Government is putting pressure on priests to break with the Vatican.

''Never forget your identity as free people who have a rightful place in this
world,'' John Paul told thousands of refugees from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos at
the Phanat Nikhom camp, 60 miles south of Bangkok. He also affirmed their
''right to go back to their roots, to return to their native land'' with
independence and self-determination.

In Papua New Guinea, where he was greeted by bare-chested dancers and drummers,
the Pope offered his blessings in the local languages as well as English. ''Mi
laikum yu Pop!'' - ''I love you, Pope,'' the audience chanted in pidgin English.

In Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands, John Paul prayed for those who died in
the fighting between American and Japanese troops in World War II.

The Pope's visits to Asian countries where Catholics are relatively few may be
intended, in part, to project his message to China and Vietnam, where Catholics
have been hard put to maintain ties with Rome. In Peking, the
Government-regulated independent Catholic Church, which claims to represent half
of China's estimated six million Catholics, announced it would revise
''outdated'' theological doctrines it argued were intended ''to safeguard the
feudal rule of the Pope in Rome.''

In South Korea, John Paul canonized 93 Korean and 10 French missionary martyrs
who died in the 19th century. He also met young people who gave him written
complaints of Government restrictions on speech and expression. Security
officers, alerted to rumors of an assassination plot, arrested a young man, -
said to be deranged - who fired a cap pistol near the Pope's bulletproof car.

Just before the Pope arrived home yesterday, bankers said the Vatican had agreed
to pay $244 million to creditors of the failed Banco Ambrosiano group. They said
the payments, reportedly nearly half the Vatican's liquid assets, would be in
recognition of ''moral involvement'' in the group's $1.3 billion loss. It was
headed by Roberto Calvi, a Milan banker who worked closely with Archbishop Paul
C. Marcinkus, an American prelate in the Vatican. The bankers said the church
planned to dispose of holdings in real estate and securities to make the
payment.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHY THE ARMY HAS AN EDGE IN COURT

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Courtroom developments in New York and Utah last week changed the boundaries of
the law for those who claim to be victims of toxic substances. But people
seeking compensation from the Government must still clear formidable barriers
before they collect - especially when the military is being asked to pay.

Whether they suffer from cancers allegedly caused by exposure to the herbicide
Agent Orange in Vietnam, slip and fall on an icy mess hall sidewalk or for that
matter are paralyzed by military surgeons using the wrong anesthesia, armed
forces personnel and veterans are often thwarted by the Feres doctrine, which
immunizes the Government from liability for injury or death connected with
military service. Lawsuits by soldiers against suppliers of allegedly defective
military products, such as the dioxin-contaminated Agent Orange, also encounter
special hurdles not faced by civilians.  Added to that are the vexing problems
of proving substances like Agent Orange, asbestos or radioactive fallout are to
blame for ailments that generally develop many years after exposure. The
mushrooming number of such ''toxic tort'' cases in itself presents a major
challenge to the nation's legal system.  The $180 million tentative settlement
announced Monday in New York City, in a class action suit by tens of thousands
of Vietnam veterans and their families against chemical companies that sold
Agent Orange to the Government, represents a triumph of sorts over these
difficulties. So does Thursday's decision by a Federal district judge in Salt
Lake City awarding at least $2.66 million for 10 civilian victims of cancers he
found were caused by atomic bomb tests in the 1950's. But the Government is
still fighting efforts by the companies that made Agent Orange to share the
liability. And the willingness of the veterans' attorneys to accept much less
than the billions they had sought reflected a sober assessment of the legal
challenges they would have confronted.

The special difficulties faced by those suing the Government are rooted in
English common law, which held that ''the King can do no wrong.'' Personal
injury suits against the United States were barred by this doctrine of
''sovereign immunity'' unless specifically authorized by Congress until 1946,
when in the Federal Tort Claims Act the Government consented to be sued under
state laws like other defendants. The act specified, however, that suits based
on a ''discretionary function'' of the Government, which the courts have defined
to encompass high-level policy decisions, were still barred.

The Justice Department argued in the fallout case that Presidentially ordered
atomic testing was a discretionary function. But Judge Bruce S. Jenkins ruled
that while ''to test or not to test is a policy decision,'' the basis of the
suit was evidence that officials ''at the operational level'' neglected to take
reasonable steps to protect the safety of people downwind.

Military suits are another matter. In 1950, the Supreme Court insulated the
Government from liability to servicemen and veterans in Feres v. United States,
ruling that survivors of a soldier who died in a barracks fire could not sue.
The Court reasoned that Congress, which had provided special veterans and
survivors benefits for soldiers injured or killed in military service, did not
intend to allow them or their survivors to bring lawsuits as well. Thus, if a
soldier and his wife together with a civilian couple were run over by a military
truck while crossing a street on a base, the civilian couple and the soldier's
wife could sue the Government but the soldier could not. If the two men died,
the civilian's widow could sue for loss of consortium but the soldier's widow
could not.

In 1977, the Court, fearful of undermining military discipline, extended the
Feres doctrine, barring suits against the Government by military suppliers
seeking reimbursement for damages they paid to soldiers injured when their
products malfunctioned, even if the fault was primarily the Government's. But
lower court rulings in the Agent Orange case and others have recognized a
special ''government contract defense'' which in some cases protects suppliers
on the ground that it would be unfair to hold them liable for doing the
Government's bidding when the Government itself is immune.

Many judges have chafed at what they deem the capriciousness of these broad
military exceptions to the general rule that a person harmed through the
negligence of another is entitled to compensation. In the Agent Orange case,
Federal District Judge Jack B. Weinstein helped spur the settlement by
innovative rulings narrowing the defense of the Government and the herbicide's
manufacturers. In an opinion earlier this year, he said the Feres doctrine
rested on ''very shaky foundations'' and could not be applied to claims by wives
and children of the veterans, even though four Federal appeals courts had come
to the opposite conclusion. And while the Government could not be sued by the
chemical companies for reimbursement of damages they might have to pay, Judge
Weinstein ruled the Government could be forced to pay a share of any damages for
miscarriages and birth defects attributable to genetic damage caused by Agent
Orange. The Government is appealing.

Judge Weinstein also stretched the law to give the veterans a shot at the
difficult task of establising that Agent Orange was the cause of their injuries.
But he warned that appeals courts might not follow him so far beyond the
mainstream of the law. The veterans' attorneys considered the odds, and took the
$180 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vietnam veteran, a plaintiff, and his family

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW AND FRIENDS WILL SIT THIS ONE OUT

BYLINE: By Serge Schmemann

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 729 words


MOSCOW

 T HERE was a sense of repetition in Moscow last week as talk of an Olympic
boycott swept the streets, echoing the themes of the United States-led boycott
of the 1980 games in the Soviet capital. But the roles were reversed this time.
Now it was Soviet athletes arguing that it was impossible to compete in a nation
as aggressive as the United States under President Reagan, while Washington
issued statements arguing that sports should not be polluted by politics.

The official explanation Moscow offered for staying away - one quickly taken up
by Bulgaria, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Vietnam, Laos and Mongolia, with
others yet to come - was that rampant anti-Sovietism had made Los Angeles and
the games unsafe for socialist participation. But the motives seemed far more
profound than apprehension about demonstrators, who in any event are an
occupational hazard for Soviet delegations abroad.

In stinging commentaries, Tass, the Soviet press agency, made clear that one key
motive was to do whatever possible to embarrass Mr. Reagan this election year,
and to demonstrate the intensity of Soviet frustration with his anti-Communist
posture and policies. Beyond that lay a grudge nourished for four years over the
American boycott in 1980, which denied the Russians the glorious display of
national achievement they had planned.

Whether accidentally or by design, the boycott announcement last week coincided
with other events that together seemed to reveal a nation belligerently
battening the hatches against the Reagan Administration and all the real and
perceived slights of the recent past. The next day, Moscow postponed what was to
have been the highest-level Soviet visit to China in 15 years. The deferral of
the trip by Ivan V. Arkhipov, First Deputy Premier, caught diplomats - and the
Chinese - by surprise. Again, the official excuse, that the Soviet side was not
fully prepared for the visit, seemed hardly sufficient.

An explanation suggested by diplomats was that the Russians were not prepared to
let a senior official go to Peking during renewed border hostilities between
China and Vietnam, Moscow's ally. The Soviet press has been loudly blaming
Peking for these incidents. Another possibility was Soviet pique at the
reception given Mr. Reagan during his visit to China.  The Russians gave no date
for rescheduling Mr.  Arkhipov's visit, leaving unclear how great a setback they
intended for the slow process of Soviet-Chinese rapprochement. Few diplomats saw
a direct connection between the canceled visit and the Olympic cancellation. But
in both, hostility to Mr. Reagan seemed to be a factor. Both derived from the
same ugly mood that appears to have taken hold in Moscow.  It was as if the
Russians had decided to draw the wagons tight, issuing only fierce denunciations
of the President, such as the one last week that said Mr. Reagan's Latin
American policies were marked by perfidy unknown since Hitler's Reich. Although
unconfirmed intelligence reports spoke of considerable debate in the Kremlin
before the Olympics decision was reached, there seemed little chance that the
dark mood would lift, at least until the Presidential election is decided.

There were reports that Juan Antonio Samaranch, the president of the
International Olympic Committee, and other officials planned to come to Moscow
to try to persuade the Russians to go to Los Angeles. But the growing number of
Communist Governments joining the boycott and the rising shrillness of Soviet
press attacks on Mr. Reagan seemed to leave little chance for a reversal.

Another event that contributed to the week's dour mood was a report from a
friend of Andrei D. Sakharov that the dissident Nobel Prize winner had started a
hunger strike to demand medical treatment abroad for his wife, Yelena G. Bonner.
At the same time, she was accused of anti-Soviet slander and restricted, like
her husband, to the city of Gorky.

The news was brought from Gorky by Irina Kristi, a friend of the Sakharovs, who
managed to converse with them for three minutes before she was seized by the
police and held overnight.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing of Moscow bear mascot

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DUARTE WINS A CRUCIAL ONE FOR REAGAN IN SALVADOR

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 4; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1022 words


WASHINGTON



P OLITICAL moods in Washington often last, as a Scandinavian Ambassador put it,
''about as long as the flight of a chicken.'' Just three weeks ago the tide was
running against President Reagan's Central American policy because Capitol Hill
was in an uproar over the mining of Nicaraguan harbors. Last week, the tide
turned. The harbor mining was barely mentioned in Congress and the President won
a tight but important legislative vote authorizing more military aid to El
Salvador. The shift reflected not only Washington's quixotic moods on Central
America, but also the perpetual tug-of-war in the post-Vietnam era over any
foreign policy that involves a conspicuous use of force.

Congress had cooled off during its Easter recess as the headlines concentrated
on President Reagan's trip to China. And the President, in a nationally
televised appeal Wednesday night, made the dire prediction that ''the Communists
will succeed'' in El Salvador unless Congress voted more aid. To Democrats, that
sounded like an election-year warning that he would hold them harshly to account
if the Salvadoran Government fell. In fact, officials said the President had
toned down earlier speech drafts, which accused his critics of being as blind
toward the Communist threat as some Europeans had been to Hitler in the 1930's.
He dropped a defiant reference to the harbor mining after Senate Republican
leaders said it would rekindle partisan passions.

The President's restrained approach helped swing votes. But the real watershed
event was last Sunday's presidential election in El Salvador, won by Jose
Napoleon Duarte, the Christian Democrat, whose vows to halt the right-wing death
squads, pursue land reform and seek a dialogue with the insurgents not only
suited the Administration but helped disarm Democratic critics. The President
greeted the first reports of Mr. Duarte's victory - he was officially declared
the winner yesterday - as proof that El Salvador had made ''strides toward
democracy.''

Events in El Salvador are seldom so simple. With a record of right-wing
disruption of previous elections, Washington was uneasy when the party of Mr.
Duarte's right-wing opponent, Roberto d'Aubuisson, attacked the results as ''a
farce'' and refused to accept them. Latin American specialists read this as an
omen that rightists might once again try to create chaos. The opposition to Mr.
Duarte was reinforced by revelations that the C.I.A. had contributed $2.1
million to defeat Mr. d'Aubuisson.  But for Capitol Hill last week, it was
enough that Mr. Duarte appeared the winner.  Otherwise, Speaker Thomas P.
O'Neill Jr.  said, ''we wouldn't even be debating these amendments'' for aid to
El Salvador, ''we'd be reassessing the whole thing.'' Indeed, Mr.  Duarte's
election split House Democratic ranks and made the Administration's victory
possible. The critical push came from majority leader Jim Wright of Texas who
backed a Republican package and opposed his own party's version of the aid bill,
one that offered no military aid to El Salvador this year and imposed tight
conditions in 1985.

Mr. Wright helped swing 56 Democrats into line with 156 Republicans to build a
212-to-208 majority for the Republican proposal for $129.4 million in military
aid for Central America this year.

Dramatic as it was, the House vote only authorized aid without actually
allocating it. But Republicans like Representative William Broomfield of
Michigan predicted it would help break the legislative impasse over a
Senate-approved bill to send El Salvador $62 million in military aid plus $21
million to Nicaraguan ''contras,'' or rebels. Others said the vote would free
the White House from its self-imposed ceiling of 55 American military advisers
in El Salvador. Emboldened Administration officials talked of pushing for
another $112 million in military aid for El Salvador this year. But to some in
Congress, that smacked of stretching a narrow victory too far.

The House vote left dangling the issue of aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, which
will run out this month and which House Democratic leaders have vigorously
opposed. That once-covert program prompted Nicaragua to file suit in the
International Court of Justice in The Hague. Last week, the court ruled that the
United States should immediately halt any attempts to blockade or mine
Nicaraguan ports. The Administration, seeking to put that controversy behind it,
had passed the word three weeks ago that the mining had been halted. Nothing in
the court ruling, a State Department spokesman said, ''is inconsistent with
current United States policy or activities with respect to Nicaragua.''

But the President made clear in his Wednesday night speech that he had no
intention of dropping the once-covert war completely. His speech contained his
most explicit public appeal for American support of the contras. They are
''freedom fighters,'' he said, whose ''democratic aspirations'' the United
States ''must support.'' To some in Congress, that sounded like an implicit call
for transforming and perhaps toppling the Sandinista Government - an objective
that both Senate and House Intelligence Committees have refused to sanction.

On aid to the contras, the criticial balance in the House shifts because the
pivotal Mr. Wright stands with Speaker O'Neill, asserting that whatever faults
there are in Nicaragua's policies, ''we may not dictate their form of society''
by backing rebel forces. ''There's no way aid to the contras will get through,''
one of the Speaker's lieutenants said. A Senate Republican aide was almost as
negative. ''The Administration has been clever in crafting the whole debate
lately around El Salvador, and they've won a big vote,'' he said. ''But the
contra money is still in trouble. They're still a long way from home on their
whole Central American policy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jose Napoleon Duarte

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Proverbially Russian

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 505 words


Tell me again, comrade, why we can't go to Los Angeles to beat the tails off the
Americans.

You'd rather have a pot of gold medals than affirm the honor of the homeland?
You'd let them march against us, shout insults at us, lure our young people into
defecting?

Those can't be your reasons. You would let a few demonstrators prevent a display
of superior Soviet man and woman? You really worry about defections? Our
athletes compete all over the capitalist world without succumbing to their
lures. Olympic runners are not ballet dancers.

They are hooting about ''captive nations'' and they've done nothing to control
the smog in Los Angeles. They are gassing the track!

You can hang a melon from a poplar, but only the fool will think the poplar a
melon tree. You'll not persuade anyone with this long list of trivial excuses.

Be calm, comrade. Please understand that our pretexts need not be our motives.
Why should we admit to a boycott and legitimize the Americans' kind of political
warfare? Why should we admit revenge for the way they destroyed our Olympics
four years ago and give them the satisfaction of knowing it still hurts?

Vengeance denied is no vengeance at all.

Oh, they will understand. We're not peasants who have to tolerate their war in
Vietnam while they can smugly punish us for Afghanistan. It's cheap to eat
grapes in the other man's vineyard.

But you're letting Reagan pose as the champion of peaceful competition. You are
re-electing him. No, comrade, you have it backward. Only necessity teaches a
bear to dance. What he most wants for Election Day are phony negotiations to
reassure his anxious people, smiling encounters that will let him boast how he
scared us with his saber-rattling. We may not be able to defeat him, but we're
not going to help him claim that his hostility makes us malleable.  Words,
words, just words, comrade. No one has ever died of insults. When his farmers
complained, he came begging to sell us wheat. At the first sight of blood, he
fled from Lebanon. The world will yet teach him its ways without our having to
strain so hard. A wolf without teeth still ogles sheep. Reagan dreams of the
teeth of his youth - nuclear ''superiority'' without American vulnerability, a
''rollback'' of Soviet power in Europe, a Soviet economy wrecked by the arms
race, maybe a capitalist restoration in Moscow. Such a man's words are deeds,
acts of hatred.  And ruining his Olympics will cool his passion? It will redeem
our self-respect. Half the world jumped through the American hoop in '80. Let
them see that half the world now jumps through ours. That is how diplomacy must
be waged. Treat us as equals and we can talk and compete in business and
basketball. Treat us as illegitimates . . . threaten us with supremacy . . .
then nothing is possible.  Reagan's re-election is highly possible. The horse is
often wiser than its rider. Besides, cows have more respect for the ugliest bull
than for the handsomest ox.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Verbatim: Nixon on the Press

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 163 words


''I don't think the press has changed. And as far as I'm concerned, I probably
have changed some. There has to be an adversarial relationship between press and
candidate. There has to be an adversarial relationship between the press and
whoever is in an office...I cherish many friendships in the press. And as far as
those who are not friends, who are critics, I respect them, but when they give
it to me, I give it back, just in kind - and that's the way it's going to be.

''I was president during a very controversial period. Many members of the media
totally disapproved, not of me personally so much as they did of the war in
Vietnam, of what we were trying to do there. I understood that. As far as I am
concerned now, speaking before this audience, I have no enemies in the press
whatever.'' Richard Nixon, answering questions about his relationship with the
press, at the annual meeting of the American Society of Newspaper Editors in
Washington, D.C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OPENING THE BOOKS ON CENSORSHIP

BYLINE: By Richard Bernstein

SECTION: Section 6; Page 28, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4724 words


Richard Bernstein is the chief of The Times' United Nations bureau.

''When I read Orwell, my hair stood on end at mere words running across the page
in front of me, at a mere idea.''

So, in the forward to a clandestine copy of ''1984,'' did the Czechoslovak
dissident writer Milan Simecka express the astonishment, the thrill of
discovery, the ''torment of self- flagellation of the mind,'' that can come from
reading a forbidden book. Then he went on to strike a note of bittersweet irony
as he claimed a unique, if unwanted, intensity in the life of the mind for those
who live under dictatorships.

There are certain countries, Mr. Simecka wrote for his underground Czechoslovak
audience, ''where you can read newspapers which print unofficial views, or go to
a public library and borrow just any book you want, or make fun of the country's
leaders . . . or even bring a stool to a certain park and spout whatever you
please to a bunch of people who have enough patience to stand there and listen
to you.'' In those countries, he went on, independent thought can hardly be
described as an adventure: ''This is thought without jeopardy.'' But if you want
''adventure by reading,'' he wrote, you have to be born ''in the right place, at
the right time, in the appropriate historical conditions'' - a dictatorship like
Czechoslovakia, for example.

In American society, self-critical, demanding, always scrutinizing itself for
moral or political defects, Mr. Simecka's ironic recollection - published in the
British bimonthly Index on Censorship - serves as a reminder of the need to make
some elementary distinctions. Particularly since the enormous surge of
self-doubt spurred by the Vietnam experience, it has become strangely out of
fashion among many Americans to utter praise of themselves, or to acknowledge
that, however flawed and beset by problems of their own, they remain far more
fortunate than that huge global mass that dwells in places where reading Orwell,
and many other authors, is an act of defiance and courage.

These thoughts come to mind on the eve of a major and ambitious exhibition at
the New York Public Library that deals directly with the issues of freedom, of
the silencing of opinion, and of the persistent effort by some to control the
minds of others. In the end, the exhibition, scheduled to open June 1, can be
taken as something of an occasion for self-congratulation. It shows that, after
centuries of struggle in this part of the world, free expression has triumphed,
even as, in many other parts, the struggle is as intense and as difficult as
ever.

Called ''Censorship: 500 Years of Conflict,'' the exhibi




 tion is the inaugural event of what is being called the ''new'' New York Public
Library. The refurbished grand old monument on Fifth Avenue and 42d Street has
completed the first stage of an ambitious $45 million renovation project
designed to reverse the decline it has suffered since New York's fiscal crisis.
Officials at the library say that the censorship exhibition will be the first in
a series of events that will display the extraordinary treasures of the
collection, much of which has rarely, if ever, been seen in recent times.

Intended to trace the history of the struggle for free expression in the West
since the invention of the printing press in the middle of the 15th century, the
exhibition will display books, drawings and other documents illustrating the
effort to suppress or control ideas and opinions. The nearly 300 objects on
display will include a banned copy of Luther's German Bible and George
Washington's personal copy of Voltaire's letters, which, banned in France, were
read by the father of our country during the terrible winter at Valley Forge.
There will be original copies of the Papal Index of proscribed books and lists
of the works destroyed for political reasons in Nazi Germany - from the stories
of Thomas Mann to Albert Einstein's general theory of relativity. The show will
be set in the D. Samuel and Jeane H. Gottesman Exhibition Hall, opened for the
first time to the public since World War II.

The library exhibition comes at a time when fears and doubts are being raised
about the validity and durability of the Western system of self-expression.
Controversies and battles continue over pornography, over sexually explicit
images on cable television, over books and films in the schools. Some months
ago, a kind of prior censorship was imposed by the Government when journalists
were refused permission to accompany the troops landing in Grenada. Also in
recent months, President Reagan attempted, apparently without success, to impose
lifetime secrecy on those who have served in key Government positions. And in
spite of the Supreme Court ruling last month in the Consumers Union case,
supporting strict judicial standards for libel judgments, there are worries that
the courts are making it easier for individuals to win judgments against writers
and newspapers and thus, perhaps, weaken the nation's commitment to uninhibited
and robust debate.

The exhibition, coming in this year of 1984, also seems likely to stir up deep,
brooding fears raised by George Orwell's masterpiece. In the exhibition
catalogue, Joan Hoff-Wilson, professor of American history at Indiana
University, warns that advanced technology may make possible deadlier and more
effective forms of mind control. Winston Smith, the hero of Orwell's
anti-utopian novel, is under constant surveillance by a television monitor in
his living room; ''thoughtpolice'' in helicopters peer into the homes of
citizens in pursuit of ''thoughtcrimes.''

Orwell, in fact, was writing a satire on Soviet totalitarianism; he does not
seem to have been projecting some dark fantasy about the evils that lurk in the
democratic West. Yet the machinery of modern society - the computers, the
information banks, the credit cards, the listening devices and spy gadgetry, the
capacity to collect, sort and recall vast amounts of data on individual citizens
- has induced fears of a mind control that was impossible when censorship was a
matter of proscribed books and straightforward persecution.

''Assassination,'' George Bernard Shaw once said, ''is the extreme form of
censorship,'' and, indeed, the exhibition in the library reminds us that over
the centuries many have been subjected to that extreme, or they have been
jailed, silenced, tortured or disgraced. In a flier sent out by the library
announcing the censorship exhibition, the warning takes this form: ''Censorship
has stifled the attempt to communicate in every century, under dictatorships and
democracies alike - and if the past is any indication, may do so again.''

Surely it is always useful to be reminded that liberty requires struggle and
vigilance, but the library's flier tends to put democracy and dictatorship into
the same category. And indeed, many have complained that, though generally less
brutal, the West has its own machinery of censorship. The English poet Stephen
Spender, in an essay written for the exhibition catalogue, tells of overhearing
a conversation between two poets, the American Robert Lowell and the Russian
Andrei Voznesensky, during which Lowell expressed a kind of rueful envy of the
Russian. It must, Lowell said, be good to live in a society where the Government
takes poets seriously enough to put them in prison and ban their poems. The West
is better, of course, Lowell seems to say, but at the same time, poetry suffers
from a crass indifference that is in itself a form of censorship.

In fact, the history of censorship in the West shows not even an incidental
similarity between the two worlds. The items on display at the library
exhibition indicate that, in the West, it was for only brief periods during the
long age of monarchial or religious autocracy that those in power managed to
create the kind of totalistic, airtight structures of repression that
effectively seal people from ideas.

Indeed, reading the history of censorship since Gutenberg set up the first
printing press around 1450, one is struck not only by the intensity of the
struggle for freedom, but also by the tenacity of ideas, their tendency to slip
through virtually any kind of repressive network and, in many cases, eventually
be incorporated into the received wisdom of Western political culture. Ralph
Waldo Emerson's claim seems warranted: ''Every suppressed or expunged word
reverberates through the earth.'' Not to put too fine a point on it, the
censorship show demonstrates that today, whatever battles may remain to be
fought in this corner of the globe, we have never been freer to express
ourselves; our marketplace of ideas and cultural products has never been so
crowded.

The same, however, cannot be said of other major portions of the political
universe, the totalitarian societies and many of the third-world countries,
where organization and technology have been used not to spread ideas or to
diversify culture, but to control them and to impose homogeneity. As Mr. Spender
writes in his essay for the exhibition catalogue, ''The difference between
censorship in the West and in the Communist countries is so great that it
amounts, not to a difference of degree, but of kind.'' He goes on: ''Censorship
in totalitarian societies is more than a matter of the persecution of individual
writers and other artists. It is a matter of the dictatorship monopolizing all
the media of communication with the people, who are told only what the
Government wants them to know.''

Mr. Spender might have added that it is a matter of labor camps, of imprisonment
in psychiatric hospitals, of the worship of the larger- than-life leader
inculcated by a vast propaganda network of newspapers, radio and television
programs, theatrical extravaganzas, songs, dances, mass meetings and political
lectures as well as books, magazines and photographs, all aimed at justifying
for the sake of the ''revolution'' or the ''people'' an absolute monopoly on
political power.

The president of the New York Public Library, Vartan Gregorian, who has achieved
a kind of celebrity status in New York as the energizing force behind the
rejuvenated public library, likes to talk of the institution's role as the
preserver of the whole of culture, of the good and the bad, the memorable and
the forgettable, the immortal and the transient. In the three years since he
arrived from the University of Pennsylvania, where he was provost, Mr. Gregorian
has introduced the smart New York set to the task of preservation and
scholarship. He has brought the captains of industry and the arbiters of high
society into an effort to raise money for an institution that, while blessed
with marble corridors and rococo ceilings, grand chiaroscuro reading rooms and
gleaming oak tables, was suffering from financial shortages, curtailment of
service and dilapidation.

Using the arts of publicity and glittering social occasions - last December
there were 95 fund-raising dinners on a single night, each hosted by a different
writer or socialite - Mr. Gregorian has more than just added to the library's
coffers; he has made the library fashionable in much the same way that Thomas
Hoving made the Metropolitan Museum of Art a center of both social and cultural
life a decade ago.

In a sense, what Mr. Gregorian has been trying to do is remind this city of the
extraordinary treasures that the library contains, its status as a repository of
knowledge. Comparable in size to the Library of Congress and the French
Bibliotheque Nationale, it contains some six million books and pamphlets, 2,500
newspapers in 62 languages, 500,000 musical recordings and videotapes. There are
175,000 original prints and drawings, 350,000 sheet maps and such rare books as
six first folios of Shakespearean plays, the first Gutenberg Bible brought to
the New World and a draft in the hand of Thomas Jefferson of the Declaration of
Independence. Each year, 1.5 million people use the 42d Street library and three
other research libraries, not to mention the 82 branches scattered around New
York.

During the planning for the censorship exhibition, which will run through Oct.
15, a list was drawn up of the items needed for display. It turned out, Mr.
Gregorian said in a recent interview, that all but 1 percent were already in the
library's collection. According to Mr. Gregorian, the library has 28 percent of
all the books on the Americas and Europe printed in the world between 1450 and
1660.

For much of the history of New York City, moreover, this richness has served an
essentially democratic purpose. The library, the use of which has always been
free, has made the power that is knowledge available to all. Mr. Gregorian likes
to point out that even in the darkest days of the Great Depression, the 42d
Street library was open for 87 hours a week, compared to 67 hours today. ''The
library was the last thing to be affected by an economic turndown,'' he said.


Censorship in our age may appear, at first, to have lost its elements of
controversy. It would probably be difficult to find respectable figures from any
part of the political spectrum proclaiming support for censorship - except in
the single area of pornography, which many in this country believe goes beyond
the boundaries of what should be legally permissible. One sign of the times is
simply that, by contrast with earlier eras, it takes no courage these days to
advocate totally free expression. It has become part of the Western political
culture.

Arthur Schlesinger Jr., writing for the exhibition catalogue, contends that the
period covered by the show ''witnessed the great shift in the moral balance
between expression and authority.'' The history of modern times, Mr. Schlesinger
goes on, is one in which censorship gave way to the concept of liberty as a
practical necessity. ''Individuals and groups,'' he writes, ''were prepared to
concede liberty of expression to others in order to assure it for themselves;
and censorship, except at the margins, began to lose legitimacy.''

There is even something retrospectively comic about some of the efforts to keep
offending works away from the public eye. Those efforts shown in the exhibition
have an anachronistic feel about them, an air of silliness and of futility,
somewhat akin to pressing confidently the claim that the world is flat. In
banning ''The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn'' from the shelves of the Concord
Public Library, one trustee, quoted by Mr. Schlesinger, accused the book of ''a
very low grade of morality'' and ''a systematic use of bad grammar.'' Mark
Twain's reply is instructive of the entire effort to suppress. He said that the
banning of the book would assure sales of 25,000 copies.

The displays in Gottesman Hall demonstrate that throughout Western history,
ideas have survived; they have always leaked through even the most systematic
and concerted efforts to suppress them. When Martin Luther publicly burned the
papal bull Contra Errores, his act of defiance was spread through Europe - as
Ann Alter, a guest curator at the library, writes in the catalogue - ''by
merchants, journeymen, humanists and soldiers, who passed pamphlets, vernacular
Bibles and Protestant and humanist tracts to friends and comrades-in-arms.''
Even at the height of absolute monarchy in Europe, there existed what Ann Alter
has called an anticensorship network, stretching through London, Cracow,
Copenhagen and Rome.

In 1564, the papacy promulgated the first Index of Prohibited Books, which
included the names of authors whose entire work was banned, lists of individual
banned titles and instructions for expurgating portions of other books whose
contents were in the main acceptable. Yet, the curator points out, ''book
smuggling was so widespread that it might more accurately be termed the
'clandestine trade' that supplemented the open commerce.''

The clandestine trade continued for virtually as long as there was censorship.
In 18th- century France, many of the great English works that influenced les
philosophes like Voltaire and Diderot - the works, for example, of Locke and
Hobbes - were French translations published in Amsterdam and distributed in
Switzerland. To control the press, as the catalogue points out, meant
controlling all of Europe.

In 1579, a French Huguenot pamphlet entitled Vindiciae Contra Tyrannos (A
Vindication Against Tyranny) was published in Scotland. It gave a justification
for revolt against the French monarchy. A century later, the pamphlet appeared
in English translation and was used by Puritan rebels in England to justify the
eventual execution of Charles I. Daniel Bell, the Harvard sociologist, pointed
out in an interview that many of the great thinkers of Western civilization -
Hobbes, Hegel, Kant among them - wrote under systems of censorship, developing
methods of couching heterodox ideas in subtle, indirect terms. ''There was a
kind of subterranean tradition for those who knew how to interpret certain
texts,'' Dr. Bell said.

In 1832, the caricaturist Honore Daumier, whose satirical drawings are to be
seen in the exhibition, was jailed by King Louis Philippe for - as the catalogue
puts it -''exciting hatred'' for the king. A generation later, Flaubert, after
writing ''Madame Bovary,'' was put on trial in France for lasciviousness and
immorality. He was acquitted, and ''Madame Bovary,'' which might well have
otherwise found only a small audience, became a best seller. Nonetheless,
between 1876 and 1906, there were an average of 55 obscenity cases a year in
France, most of them ending in conviction. In England and the United States,
Thomas Bowdler's ''Family Shakespeare,'' which excised whatever could not ''with
propriety be read aloud in a family,'' gained great popularity. It exemplified
the spread of Victorian prudery, amounting to a new kind of censorship, the
censorship of inhibition.

In the United States, works by Whitman, Stephen Crane and Theodore Dreiser were
banned for years in some places, as were Havelock Ellis's studies of
homosexuality. Private pressure groups proliferated after the Civil War and
waged relentless war on what were perceived as obscene publications. The
notorious Comstock Laws, named for the secretary of the New York Society for the
Suppression of Vice, led to the prosecutions of Edward Bliss Foote and Margaret
Sanger for advocating birth control and to the exclusion of works by Rabelais,
Boccaccio and Voltaire. It was only after the American courts ruled against a
ban on D. H. Lawrence's ''Lady Chatterley's Lover'' in 1960 that moral
censorship essentially came to an end in the United States.



The victory of free expression in the West provides a stark contrast to the
truly Orwellian outcomes in the totalitarian worlds - Nazi Germany, the Soviet
Union, the Guinea of Ahmed Sekou Toure or latter-day Iran - where
unprecedentedly powerful networks of repression were being created even as the
more fragile networks in the West were crumbling. Anthony Comstock was not in
the same league with Lenin, Hitler, Toure or the Ayatollah Khomeini. Their first
acts upon coming to power - often legally or, at least, with enthusiastic public
support - included gaining control over the press, creating extralegal secret
police forces and manufacturing a self-contained world of propaganda to justify
the new dictatorship.

Ideas do get through, however; there are radio broadcasts, travelers from
abroad, even clandestine copies of ''1984.'' Yet the arguments are strong that
contemporary censorship enforced by an apparatus of control is harsher and more
thoroughgoing than that of earlier eras in the West.

At the root of the impulse toward modern-day control of ideas is the
pseudoscientific notion that all of history points to a single end and that
nothing which diverges from that end has any worth. In that sense, there is a
corollary to the suppression of dissident ideas. It is the inculcation of the
approved ones, the revolutionary classics learned in school, the ''scientific
truths'' of Marxism- Leninism, the heroic deeds and brilliant thoughts of the
leader.

At the same time, censorship in today's dictatorships has a hypocritical aspect
that makes it very different from censorship in the past. In earlier centuries,
the control of ideas was undisguised; it was viewed as a moral necessity.
Today's totalitarian societies control ideas despite formal guarantees of such
freedoms as speech and of the press. In China, where this is the case, free
expression must adhere to what are officially called ''fundamental principles,''
including advocacy of ''the socialist road'' and the ''leadership of the
Communist Party.'' In the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, the law allows
prosecutions for ''incitement against the state'' or ''anti-Soviet slander,''
which usually means any sharp criticism of the system.

In an interview published last year, the Czechoslovak playwright Vaclav Havel,
who spent 1979 to 1983 in prison, recalled reading in the official newspaper,
Rude Pravo, a comment by the then Minister of the Interior Jaromir Obzina, that
crime in a Communist state was the result of ''insufficient social homogeneity
of the population.'' The nature of life itself is heterogeneity, Mr. Havel said;
it is a mixing of diversity. Indeed, he added, ''once we become exactly like one
another there will be no more need for courts of law and prisons.''

Writes Stephen Spender: ''Censorship is the absolutely indispensable preliminary
to dictatorship.'' He adds: ''It involves censoring the whole people, dividing
the world into the free and un-free.'' Mr. Spender argues that one practical
effect of this is nothing less than the threat of war. By suppressing the
advocacy of disarmament in his own country, Hitler, in effect, turned pacifists
in England into ''his assistants in rearming Germany.'' The same thing might be
said about the Communist states today. The suppression of fledgling, private
peace groups in the Soviet Union, East Germany and Hungary, and the
encouragement of such groups in the West represent a form of censorship with far
more than literary consequences. It could well have consequences for the
survival of the planet.

The situation in the West, with its profusion of opinions and its floods of
disclosures, is different. When, for example, the Government of the United
States tried to prevent The New York Times from publishing the Pentagon Papers
13 years ago, the paper went to court and prevailed. In many other countries,
the Government would have sent in the police and censorship would have
prevailed. Even the most recent effort of the American Government to control
information, by denying the press its normal right to cover the first few days
of the invasion of Grenada, was a limited operation that itself brought such a
storm of censure and protest that the Pentagon was forced to apologize and vow
not to repeat the mistake.

Still, there are deep concerns in our part of the world both about the residues
of traditional forms of censorship and what are alleged to be new varieties of
it. In one instance, there are fears that government power endangers the
fullness of self-expression.

Joan Hoff-Wilson of Indiana University, in her essay for the exhibition
catalogue, warns not only of the danger that government bureaucracies may gain
greater control over the freedoms and rights of citizens because of new
technology; she also believes that the swing toward the right by the American
electorate in the last few years has already produced an ''avalanche of
reaction'' blocking further progress on behalf of ''civil-liberties issues such
as busing, abortion, the ERA, affirmative action, obscenity and gay rights.''
She contends that since the mid-1970's there has been an ''epidemic of attempts
to censor books and films in the schools,'' a contention supported by others.
The Washington-based citizens' group, People for the American Way, which
supports First Amendment rights, claims that last year there were attempts to
remove, alter or restrict textbooks, library books or teaching materials and
courses in 48 states.

Joan Hoff-Wilson, in particular, seems less dismayed that censorship is on the
rise - though that is part of her concern - than that certain Government
policies are misdirected. Not everyone would agree, for example, that busing,
abortion and obscenity are civil liberties; they are policies or phenomena that
one is free to support or oppose.

Of more profound concern is what has been called ''repressive tolerance,'' a
notion developed by the radical social critic Herbert Marcuse. It suggests that
disturbing ideas are simply ignored in this country; they are tolerated but
overwhelmed and obscured as the mass of citizens are manipulated by
ever-more-skillful image makers. An ironic result of the triumph of
permissiveness might, some writers have complained, be a sort of censorship in
reverse.

''We live in a society in which the main consensus seems to be that the artist's
duty is to entertain and divert, nothing more,'' said the Canadian writer
Margaret Atwood at a conference in Toronto three years ago. She added, ''We
control through the marketplace and through critical opinion. We are also
controlled by the economics of culture.'' The French novelist Michel Tournier,
at the same conference, spoke of the ultimate censorship of the Gulag
Archipelago, but he added that Western society also contained poisons which,
''though they may be milder, are nonetheless equally effective in taming the
untamed writer.'' They are, Mr. Tournier said, ''the literary prizes, the
academies, the official posts, and more significantly, the confidence and
loyalty of a particular public of readers.''

Clearly, censorship is a subtle and complex matter these days. It involves less
the heavy hand of political repression and far more the pressures and
constraints of normal social life. Mr. Tournier may justly grieve that artists
and writers are made less honest, less faithful in their efforts to hold up a
mirror to the world than they would be if there were no prizes, no rewards. But
the censorship exhibition suggests that in the past, at least, the problem was a
good deal less benign than today. We have progressed that far at least.

There is, in fact, yet another school of thought, one that sees the danger to
free expression coming not from overt political repression or from social or
economic suasion or even from inertia in the face of the power of received
opinion. Censorship can also be privately motivated; it can come as a kind of
self-restraint, as a failure to tell the truth, perhaps out of fear or, what may
be less forgiveable, from a sense of political commitment.

Jean-Francois Revel, for example, in ''The New Censorship,'' published in France
in 1978, charged that intellectuals have persistently refused to tell what they
know to be the truth about Communism largely because they are unwilling to
provide ammunition to their perceived enemies on the right. Mr. Revel and others
have charged that a confusion of political values, a failure to realize our own
self-worth, has led to a fashion of self- criticism and a willful self- delusion
about the denial of liberty elsewhere.

In ''The Book of Laughter and Forgetting,'' the Czechoslovak writer Milan
Kundera tells of the festive air of acceptance in the West that followed the
Soviet-inspired Communist coup in his country in 1948. Two years later, he says,
there was dancing in the streets in the wake of the execution of Zavis Kalandra,
a friend of the French poets Andre Breton and Paul Eluard. Mr. Kundera, who
lives in Paris now, his books banned in Czechoslovakia, recounts that Eluard
refused to join Breton in dismissing the ''absurd accusation'' of treason
against Kalandra. Eluard, Mr. Kundera writes bitterly, was ''too busy reciting
his beautiful poems about joy and brotherhood'' to ''stand up for a man who had
betrayed the people.''

Many besides Eluard have, in their desire for revolutionary change, looked the
other way at revolutionary atrocities. This habit of mind does not appear among
the exhibits soon to be on view at the New York Public Library. Yet it is, in
its way, as insidious a form of censorship as any.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vartan Gregorian

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

About Men;
Facing Violence

BYLINE: By Michael T. Kaufman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 70, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1099 words


Michael T. Kaufman

is chief of the Ottawa bureau of The New York Times.



 ALMOST 20 YEARS ago, when my oldest son was very young, I tried to shield the
boy from violence and aggression, those alleged attributes of manliness. My wife
and I had agreed to raise our children in an atmosphere of nonviolence, without
playthings that simulated weapons. Then my uncle came to visit us from Israel.
My uncle, unlike his wife and children, had survived Auschwitz, and he was
surprised that my son had no toy guns. I tried to explain, but, asserting the
moral authority of a war victim and survivor, he took my son off to Macy's to
buy the biggest, noisiest toy machine gun he could find. My uncle said that if
people do not go bang bang when they are young they go bang bang when they grow
up.  Since then, we have lived in Africa and in Asia and I have seen and heard
bang bang. I am not sure I fully understand what my uncle meant, but I no longer
think that exposure to the symbols of death and violence causes little boys to
grow up ethically impaired. In fact, now that I am living in North American
civilization, where enormous energies are spent rendering death and violence
either fictional or abstract, I think the greatest moral pitfall is not that we
witness too much bang bang, but that, for the most part, we perceive it
vicariously. We shield ourselves from real death and pain while paying to see
these same things, sanitized and stylized, in the movies.

This idea crystallized in my mind after a conversation I had a short while ago
with Jack Troake, a thoughtful man who, like his father, grandfather and
great-grandfather, makes his living by fishing from his home port of
Twillingate, Newfoundland. Like his ancestors and neighbors, he also used to
spend the icebound winter months hunting gray skin seals, but he does so no
longer. The market for seal pelts in Europe and the United States has been
destroyed because of protests launched abroad by animal-rights groups. The
original protests were against the clubbing of baby white-furred seal pups, a
hunt that Jack Troake never joined. Then the outcry spread to include all seals.
Last year, a British supermarket chain declared it would no longer stock
Canadian fish because of someone's belief that some fishermen either now hunt
seals or once did.  As we sat on Mr. Troake's radar- equipped boat watching his
sons mend nets, he made it clear that he was flabbergasted and insulted by what
he assumed to be the view of some foreigners that he and his neighbors were
barbarians. ''Look old boy, there's no doubt about it, I make my living killing
things. We kill mackerel and cod and we used to kill seals. Now, there seems to
be a bunch of people who do not like that. I imagine them sitting eating lamb
chops and steak and chicken, thinking they all come neatly wrapped in plastic
from some food factory. I wonder whether they have ever seen anything die or
anything born, except on televison and in the movies. But, to tell you the
truth, old boy, I really feel sorry for those people who are so upset about this
old Christian.''

Me too. I left Twillingate, and in a motel that night I watched the footage from
Beirut. As I remember now, it contained what have become the current visual
cliches of violence. Men firing bazookas around a corner at something. Smoke and
rubble. Women with shopping bags walking fast across a street. Adolescent gunmen
smiling into the camera from the backs of trucks. It conveyed a sense of
destruction, but it stopped short of being horrible. I knew the images were
authentic, but they did not seem real. They blurred into an already crowded
memory bank of two-dimensional violence: Dirty Harry, the A Team, Beirut,
Belfast, El Salvador, car crashes. And I thought how I, bombarded with such
pictures of death, had, two years ago, backed away from the real drama of death
when it touched me as something more than a witness. I had sent my own mother to
die in a nursing home, among death specialists. I did not hold her as her life
ebbed. Later, I consoled myself with the thought that this is what people do in
a technological culture, and that, anyway, the room was clean and the doctors
said she did not suffer greatly.

I recall how we used to hear that the images of the Vietnam War, shown on
television, sensitized the nation. Perhaps. I can recall the naked little girl
running from napalm, and the man being shot by a police official in Saigon. But
everything else has been jumbled in memory, and what remains are mostly
recollections of what I now think of as my skin-deep shock and my pious
responses. There were too many images. The only people I hear talking about
Vietnam now are the ones who were there.

What I do remember is the first dead man I ever saw, a man shot and bleeding on
dirty stairs in New York. I remember victims of massacres in Zaire and Rhodesia,
and I can recall where each of those bodies lay. I remember an Afghan freedom
fighter in a hospital in Peshawar, his leg lost in a land-mine explosion. He had
his rifle with him, and his 7-year-old son was on his bed touching the man's
stump. The father was talking about returning to fight Soviet forces; he hoped
that his son would continue the fight. For that small boy, perhaps, the moment
was indeed too much bang bang, but I am no longer sure.

As for little boys playing with toy guns, I don't think it matters much, one way
or the other. What does matter, it seems to me, is that at some time in their
formative years, maybe in high school, our children should bear witness to the
everyday violence they could see, say, in an emergency ward of a big city
hospital. I know it sounds extreme, but maybe our children could learn something
valuable if they were taken for a day or two to visit a police station or an
old-age home. It might serve as an antidote for the unreal violence on all our
screens.

What would be learned, I think, is that, up close and in three dimensions, the
dead, the dying and the suffering are always to some extent ''us.'' On the
screens they always seem to be ''them.'' I don't understand it, really, any more
than my uncle's view of bang bang, but I know that as long as men die and men
kill it is wrong to turn away too much. Also, I am certain that I would prefer
to be judged by the hunter Jack Troake than by anyone who would judge him
harshly.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM NOVELS

SECTION: Section 7; Page 37, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 223 words


To the Editor:


I was impressed by James Webb's ''Fields of Fire'' when I read it two years ago,
and have been surprised never to see it mentioned or reviewed. I therefore
turned with interest to Michiko Kakutani's essay on books on the Vietnam War,
thinking to find it discussed with the respect it deserves. I was disappointed
and offended to see it scornfully dismissed. Evidently Miss Kakutani did not
feel Mr. Webb was critical enough of the war.

Books criticizing the war are a dime a dozen. How many are there, like Mr.
Webb's, that tell us what it was like to be there? How it changed people, as war
always does, in unexpected ways, and made unlikely heroes. Parts of the book are
truly epic, in the tradition of the ''Iliad.'' At the same time it tells of a
world few white middle-class people know of; in this it reminded me of Hubert
Selby Jr.'s ''Last Exit to Brooklyn.'' The character of Snake in ''Fields of
Fire,'' a violent misfit in the streets of the slums who finds a leader in
himself, and the manhood in himself, is one of the most moving I have come
across. You cannot often tell who is white or who is black; like many small
differences, this one disappears in wartime.

Not surprisingly James Webb was active in having a monument for Vietnam veterans
set up - only last year.  LARISSA BONFANTENew York

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Novels

SECTION: Section 7; Page 37, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 161 words


To the Editor:

Michiko Kakutani's essay on ''Novelists and Vietnam: The War Goes On'' (April
15) discussed some shortcomings of American novels and other books on Vietnam
but left out the main one - the fact that the Vietnamese tend to be shadowy
figures in the background of such books.

The war was fought in Vietnam by Vietnamese. We didn't lose it; the North
Vietnamese won it. The war did shake us up a bit, but the people who really got
shaken up were the Vietnamese. They'll never be the same.

The shadowy place of the Vietnamese in most American books about the Vietnam War
does accurately, if inadvertently, reflect their indistinct place in the minds
of American soldiers, top brass, diplomats and correspondents alike. Much,
indeed, remains to be written about the war, but it looks as though it will have
to be written by Vietnamese. Only they would have the kind of perspective to put
us in our place.  JAMES HOOVERCornwall, N.Y.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS May 13, 1984Fiction

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 713 words


1

GENTLE FEUDING, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $3.95.) True love overcomes a bloody
feud between two Scottish clans.

2

SEEDS OF YESTERDAY, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $3.95.) Concluding volume of a
horror series about the Dollanganger family.

3

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL, by John le Carre. (Bantam, $3.95.) A young Englishwoman
caught between Israeli and P.L.O. agents.

4

LEGION, by William Peter Blatty. (Pocket, $3.95.) Investigating the crucifixion
murder of a 12-year-old boy.

5

CROSSINGS , by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) A clandestine trans-Atlantic
romance survives the stresses of World War II.

6

ANCIENT EVENINGS, by Norman Mailer. (Warner, $4.95.) Ten centuries of rites and
orgies in long-ago Egypt.

7

BLACK HEART, by Eric Van Lustbader. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) Tracking the
murderer of a Presidential candidate into the jungles of Cambodia.

8

SON OF A WANTED MAN, by Louis L'Amour. (Bantam, $2.95.) A young man inherits his
father's place as head of a gang of Western outlaws.

9

ICEBREAKER, by John Gardner. (Berkley, $3.50.) James Bond's mission is to break
a neo-Nazi group somewhere in the Arctic.

10

HEARTBURN, by Nora Ephron. (Pocket, $3.50.) A roman a clef about a marriage
breaking up.

11

V, by A. C. Crispin. (Pinnacle, $2.95.) Novelization of a TV miniseries about an
invasion from outer space.

12

LIGHT A PENNY CANDLE, by Maeve Binchy. (Dell, $3.95.) A crisis threatens the
close relationship of two sisters.

13

WHITE GOLD WIELDER, by Stephen R. Donaldson. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.95.) Book
Three in ''The Second Chronicles of Thomas Covenant,'' a fantasy saga.

14

THE COLOR PURPLE, by Alice Walker. (Pocket/Washington Square Press, $6.95.)
Black women and their families in the South.

15

BALEFIRE, by Kenneth Goddard. (Bantam, $3.95.) Pursuing a ruthless cop-killer.




The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.



 Nonfiction

General 1

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
autobiography.  2

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons from well-run corporations.  3

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.  4

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon.  (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) A trip
through the back roads of America.  5

THE SHOEMAKER, by Flora Rheta Schreiber.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) The story of a
psychotic killer. 6

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  7

CHARLIE COMPANY, by Peter Goldman and Tony Fuller. (Ballantine, $3.95.) What
their experience in Vietnam did to some 50 infantrymen.  8

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.



Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  2

'TOONS FOR OUR TIMES, by Berke Breathed.  (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoons from
the comic strip ''Bloom County.'' 3

GARFIELD TIPS THE SCALE, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon humor.  4

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson.  (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.  4

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
For 1984.  6

JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $9.95.) An exercise
book for women.  7

THE BILL JAMES BASEBALL ABSTRACTS 1984, by Bill James. (Ballantine, $6.95.)
Statistics and analysis.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS May 13, 1984Fiction 1110

SECTION: Section 7; Page 36, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 734 words


THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  225

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  339

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss. (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about the
nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  446

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  557

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  6814

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  7810

LORD OF THE DANCE, by Andrew M. Greeley. (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) In
seeking her long-lost cousin, a teen-ager probes the mysteries of life and
death.  7628

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  977

ONE MORE SUNDAY, by John D. MacDonald. (Knopf, $15.95.) Behind the scenes with a
charismatic television preacher.  101014

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  111247

THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, $15.95.) Unraveling the mystery of a murder in a 14th-century
Italian monastery.  111137

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.  13123

FLOODGATE, by Alistair MacLean. (Doubleday, $15.95.) Terrorists threaten to
flood the Netherlands unless Britain leaves Northern Ireland.  13143

WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W. Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What follows
the first nuclear war in 1988.  15 2

DESCENT FROM XANADU, by Harold Robbins. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A man who
has everything - power, money, women - seeks to obtain immortality.


 Nonfiction 1134

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck.  (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2313

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.  2410

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty. (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  429

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W. Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  5528

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a California preacher.  6103

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' TV series.  772

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock. (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  887

MAFIA PRINCESS, by Antoinette Giancana and Thomas C. Renner.  (Morrow, $15.95.)
Growing up in the family of the mobster Sam Giancana.  9122

CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Secretary of State gives his views on foreign policy.  9 1

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter. (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.) Memoirs.
111119

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin. (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  11135

FURTHER UP THE ORGANIZATION, by Robert Townsend. (Knopf, $15.95.) Business
strategies for the 1980's.

11 85

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein. (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  14613

TOUGH-MINDED FAITH FOR TENDERHEARTED PEOPLE, by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $14.95.) More inspiration from a California preacher.  151414

PEOPLE OF THE LIE, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
psychiatrist's prescription for ''healing human evil.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

D-DAY PLUS 40 YEARS

BYLINE: By JOHN VINOCUR

SECTION: Section 10; Page 14, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1133 words


JOHN VINOCUR is the Paris bureau chief of The New York Times.

Pointe du Hoc is a knife, stood on its edge, pointed into the sea. It looks
lethal, a palisade of boulder and mean rocks where Normandy's green softness has
reclaimed nothing. Battlefields: you could walk them from Gettysburg to
Waterloo, and go back to your car, thinking of lunch. But not at Pointe du Hoc.
The brightest morning roughens there, the wind working like a rasp, still
scoring cruel edges on the sheer cliffs. On D-day, the U.S. Army's Second Ranger
Battalion had to climb the knife's blade through bullets and shells. In 1984,
looking down to the sea from the viewpoint of the German machine-gun
emplacements, imagination becomes superfluous. The emotions are all immediate
and distinct: my God, they made it to the top; this is still a cruel place; it
holds the mark of a killing ground.

Pointe du Hoc is special. For the most part, the pastoral blanket of Normandy
covers over any sense of the fury, the dying, and the scale involved in the
thrust of 180,000 Allied troops into Europe on the 6th of June 1944. The
pastures are too lush, the land too rich with apple orchards and rose arbors. In
Normandy, near the beaches, the war burned fast. There is no complaint, of
course - the Allies rushed through the nearby countryside, and were soon gone;
11 months after D-day, Hitler's Europe fell. Occasionally, a speech (hundreds
are scheduled this year) will resemble the regrown landscape and turn the
invasion to whole glory, leaving the dead as a detail. Reality was something
else. In the first 25 hours, the U.S. First Army had 6,603 casualties; two
months later, the Americans had to use bulldozers to clear a passage through the
40,000 German corpses at Chambois to the south.

Normandy, its landscape healed, soothes mostly, and holds tightly to its
emotions. They are there, although not much at Utah or Omaha Beaches, or in the
invasion museums, where models of the engineering feats have the look of Erector
sets, and the old uniforms seem like rock band gear from costume shops. The
sense of war, the extraordinary bravery of the Allied armies, the numbers, the
losses, the real suffering that disappears in time and commemorative oratory,
are not marked out in any red guidebook of the emotions, but they are present if
you look.

I went to the D-day beaches for the first time 15 years ago in May 1969,
expecting no feelings at all. Europe seemed so rich and self-content that it was
hard to believe that the United States had to come to help. World War II, just
25 years earlier, felt terribly long ago then; in 1969 there was too much war
going between my own contemporaries, all of it bad, the just cause not having
leaped the generational gap. I had just returned from Biafra reporting on a
ghastly and lunatic war of starved children and big oil interests, and the news
in the papers was of Hamburger Hill, the tag name for a place the U.S. Army was
having trouble capturing in Vietnam. The stories made clear that there were
grunts who did not want to go into the fire, and the accounts, I thought, were
written with the sympathy of the times, and probably often read that way too.

I got to Pointe du Hoc mostly by accident then because the road was not well
marked and seemed to peter out in the fields. The wind jumps up from the sea as
you get closer, and the fields begin to roll and dip, cratered by the Allied
offshore bombardment. At the edge of the cliffs, the wind is a smack, and D-day
becomes wildly clear: climbing that cutting edge into the bullets. The first men
came up on rope, and then ladders belonging to the London Fire Department. The
Germans, firing down at them, even rolling boulders over the precipice, killed
more Americans in the first wave than those who got to the top.

The day I was there, a man paced around Pointe du Hoc as if he were taking
measurements for a linoleum company. His name was Robert Fruling, he worked in a
spare parts department in West Palm Beach, Fla., and he was looking around
because he had come up the cliffs as a Ranger. I heard how he got hell for
losing the radio he was toting, and how a bullet went through his helmet, kindly
following a path that avoided his head. He talked about the place with a kind of
chirpy good humor for a while and then he stopped. About 75 men in the 235 he
came ashore with survived. ''We got it, and we got it,'' he said, and turned
away. He bent over shaking with sobs.

There is as much death as glory now at Pointe du Hoc, and somehow, in a
recriminating 1984 Europe, a disenchanted one, the battlefield and D-day seem
more real than in 1969. Do we discuss going up the cliff? Not here. Pointe du
Hoc offers its own conclusions, a battlefield never gone quite still.


The quiet lies elsewhere, its emotions strong. The American cemetery at
St.-Laurent-sur-Mer is a great lawn at the edge of the sea, white marble crosses
and Stars of David against an open horizon. It is a graceful, light,
uncomplicated place. I think of it as very American in the best sense: no phony
piety, simple, easy. The graves are the message, and they are left alone: long
rows, long rows, long rows. Unequivocal. The monument is inscribed with
monument-inscription language, but minus the tremolo, it is right: ''This
embattled shore, portal of freedom, is forever hallowed by the ideas, valor and
sacrifice of our fellow countrymen.'' At Cambe, near Isigny, away from the sea,
and off a main road, there is a German cemetery. It is a very different place, a
powerful one, not so simple, not so certain, one that is more of this than that
other time. The headstones are low and dark, almost black, looking like Knight's
Crosses. The grass is let to grow high, and it moves in the wind against the
dark stones. The Germans executed scores of French hostages at Caen, nearby, the
night of the invasion, but no one has ever touched, tried to vandalize, these
graves. They have extraordinary dignity. As much as St.-Laurent seems American
in its emotions, as much as it seems to reflect the right war and its cost, La
Cambe strikes me as German; it has real beauty, and a dark, melancholy strength.

How do you mark the graves of a defeated army, fighting for monstrous goals, on
the land of a country it had conquered? ''Here lie German soldiers,'' one
inscription says. On a pedestal in the same dark stone, old parents huddle and
grieve. And this, chiseled deep: ''God has the last word.''

This is the 40th anniversary of D-day. The law of round numbers and memorial
reflection probably mean that the next time people think about it much is in
another 10 years. In spite of Normandy's forgetting meadows, the cliffs and the
graveyards will not lose their strength, their terror, their message.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DIANE ARBUS, HER VISION, LIDE, AND DEATH

BYLINE: By Patricia Bosworth

SECTION: Section 6; Page 43, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6734 words


Patricia Bosworth writes frequently about people in the arts. This article is
adapted from her biography ''Diane Arbus,'' to be published next month by Knopf.







 AS A TEEN-AGER, DIANE Arbus used to stand on the window ledge of her parents'
New York apartment in the San Remo, high above Central Park West. She would
stand there on the ledge for as long as she could, gazing out at the trees and
skyscrapers in the distance, until her mother pulled her back inside. Years
later, Diane would say: ''I wanted to see if I could do it.'' And she would add:
''I didn't inherit my kingdom for a long time.''

Ultimately she discovered her kingdom with her camera. Her dream was to
photograph everybody in the world, and by the end of the 1960's she was a legend
in magazines, with edgy, transcendental photographs of peace marches, art
openings, circuses and portraits of billionaire H. L. Hunt, Gloria Vanderbilt's
baby, Coretta Scott King. She defined some of this work as ''funk and news.''
Her more personal projects (for which she won two Guggenheim Fellowships) were
mysterious. In them she explored the eerie visual ambiguity of twins and
triplets, the distinctions - and the connections - between bag ladies and
wealthy matrons. Her complex feelings about her subject matter, her terror and
fascination, were often reflected in her pictures. She thought of photography as
an adventure, an event that required courage and tenacity. Her camera was also,
as she said, her protection, her shield.

''A photograph is a secret about a secret,'' she said. ''The more it tells you,
the less you know.'' This idea seemed to reverberate in her unsettling images of
freaks and eccentrics, pictures that were beginning to be heralded in the art
world when Diane Arbus killed herself in l971.

A year after her death, the Venice Biennale exhibited 10 huge blowups of her
human oddities (midgets, transvestites, nudists) that were ''the overwhelming
sensation of the American Pavilion,'' wrote Hilton Kramer, the art critic. Soon
afterward, a large retrospective of her work opened at the Museum of Modern Art
in New York and was both damned for its voyeurism and praised for its
compassion. Crowds pushed in to see such Arbus portraits as ''A Jewish Giant at
Home With His Parents,'' ''A Young Man in Curlers,'' ''Girl With Cigar in
Washington Square.'' The show's themes - sexual role-playing and human isolation
- seemed to sum up feelings that had surfaced in the 1960's and had flowed into
the early 1970's.

A traveling exhibit featuring 79 of her pictures from Esquire and Harpers Bazaar
is at the Minneapolis Institute of Arts through June 24; it will later be at the
University of Kentucky Art Museum in Lexington, the California State University
art museum in Long Beach and several other museums. Her works, like those of
Alfred Stieglitz and Edward Weston, are now collected as art. Arbus prints have
grown in value. A rare portfolio printed by herself and containing 11 of her
most famous images was recently auctioned at Sotheby's for $42,900. A single
Arbus, ''The Boy With Toy Hand Grenade,'' was priced not long ago at $8,000. The
prints are strictly controlled by the Arbus estate and relatively few are on the
market. The estate also has a policy of not giving publications reproduction
rights to the pictures unless it has control over the accompanying text. (This
is why no Arbus photographs accompany this article or the book from which it is
adapted.)

Her importance has extended beyond photographic circles. Lucas Samaris, the
artist, has extolled her influence. Stanley Kubrick, the film maker, used her
image of twins over and over again in his horror movie ''The Shining.'' Among
many people, the phrase ''an Arbus face'' is synonymous with expressions of
anguish, kinkiness and, in the words of Sanford Schwartz, the critic, a kind of
''creepy intimacy.''








 IANE ARBUS WAS BORN IN New York City on March 14, 1923. Her mother, the
beautiful Gertrude Russek Nemerov, named her after the sublimely romantic
heroine of the play ''Seventh Heaven,'' a role that was to be played four years
later in the movies by Janet Gaynor. (With certain people, Diane insisted she be
addressed as ''Dee-ann,'' but she answered to ''Dy-ann'' as well.) Diane's
father, David Nemerov, ran Russeks Fifth Avenue, the family's fashionable fur
and ladies' clothing store. A retailing innovator, he introduced the fur
cardigan and tinted furs. He also pioneered the use of photographs, in place of
illustrations, in newspaper advertisements.

The Nemerovs lived very well in big, lavish apartments with many servants. All
three of the children were to become involved in the arts. Early on, Diane
showed a talent for painting. Her younger sister, Renee, was to became a
sculptor. Her older brother, Howard, is today one of America's most
distinguished poets. He remembers that whenever he and Diane played in the park
sandbox, they were forbidden by their nannies to take off their white gloves.
Diane felt pampered, but isolated. For years, like many imaginative children of
the time, she was terrified that the Lindbergh kidnapper would descend on her.
Being afraid gave her pleasure, and much later she remembered that she loved to
stay in her pitch-black bedroom at night waiting for monsters to come and tickle
her to death.

Diane attended the Fieldston School in the Riverdale section of the Bronx from
the seventh through the 12th grades, and for one year Howard was there at the
same time. Teachers said they were the most gifted brother and sister who had
ever attended that institution. They hated being compared. Later, when Howard
became a poet and Diane a photographer, they never discussed their work with
each other. In fact, they rarely told anyone of the other's existence. ''And I,
for one, have no theories as to how or why we became what we became,'' Howard
says now.

Diane and her classmates were taken to visit a settlement house on the lower
West Side, an immaculate building set in a decaying slum. The students were
forbidden to speak to the derelicts who lounged in the doorways. Diane longed to
talk to these strange people, to find out their thoughts. Years later, she said,
''One of the things I suffered from as a kid was I never felt adversity. I felt
confirmed in a sense of unreality which I could feel as unreality, and the sense
of being immune was, ludicrous as it seems, a painful one.'' As far

as she was concerned ''the world seemed to belong to the world. I could learn
things but they never seemed to be my own experience.''

To counteract this, she and a friend, Phyllis Carton, created little adventures
for themselves. They would ride all over the subway system observing the strange
passengers - an albino messenger boy, a little girl with a purple birthmark.
These were visual and sensual experiences for Diane, and they frightened and
pleased her.

Periodically during vacations she worked at Russeks in the stock room. She said
later, ''I absolutely hated furs; I found the family fortune humiliating.'' But
as a teen-ager she suffered in silence.

Working in the Russeks advertising department as a paste-up boy was Allan Arbus,
a slender, handsome, curly-haired 19-year-old who was going to City College at
night. He wanted to become an actor. Diane took one look at him and he took one
look at her and, according to Ben Lichtenstein, a Russeks executive, ''they fell
madly in love.'' Diane liked to say that Allan was the most beautiful man she
had ever seen and that their romance was like Romeo and Juliet.

They continued to see each other - in spite of parental disapproval - during
Diane's years at Fieldston. Her friends knew of Allan's existence, but she never
took him to school. Secrecy was always important to her - as it was to Allan.
They were a scrupulously private couple.







 HERE WERE A LOT OF BOYS in love with her,'' recalls the family counselor Eda J.
LeShan, who was a classmate.  The screenwriter Stewart Stern, another classmate,
says, ''She was irresistible. I used to stand outside her apartment looking up
at her window hoping I'd catch a glimpse of her.  When you were with her she
made you feel like you were the only person in the world.'' And Alexander Eliot,
a good friend who met her at this time, says, ''Her physical presence was so
extraordinary she startled me, took my breath away. It was like coming upon a
deer in a forest.''

She was doing exceedingly well in school. Friends remember her bold paintings,
the confrontational way she sketched the naked models relaxing and smoking in
life-study class. She also made bizarre little pencil sketches, caricatures of
people she saw on the street. She helped Stewart Stern complete a mural in the
school dining room. Her adviser and art teacher, Victor D'Amico, encouraged her
to think seriously about becoming a painter after she graduated. ''But Diane was
scared stiff of her talent,'' says her girlhood friend, now Phyllis Carton
Contini. ''It set her so apart.''

So when she fell in love with Allan Arbus, she stopped dreaming of being, in her
phrase, ''a great sad artist.'' She decided to get married right after she
graduated. ''Falling in love with Allan had made Diane feel very grown up,''
Phyllis Contini says. ''Marriage would mean a huge life experience. She was
preoccupied with anything physical - any physical sensation that made her
believe she was alive. Her menstrual cycle fascinated her. We discussed the
mysteries of conception; she thought childbirth must be the most extraordinary
experience in the world.''

By early 1941, the Nemerovs, exhausted from resisting, finally consented to the
marriage. As a wedding present, Gertrude Nemerov gave Diane a five-year supply
of clothes from Russeks and the use of a ladies' maid for a year.


After Pearl Harbor, Allan Arbus joined the Army Signal Corps and attended
photography school at Fort Monmouth, N.J. Diane moved near him to a one-room
apartment in Red Bank. She set up a darkroom in their bathroom, and every night
Allan would come back from school and teach her what he had learned. She started
snapping pictures all the time. She never talked about why she was so drawn to
photography, but she did say once that what intrigued her about the camera was
that ''it's recalcitrant. It's determined to do one thing and you want it to do
something else.'' In 1944, Allan went to Burma with a photography unit, and when
he came back after the war, he and Diane became fashion photographers.

They got their first account in l946, photographing furs for Russeks. For the
next decade, they worked constantly for the store and for Glamour and Vogue,
even though neither of them had any interest in fashion; it seemed too
frivolous, too ephemeral. Diane in particular hated the business, hated the
stiff new clothes the models wore. She herself went barefoot most of the time,
carried a brown paper bag instead of a purse and would wear a shirtwaist dress
over and over until it developed ''character.'' Eventually, she stopped taking
fashion photographs and worked instead as Allan's assistant, ''styling'' the
shots for him. She was very good at this, and they became even more successful
as a team. In 1955, one of their Vogue pictures, of a father reading the
newspaper to his son, was chosen by Edward Steichen to be in the famous ''Family
of Man'' photographic exhibit.

She and Allan really loved each other, Diane said. They would never stop loving
each other. She believed implicitly in romantic love - in passion and a
quickening of the blood. But she couldn't reconcile the perpetual conflict in
herself between love and lust, between need and fear. Sex was very important to
her. She bragged that she and Allan ''made love all the time.'' She had a
growing curiosity about what other married people did in bed, and she had begun
to ask friends intimate questions about their sex lives. She once confided that
she envied a girlfriend who'd been raped. She wanted to have that punishing,
degrading experience, too. She could almost imagine it was like a murder - the
murder of a woman's nature and body - though the woman lived to tell the tale.

To combat frequent depressions, Diane took pictures on her own. She had no
particular focus or goal, just a vague feeling that she wanted to photograph
worlds hidden from public view. For a while, she took pictures of people's
bathrooms. She was fascinated by the rich gardens flowering in some shower
stalls, in the stacks of old magazines and newspapers piled near certain
toilets, the endless array of perfumes, soaps, creams and tranquilizers on so
many shelves. ''A person's bathroom is like a biography,'' Diane said.  She was
too shy to ask strangers to pose, so instead she took pictures of friends. She
photographed, off and on, a great many children - enraptured Puerto Rican kids
watching a puppet show in Spanish Harlem; a tiny, seemingly deformed boy and
girl laughing into her camera (this picture ended up as an Evergreen magazine
cover in 1963). Then there were endless candids of her two daughters, Doon and
Amy. John Szarkowski, director of the department of photography at the Museum of
Modern Art, says, ''Her most frequent subject in fact was children - perhaps
because their individuality is purer, less skillfully concealed, closer to the
surface.''

In 1957, Diane inexplicably burst into tears at a dinner party when a friend
asked her to describe her routine during a fashion shoot. She, who never cried,
who hated crying, began to sob as she ticked off her duties: brush the model's
hair, pin up the dress, arrange the props just so, turn on the fan. She hadn't
had much practice crying, and the sobs seemed to have trouble coming from her
throat. They were ugly, constricted cries and Allan couldn't stand listening to
them. Then and there he decided she would never again style the shots for a
Diane and Allan Arbus fashion layout, and she never did.

From this point on, her own photography became her main concern. But there were
adjustments to make, since she felt torn between her responsibilities as a wife
and mother and her deep need to photograph. She often made both her daughters
accompany her when she took pictures in the streets. Allan meanwhile, still
determined to be an actor, enrolled in mime class. Eventually, although they
remained close friends and he would always be her biggest champion (''He was my
first teacher,'' she often said.), the Arbuses drifted apart. In time, while
Allan continued living at their studio on Washington Place, Diane moved with her
girls to a little house on Charles Street, and people and events more closely
linked to documentary photography began taking over her life.

She wanted to get away from slick, romantic fashion images; she was responding
to the work of her contemporaries Louis Faurer and Robert Frank, who scorned
elegance and were experimenting with exaggerated scale and shadows, outrageous
cropping and out- of-focus imagery. She responded to the demonic violence in
Weegee's crude pictures, too. Weegee was a fast-talking, cigar-smoking press
photographer. But Diane was most impressed with Lisette Model's images of
grotesques which had been documented with almost clinical detachment. These
pictures of poverty and old age were 16- by 20-inch prints of beggars, drunks
and rich people blown up to such heroic proportions you could almost feel their
existence. Model called them ''extremes.''


The photographer Lisette Model, born in Vienna in 1906, was said to use the
camera with her entire body. Benedict J. Fernandez, head of the photography
department at the New School for Social Research, called her eyes ''the most
instinctive eyes in photography.'' Model's first pictures - massive portraits of
French gamblers and the idle rich taken on the Promenade des Anglais in Nice -
established her reputation when they were published in the New York newspaper
P.M. in 1940 under the title ''Why France Fell.'' She had come to New York in
1937 and was turned into something of a celebrity when her pictures were shown
at the Museum of Modern Art, and were praised by the photographers Ansel Adams
and Walker Evans and by the critic Beaumont Newhall. By the late 1950's she was
giving lectures at the New School, and Diane Arbus went to study with her. Model
remembered Diane as extremely nervous, a woman in her mid-30's who still looked
like a little girl.

Model taught that photography has extended our vision, but in ways we still
cannot understand. Photography was first viewed as a superstition, she would
say, but it is now an addictive craving. There is a big difference between what
the eye sees and what the camera sees. The transformation between the third
dimension and second dimension can make or break a picture. She talked a lot
about technique, the psychological importance of light and the visceral exchange
that was necessary between subject and photographer. But in the end, she told
her students, they must forget everything she told them. ''Photography is about
creating a picture,'' she said.

One of Model's first assignments to Diane and the others was to photograph a
face ''like a Picasso.'' She urged her students to intensify their compulsion to
take pictures by wandering through the streets of New York carrying cameras
without film. ''Don't shoot until the subject hits you in the pit of the
stomach,'' the photographer Berenice Abbott quotes her as saying.

The first extended conversation between Diane and Model took place on a field
trip to the Lower East Side. Diane had her two daughters along, trailing behind
as she kept lifting her camera to her eye and putting it down. According to
Model she was very pale. Finally she said, ''I can't photograph.'' Model asked
her why. Diane said she'd have to think about it. The following day she came
back with an answer. ''I can't photograph because what I want to photograph is
evil,'' she said.

''Evil or not, if you don't photograph what you are compelled to photograph,
then you'll never photograph,'' Model answered. She understood that certain
pictures had to be taken in order for Diane to relieve her mind of the images
that were haunting it. She said later that she had tried to reach Diane where
her deepest anxiety lay, the anxiety Diane thought was evil. ''And I pushed it
out,'' Model said.

Years later, Doon wrote: ''I think what Mother wanted to photograph was not evil
but forbidden subject matter and Lisette gave her license to do that.''


Diane took the D train to Coney Island. She discovered a tenement off Stillwell
Avenue. She marched inside and discovered it was actually a hotel full of
disoriented old people and a barking dog. She spent hours photographing there.
''If I ever went away for a weekend this is where I'd go,'' she said. She
returned to Coney Island again and again. She photographed the wax museum,
Puerto Rican mothers, tattooed people. She kept asking why people get tattooed.
For decoration? To hide scars? On a dare? The secret ritual of it intrigued her
since it was a combination of traditional art, physical pain and sensuality. The
hardest thing in all this was trying to overcome her shyness, the nauseating
feeling whenever she had to ask someone to pose. She'd stop a man or woman who
intrigued her by exclaiming, ''Oh, you look terrific! I'd like to photograph
you,'' and the person would usually hem and haw and then consent, because Diane
seemed so gentle and unthreatening. ''I was terrified most of the time,'' she
said. But terror, as always, aroused her and made her feel; it shattered her
listlessness, her depression.

Like Model, she now believed that picture-taking is a profound experience. ''The
very process of posing requires a person to step out of himself as if he were an
object,'' she liked to say. ''He is no longer a self but he is still trying to
look like the self he imagines himself to be. It's impossible to get out of your
skin and into somebody else's and that's what photography is all about.''

After a while, she realized that people paid attention to her because of the
camera in her hand; they treated her with respect and kept their distance - gave
her space. Eventually, she wore a camera at all times. ''I never take it off,''
she would say.

She began to prowl the city at all hours, striking up conversations with any
outcasts she happened to encounter. She wasn't afraid of New York at 2 A.M. She
seemed to be more alive in the dark as she traveled by herself on the subway,
laden down with her cameras. The trains pounded in and out of the dark tunnels,
headlights shining like eyes. The stations were deep, empty, smelly - ''like the
pits of hell,'' she said. She saw hunchbacks, paraplegics, exhausted whores,
boys with harelips, pimply teen-age girls. She was sure the ladies in ratty fur
coats were cashiers.

She considered photographing the men who lived in the bowels of Grand Central
Terminal, bums who wrapped their feet in old newspapers to keep warm. She
befriended a bag lady, a woman who was a fixture in the corridor connecting the
Lexington Avenue subway to the Times Square shuttle. The bag lady would lie in a
corner day and night, hardly moving. The rumble of the trains in the distance
was like the sound of the sea in her ear; gradually, she told Diane, it was
going to rise up and envelop her completely.  She spent a lot of time at
Hubert's Freak Museum, which had been operating for more than 25 years at
Broadway and 42d Street. She always visited Professor Heckler, who ran the flea-
circus concession there. Diane liked to sit with him while he fed his fleas. He
would roll up his sleeves, pick the fleas with tweezers from their mother-of-
pearl boxes, drop them on his forearm and let them eat their lunch while he read
the newspaper. Diane would remain in Hubert's for hours, so scared her heart
would pound and sweat would pop out on her brow. Then she would conquer her fear
and scrutinize the fat lady's waddle, the armless man's dexterity as he lit a
cigarette from the match he held between his toes. She would come back day after
day, and once she felt that the freaks trusted her, she asked them to pose.


In the late summer of 1959, Diane took her portfolio to Esquire. The writer
Thomas B. Morgan had suggested that she show her photographs to Harold Hayes,
the Esquire articles editor who went on to be editor in chief. Hayes recalls
being ''bowled over by Diane's images - a dwarf in a clown's costume, television
sets, movie marquees, Dracula. Her vision, her subject matter, her snapshot
style were perfect for Esquire, perfect for the times; she stripped away
everything to the thing itself. It seemed apocalyptic.''

He showed the portfolio to Robert Benton who was then Esquire's art director
(long before he went on to win two Oscars for writing and directing ''Kramer vs.
Kramer''), and Benton agreed. ''Diane knew the importance of subject matter. And
she had a special ability to seek out peculiar subject matter and then confront
it with her camera. It was like something I'd never seen before. She seemed to
be able to suggest how it felt to be a midget or a transvestite. She got close
to these people - yet she remained detached.''

Hayes, Benton and Clay Felker, the

 features editor, had come up with the idea of devoting an entire issue of
Esquire to New York. Hayes told Diane he wanted her to do a photographic essay
on the night life of the city, emphasizing events, people and places nobody knew
about.

Diane was intrigued. ''Let me waste some film!'' she exclaimed to Benton, adding
that she planned to photograph River House, drug addicts, Welfare Island,
Roseland and the newsroom of The Bowery News ''for starters.'' She went on to
tell him that she'd been ''peering into Rolls- Royces, skulking around the Plaza
Hotel.'' She'd also thumbed through the Yellow Pages under ''clubs'' (Harold
Hayes wanted something ''respectable'' like the Colony Club and the Union
League), and she'd found one called ''the Tough Club'' and another, ''Ourselves
Inc.'' She reminded Benton that Mathew Brady had once photographed the Daughters
of the American Revolution and that the results had been ''formidable.'' In a
note scribbled to Benton she asked for ''permissions both posh and sordid . . .
. I can only get photographs by photographing. I will go anywhere.''

Diane began the Esquire assignment by visiting the morgue at Bellevue, a
cavernous building on the East River near 27th Street and a place of dank tiles
and refrigerated corpses. In the autopsy room, the air was heavy with the smell
of decomposing flesh, of viscera open for examination. Diane got to know some of
the forensic doctors and she was allowed to photograph there. She began to
collect information about death and dying. The terminology, particularly of
suicides, fascinated her: hangings, suffocations, cut throats, bodies dragged
from the bottom of the Hudson river.

She roamed in and out of Manhattan's flophouses, brothels and seedy hotels, the
little parks on Abingdon and Union Squares, the parks near the Brooklyn Bridge
and Chinatown. Soon, her address books were filled with an incongruous
collection of names: ''Detective Wanderer - West Side homicide . . . subway
brakeman, Kass Pollack . . . Vincent Lopez, band leader . . . Flora Knapp
Dickinson, D.A.R. . . . .'' ''I love it, I feel like an explorer,'' she said to
Seymour Krim, the writer. ''I own New York!'' she exulted to her sister, Renee.
She placed a blackboard by her bed with a list of places and people she wanted
to photograph: ''Pet crematorium, New York Doll Hospital, Horse Show, opening of
the Met, Manhattan Hospital for the Insane, condemned hotel, Anne Bancroft in
'The Miracle Worker'.''

From anxiety, she shot hundreds of rolls of film on the Esquire assignment.
Robert Benton and Harold Hayes were so excited by the raw images she kept
bringing in that they considered illustrating the entire New York issue with
Arbus pictures. ''I foolishly decided against it,'' Hayes says now. ''The
pictures were such an indictment.''

He and Benton finally chose six for the July 1960 issue - among them, Flora
Knapp Dickinson of the D.A.R.; an unknown person in the morgue at Bellevue; a
beautiful blonde, Mrs. Dagmar Patino, at the Grand Ball benefiting Boys Town of
Italy, and Walter Gregory, an almost legendary Bowery character known as ''The
Madman from Massachusetts.''


The four years following that first Esquire job were the most productive and
energizing periods of Diane's life. As she struggled to come to grips with her
themes, her style and her subject matter became more extreme (transvestites,
nudists, a giant). Eventually she stopped using the 35 millimeter format,
switched to the square 2 1/4-inch format using a Rolleiflex camera and later
alternated between it and a 35 millimeter Mamiya with flash. This was a crucial
change for her. Her subjects took on a stronger life, and the illumination of
the flash stripped away artifice to reveal a psychological truth. The film's
square format, as she used it, seemed to imprison the subjects.

She had many magazine assignments, including several from Show, although Show's
art director, Henry Wolf, wasn't that pleased by her crude, abrasive work. ''I
couldn't use some of the pictures she shot for Gloria Steinem's story on movie
theaters in Ohio - they weren't that good - and I refused to publish her
portrait of the human pincushion, even though she kept urging me to.'' Wolf, a
cultivated gentleman who later was a partner in a successful advertising agency
before becoming a photographer himself, confesses, ''Diane always made me feel
guilty for enjoying myself. Once I ran into her on a beautiful Saturday morning
all decked out in her cameras. 'What are you doing on such a gorgeous day?' I
asked. 'Trying to find some unhappy people,' she answered. Well, I couldn't
relate to that!''

By the mid-1960's, Diane had become a familiar figure to almost every working
photographer in New York City. She was seen at art openings, at happenings, at
the Judson Memorial Church, at an Ethel Scull party held at Nathan's, at a Tiger
Morse fashion show, at the Henry Hudson Health Club where models stoned on pot
showed off lingerie, then fell into the pool. ''Diane was at every spectacle,
every parade,'' the photograher Bob Adelman says, ''right up to the Gay
Liberation Day march of 1970.''

Adelman, who eloquently documented the civil-rights movement in the pages of
Look magazine, recalls seeing Diane at ''most of the protests against the
Vietnam War. But she would never plunge into the crowd like the rest of us. We
were all going for a sense of immediacy, of grabbing on to the entire vista - we
wanted to record the action. But Diane hung back on the fringes. She'd pick out
one face, like the pimply guy with the flag or the man with his hat over his
heart.''

On assignment, in competition with other (mostly male) photographers, Arbus
could turn cold and aggressive. Sometimes at an art opening or press conference
she would hop about here and there, click-clicking away at people until they ran
through their repertoire of public faces and stood exposed, blinking under the
glare of her flash. ''She used to drive people crazy at parties,'' photographer
Frederick Eberstadt says. ''She'd behave like the first paparazzi. She didn't
talk much but she'd swoop like a vulture on somebody and then blaze away. And
she would wait outside a place for hours in any kind of weather to get the kind
of picture she wanted.''

Everyone who knew her then came away with a different impression of her. ''A
huntress,'' Walker Evans said. ''Elegance, high intelligence and such
amtition,'' John Szarkowski says. The writer Gay Talese recalls, ''She was
lovely, but she always seemed to be in another time. She had a worn quality
about her, an ashen quality - she was remarkably gray, out of focus - and
sometimes there was a sense of dust about her - as if she was uncared for. Her
skin looked older than it should have. But God, she had a beautiful face!
Gorgeous. Particularly in profile. And deep-set, strange, watchful eyes.'' Her
friend Marvin Israel, the painter and art director, wrote in an article: ''Diane
loved being naughty. Much of what she did as a photographer came from that kind
of delight.''

Peter Crookston, a London editor, once listened as she told a story, complete
with gestures and accents, about a photo assignment. The subject had been a
celebrated lawyer. She'd arrived at his office and found a British reporter
already there interviewing him - a very pretty, very ambitious journalist who,
Diane sensed, wanted to seduce the man, ''because this lawyer was rather sexy
and powerful, too.'' Diane decided ''for kicks'' to seduce him first - and for
the next hour she exerted her fey charm on the man while blinding him with her
flash. He got sweatier and more excited and finally the British journalist left,
and Diane said she'd felt sorry for her because ''she didn't have the patience I
had. I hung in there.''

Sex would become the quickest, most primitive way for Diane to begin connecting
with another human being. It was almost as if she were determined to explore
with her own body and waking mind every nightmare, every fantasy she might have
repressed deep in her subconscious.


In 1965, three of Diane's earliest pictures were included in a show at New
York's Museum of Modern Art. The public's reaction was extreme. Yeu- bun Yee,
then the photo department's librarian, came in early every morning to wipe the
spit from the Arbus portraits. Nevertheless, two years later, she shared another
photo exhibition at the museum with Garry Winogrand and Lee Friedlander, a show
called ''New Documents.'' This was crucial in shaping the social-documentary
style of the 1970's, and most of the comments it generated, both praise and
censure, focused on Arbus's portraits of nudists, midgets and transvestites.

That same fall, in 1967, Diane was invited to attend ''idea'' meetings at New
York magazine which was about to revolutionize the weekly ''city magazine''
format. She joined contributing editors Gloria Steinem, Barbara Goldsmith and
Tom Wolfe in editor Clay Felker's cluttered little office.

Diane understood Felker. ''He has a photographer's mentality,'' she once
commented. ''He'll stop at nothing to get the image - he'll pay any price.'' At
one meeting there was a great deal of discussion about Andy Warhol, who seemed
to the group to be setting the tone of the 1960's. Warhol had been promoting an
exceptionally beautiful actress named Viva. In his most recent movie, ''Lonesome
Cowboys,'' she could be observed nude and talking nonstop while participating in
an orgy. Felker decided that Diane should photograph Viva.

Viva's memory of their encounter is a bitter one: ''Diane rang the doorbell. It
was pretty early. I'd been asleep on the couch. I was naked so I wrapped a sheet
around me and let Diane in and then I started putting mascara on. I was about to
get into some clothes when Diane told me 'don't bother - you seem more relaxed
that way - anyway, I'm just going to do a head shot.' I believed her. She had me
lie on the couch naked and roll my eyes up to the ceiling which I did. Those
photographs were totally faked. I looked stoned but I wasn't stoned, I was cold
sober. There was nothing natural about those pictures, nothing spontaneous. They
were planned and manipulated. Diane Arbus lied, cheated and victimized me. She
said she was just going to take head shots. I trusted her because she acted like
a martyr, a little saint, about the the whole thing. Jesus! Underneath she was
just as ambitious as we all were to make it - to get ahead. I remember right
afterwards I phoned Dick Avedon because he'd just done some gorgeous shots of me
for Vogue. I told him 'Diane Arbus has taken pictures of me for New York
magazine,' and he groaned, 'Oh My God, no! You shouldn't have let her.' And Andy
told me the same thing. After the fact. I'd never seen her work. I didn't know
an Arbus from a Philippe Halsmann.''


The photographs of Viva (which accompanied an article by Barbara Goldsmith)
appeared in New York magazine in April 1968, and were absolutely merciless. Out
of the dozens of contact prints, Felker and Milton Glaser, the design director,
chose two. One was a jarring grainy closeup in which Viva appears dazed and
drugged, eyes rolled back into her sockets. In the other portrait Viva can be
seen naked and roaring with laughter on a sheet-draped couch. There is a raunchy
casualness about the pose; she appears pleased with herself right down to the
soles of her dirty feet. The qualities that are distressing and alienating in
some of Diane's work - the severity, the seeming disregard for the subject - are
very apparent here. When Diana Vreeland, then the editor of Vogue, saw the
pictures she screamed and canceled the rest of Viva's bookings. The Viva
pictures created such a furor along Madison Avenue that New York magazine seemed
about to lose all its advertisers.

Today, Clay Felker winces when he recalls the incident. ''I made a terrible
mistake publishing them,'' he says. ''They were too strong - they offended too
many people.''

Diane wrote to an English friend, ''It is a cause cel ebre. Much mail. Canceled
subscriptions, pro and con phone calls and even a threatened lawsuit'' (from
Viva which was ultimately dropped).

The writer Thomas Morgan thinks the Viva pictures were ''watershed pictures.
They broke down barriers between public and private lives. They were painful
photographs to look at - that was what made them significant. You're reacting
the way Diane reacted. That's why her images have such a startling effect - they
invariably contain contradictory responses.''


In 1969, Allan Arbus divorced Diane and married Mariclare Costello, a young
actress. Diane gave them a small reception, remarking later that she felt ''sad
happy'' about the occasion. She said that Mariclare was a ''good friend'' of
hers, and that the two of them ''hung out on the phone a lot.'' Not long after
the wedding party, Allan closed his fashion studio, and he and his new wife
moved to Hollywood to pursue their acting careers. (He would, among other
things, play the psychiatrist Dr. Sidney Freedman in the M*A*S*H* television
series.) Diane outwardly applauded the move. But she was frightened. She had
depended on him emotionally since she was 14; throughout their long separation,
they had remained close. Until recently, he had printed much of her work; now he
would be 3,000 miles away.

Late that year, the sculptor Mary Frank and Diane discussed moving to Westbeth,
the new artists' community that had just opened near the Hudson River docks. To
outsiders, the massive gray stone buildings, a 13-story pile that once had been
Bell Telephone Laboratories, might resemble ''a Swedish prison,'' but Mary
thought Diane would be less lonely there. ''Everybody at Westbeth was creating

wildly,'' says David Gillison, a photographer and painter who still lives there.
''Actors, painters, musicians, photographers - it was like living inside a big
turbulent pot. There were all-night parties, consciousness sessions . . . People
left their doors open . . .'' Diane moved to Westbeth in January of 1970 along
with the choreographer Merce Cunningham, the poet Muriel Rukeyser and the
documentary photographer Cosmos, who hadn't shaved since John

F. Kennedy was assassinated. And for a while she seemed happy in her new duplex.
It had a wonderful view of the river; she had space for her bicycle, her plants,
her platform bed covered with furs.

But she was barely making enough money to pay the rent. For the next year she
taught classes, she worked part time doing research for the Museum of Modern
Art, she was assigned to cover Tricia Nixon's wedding for the London Sunday
Times magazine, on her own she was photographing retardates. She had been sick
twice with hepatitis. She was having increasingly severe depressions. She
refused to take any tranquilizers, because she had discovered she had bad
reactions to most drugs. She spent her free time phoning people - friends like
Richard Avedon and Marvin Israel, Lisette Model, Allan in California, her mother
in Florida.

By June 1971, she began complaining that her work wasn't giving her back
anything any more and she was in a panic. She kept referring to her ''monumental
blues.'' When Walker Evans suggested to his colleagues that she be his successor
teaching photography at Yale, she said no.

On July 27, the telephone started ringing in Diane's apartment. One of her
students called again and again, trying to confirm the fact that she would be
conducting a symposium on photography he had organized for later in the week.
Marvin Israel called several times, too, and he got no answer. On July 28, he
went over to Westbeth.

He found Diane dead with her wrists slit, lying on her side in the empty
bathtub. She was dressed in pants and shirt - her body was already in a state of
decomposition, according to the coroner's report. On her desk, her journal was
open to July 26, and across it was scrawled: ''The last supper.'' The New York
medical examiner concluded that she had died of acute barbiturate poisoning.

Her funeral at the Frank Campbell Funeral Chapel at 81st Street and Madison
Avenue was sparsely attended. Many of her friends were away for the summer;
others weren't informed. Allan Arbus flew in from California with his wife.
Diane's mother and daughters were there and so was Diane's brother, Howard
Nemerov.

He gave the eulogy. It was short. Later, he wrote a poem about Diane which has
been reprinted many times. It ends:

And now you've gone, Who would no longer play the grown-

ups' game Where, balanced on the ledge above

the dark, You go on running and you don't look

down, Nor ever jump because you fear to

fall.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Diane Arbus

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 13, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WONDERING WHAT IT'S LIKE TO BE A WOMAN

BYLINE: By Margaret Atwood

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2372 words


THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK

By John Updike.  307 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.

''THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK'' is John Updike's first novel since the
much-celebrated ''Rabbit Is Rich,'' and a strange and marvelous organism it
proves to be. Like his third novel, ''The Centaur,'' it is a departure from
baroque realism. This time, too, Mr. Updike transposes mythology into the minor
keys of small

Margaret Atwood's most recent books are the novel ''Bodily Harm,'' a volume of
short stories ''Dancing Girls'' and a collection of criticism ''Second Words.''
town America, but this time he pulls it off, possibly because, like Shakespeare
and Robert Louis Stevenson before him, he finds wickedness and mischief more
engrossing as subjects than goodness and wisdom.

Mr. Updike's titles are often quite literal, and ''The Witches of Eastwick'' is
just what it says. It's indeed about witches, real ones, who can fly through the
air, levitate, hex people and make love charms that work, and they live in a
town called Eastwick. It's Eastwick rather than Westwick, since, as we all know,
it's the east wind that blows no good. Eastwick purports to be in Rhode Island
because, as the book itself points out, Rhode Island was the place of exile for
Anne Hutchinson, the Puritan foremother who was kicked out of the Massachusetts
Bay colony by the forefathers for female insubordination, a quality these
witches have in surplus.

These are not 1980's Womanpower witches. They aren't at all interested in
healing the earth, communing with the Great Goddess, or gaining Power- within
(as opposed to Power-over). These are bad Witches, and Power-within, as far as
they are concerned, is no good at all unless you can zap somebody with it. They
are spiritual descendants of the 17th-century New England strain and go in for
sabbats, sticking pins in wax images, kissing the Devil's backside and phallus
worship; this latter though - since it is Updike - is qualified worship. The
Great Goddess is present only in the form of Nature itself, or, in this book,
Nature herself, with which they, both as women and as witches, are supposed to
have special affinities. Nature, however, is far from Wordsworth's big motherly
breast. She, or it, is red in tooth, claw and cancer cell, at best lovely and
cruel, at worst merely cruel. ''Nature kills constantly, and we call her
beautiful.''

How did these middle-class, small-town, otherwise ordinary women get their
witchy powers? Simple.  They became husbandless. All three are divorcees and
embodiments of what American small-town society tends to think about divorcees.
Whether you leave your husband or are left ''doesn't make any difference,''
which will be news to many abandoned women stuck with full child support.
Divorced then, and, with the images of their former husbands shrunk and dried
and stored away in their minds and kitchens and cellars, they are free to be
themselves, an activity Mr. Updike regards with some misgivings, as he regards
most catchwords and psychofads.

Being yourself involves artistic activity, albeit of minor kinds. Lexa makes
ceramic earthmothers, which are sold in the local crafts store, Jane plays the
cello, and Sukie writes, badly, a gossip column for the weekly paper, her
participles dangling like earrings. All three are dabblers, but their
''creativity'' is seen in the same light as that of other, more accomplished
female artists. The townspeople of Eastwick, who act as a collective chorus,
credit them with ''a certain distinction, an inner boiling such as had in other
cloistral towns produced Emily Dickinson's verses and Emily Bront"e's inspired
novel.''

IT'S doubtful, however, that either of the Emilys

went in for the sexual loop-the-loops indulged in by

these three weird sisters. Sisters in more senses

than one because the novel is cunningly set at a precise moment in America's
recent history. The women's movement has been around just long enough for some
of its phrases to have seeped from New York to the outer darkness of provincial
towns like Eastwick, and the witches toss around words like ''chauvinist'' in
light social repartee. In the public, male world, which is offstage, the Vietnam
War goes on, watched by the witches' children on their television sets, and the
antiwar activists are making bombs in cellars.

The witches don't busy themselves with ''causes,'' however. At first, they are
merely restless and bored; they amuse themselves with spiteful gossip, playing
mischievous tricks and seducing unhappily married men, which Eastwick supplies
in strength; for if the witches are bad, the wives are worse, and the men are
eviscerated. ''Marriage,'' one of the husbands thinks, ''is like two people
locked up with one lesson to read, over and over, until the words become
madness.''


But enter the Devil, the world's best remedy for women's boredom, in the form of
the dark, not very handsome but definitely mysterious stranger Darryl Van Horne,
who collects pop art and has an obvious name. Now mischief turns to maleficio,
real evil occurs and people die, because Van Horne's horn becomes a bone of
contention - nothing like not enough men to go around to get the witches'
cauldrons bubbling. And when Van Horne is snatched into marriage by a newcomer
witchlet, the eye of newt comes out in earnest.

This may sound like an unpromising framework for a serious novelist. Has Mr.
Updike entered second childhood and reverted to Rosemary's babyland? I don't
think so. For one thing, ''The Witches of Eastwick'' is too well done. Like Van
Horne, Mr. Updike has always wondered what it would be like to be a woman, and
his witches give him a lot of scope for this fantasy. Lexa in particular, who is
the oldest, the plumpest, the kindest and the closest to Nature, is a fitting
vehicle for some of his most breathtaking similes. In line of descent, he is
perhaps closer than any other living American writer to the Puritan view of
Nature as a lexicon written by God, but in hieroglyphs, so that unending
translation is needed. Mr. Updike's prose, here more than ever, is a welter of
suggestive metaphors and cross-references, which constantly point toward a
meaning constantly evasive.

His version of witchcraft is closely tied to both carnality and mortality. Magic
is hope in the face of inevitable decay. The houses and the furniture molder,
and so do the people. The portrait of Felicia Gabriel, victim wife and
degenerate after-image of the one-time ''peppy'' American cheerleading
sweetheart, is gruesomely convincing. Bodies are described in loving detail,
down to the last tuft, wart, wrinkle and bit of food stuck in the teeth. No one
is better than Mr. Updike at conveying the sadness of the sexual, the melancholy
of motel affairs - ''amiable human awkwardness,'' Lexa calls it. This is a book
that redefines magic realism.

There's room too for bravura writing. The widdershins dance, portrayed as a
tennis game in which the ball turns into a bat, followed by the sabbat as a
hot-tub- and-pot session, is particularly fetching. Students of traditional
Devil-lore will have as much fun with these transpositions as Mr. Updike had.
Van Horne, for instance, is part Mephistopheles, offering Faustian pacts and
lusting for souls, part alchemist-chemist, and part Miltonic Satan, hollow at
the core; but he's also a shambling klutz whose favorite comic book is - what
else? - Captain Marvel.

Much of ''The Witches of Eastwick'' is satire, some of it literary playfulness
and some plain bitchery. It could be that any attempt to analyze further would
be like taking an elephant gun to a puff pastry: An Updike should not mean but
be. But again, I don't think so. What a culture has to say about witchcraft,
whether in jest or in earnest, has a lot to do with its views of sexuality and
power, and especially with the apportioning of powers between the sexes. The
witches were burned not because they were pitied but because they were feared.

Cotton Mather and Nathaniel Hawthorne aside, the great American witchcraft
classic is ''The Wizard of Oz,'' and Mr. Updike's book reads like a rewrite. In
the original, a good little girl and her familiar, accompanied by three
amputated males, one sans brain, one sans heart and one sans guts, go seeking a
wizard who turns out to be a charlatan. The witches in ''Oz'' really have
superhuman powers, but the male figures do not. Mr. Updike's Land of Oz is the
real America, but the men in it need a lot more than self-confidence; there's no
Glinda the Good, and the Dorothy-like ingenue is a ''wimp'' who gets her
comeuppance. It's the three witches of Eastwick who go back, in the end, to the
equivalent of Kansas - marriage, flat and gray maybe, but at least known.

''The Witches of Eastwick'' could be and probably will be interpreted as just
another episode in the long- running American serial called ''Blaming Mom.'' The
Woman-as-Nature-as-magic-as-powerful-as-bad-Mom package has gone the rounds
before, sometimes accompanied by the smell of burning. If prattle of witchcraft
is heard in the land, can the hunt be far behind? Mr. Updike provides no
blameless way of being female. Hackles will rise, the word ''backlash'' will be
spoken; but anyone speaking it should look at the men in this book, who, while
proclaiming their individual emptiness, are collectively, offstage, blowing up
Vietnam. That's male magic. Men, say the witches, more than once, are full of
rage because they can't make babies, and even male babies have at their center
''that aggressive vacuum.'' Shazam indeed!


A* MARTIAN might wonder at the American propensity for tossing the power
football. Each sex hurls it at the other with amazing regularity, each crediting
the other with more power than the other thinks it has, and the characters in
this book join in the game with glee. The aim seems to be the avoidance of
responsibility, the reversion to a childlike state of Huckleberry Finn-like
''freedom.'' What the witches want from the Devil is to play without
consequences. But all the Devil can really offer is temptation; hot-tubbery has
its price, and the Devil must have his due; with the act of creation comes
irreversibility, and guilt.

Mr. Updike takes ''sisterhood is powerful'' at its word and imagines it
literally. What if sisterhood really is powerful? What will the sisters use
their ''powers'' for? And what - given human nature, of which Mr. Updike takes
not too bright a view - what then? Luckily these witches are only interested in
the ''personal,'' rather than the ''political''; otherwise they might have done
something unfrivolous, like inventing the hydrogen bomb.

''The Witches of Eastwick'' is an excursion rather than a destination. Like its
characters, it indulges in metamorphoses, reading at one moment like
Kierkegaard, at the next like Swift's ''Modest Proposal,'' and at the next like
Archie comics, with some John Keats thrown in. This quirkiness is part of its
charm, for, despite everything, charming it is. As for the witches themselves,
there's a strong suggestion that they are products of Eastwick's - read
America's - own fantasy life. If so, it's as well to know about it. That's the
serious reason for reading this book.

The other reasons have to do with the skill and inventiveness of the writing,
the accuracy of the detail, the sheer energy of the witches and, above all, the
practicality of the charms. The ones for getting suitable husbands are
particularly useful. You want a rich one, for a change? First you sprinkle a
tuxedo with your perfume and your precious bodily fluids and then. . . .B




HED GOES HERE Beverly Farms on the Massachusetts coast is just north of Salem.
And it is there, appropriately enough, that John Updike wrote ''The Witches of
Eastwick.'' In a sense, he has concocted a spell to do three things: serve a
longtime interest in witchcraft, satisfy the urge to write a murder mystery set
near the sea and reply to critics who say the women in his books are a second
sex.  Mr. Updike, who was 52 in March, said over the telephone that an English
translation of ''La Sorci ere'' by Jules Michelet, the 19th-century French
historian, had made a strong impression on him in college. It ''puts forward the
notion, which to me is quite striking, that pre-Christian paganism was kept
alive by witchcraft. Over the years I've been interested in what a witch is.
There is a kind of witch in all of us. I have also long wanted to write a murder
mystery involving tides, a murder in the marshes. The two ideas merged.''
Finally, he said, his youthful student's voice sounding self-conscious, ''I've
been criticized for making the women in my books subsidiary to the men. It was
true enough. Perhaps my female characters have been too domestic, too adorable
and too much what men wished them to be.'' Would he like to be a woman?  He
laughed. ''Yes, I would like to investigate being a woman, if at the end of a
fixed period I could come back to being a man. I think it is very normal for a
male to view women as something other. If you're wired heterosexually, women can
be elusive, strange and frightening to a degree. In elementary school I was
mingled in with these female creatures alphabetically. They were full of menace
and magic and strangeness.'' His novel and witchcraft, he said, are both about
female power, a power that patriarchal societies have denied while they try to
retain the ''wonderful male power'' of killing people.  ''The Witches of
Eastwick,'' in which nature appears busier killing than birthing, is also
''about all of us and nature. We are part of the animal kingdom. I watch these
films on television about nature, and all you see is animals pouncing on each
other.'' At the novel's end, the three witches pounce on marriage as the
solution to their difficulties. This may seem less like witchcraft than that old
fictional magic. For him, Mr. Updike said, ''the marriages are an ending to my
book. Who knows what's going to happen? That's three other novels.'' - Andrea
Stevens

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing; photo of John Updike

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 14, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. FORCES MAY LACK RESOURCES FOR SUSTAINED WAR, OFFICERS SAY

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 3971 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 13


The 17th Tactical Fighter Squadron at Shaw Air Force Base in South Carolina is a
hotshot outfit by almost every measure. But senior Air Force officers say it is
officially rated not ready for sustained combat.

The 17th, the newest fighter squadron in the Air Force, is led by a veteran of
the war in Vietnam. More than half its pilots are rated experienced, and its
younger fliers are considered among the best in the service. It has most of the
trained technicians it is authorized to have.

The 17th Squadron is fully equipped, with the last of its 24 F-16 fighters
delivered recently. Each pilot logs more than 20 hours of training sorties a
month. Skilled ground crews maintain the planes under the watchful eyes of
senior sergeants. Morale seems high.

Shortage of Spare Parts

But the 17th has in its war reserves only 60 percent of the spare parts
considered necessary for sustained battle and has thus been rated not ready for
combat, the senior officers said. The squadron could fight in the early days of
a war but without more spare parts, it might have to be grounded quickly.

The 17th Tactical Fighter Squadron is not alone. Rather, it reflects uneven
combat capacities in many other Air Force squadrons, Army and Marine Corps
battalions and Navy ships, despite three years of rapidly rising military
spending.

That conclusion arises from recent conversations with more than 100 squadron,
battalion and ship officers and noncommissioned officers, those who would bear
the brunt of battle if the United States went to war.

Improvements and Problems Cited All those combat leaders asserted that the arms,
equipment and personnel of their units had steadily improved in the last three
years. At the same time, many cited deficiencies in training and war reserves
that they said could cripple their forces in combat.

Those assessments were supported in large measure by the military high command
in Washington and by senior officers of the unified four-service combat commands
in testimony before Congress and in other public statements.

At issue are two closely related measures of capacity to be ready to fight a war
and sustain combat. The degree of readiness, in Pentagon parlance, measures a
unit's ability to fight on the first day of a full-scale war with conventional
arms against a well- armed, well-trained adversary. The degree of sustainability
measures a unit's capacity for continuing to fight effectively until American
industry can produce weapons, ammunition and supplies as fast as they are
consumed on the battlefield.

Recent wars in the Middle East show that consumption rates can be tremendous.

Military planners thus estimate that the forces should have on hand 60 to 90
days' supply of ammunition, parts and supplies to fight, for instance, a Soviet
invasion of Europe, a North Korean attack on South Korea, or an Iranian attack
on Saudi Arabian oilfields.  The Reagan Administration, in presenting its 1985
military budget to Congress, has said its military spending has been balanced
and that the armed forces are more ready for war and for prolonged conflict than
when President Reagan took office in 1981.

39% Improvement Asserted


At that time, Mr. Reagan said he was ''appalled'' by what he had seen:
''American planes that could not fly and American ships that could not sail for
lack of spare parts and trained personnel, and insufficient fuel and ammunition
for essential training.''

This year, when Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger submitted his annual
report to Congress, he asserted, ''Today, three years later, 39 percent more of
our major military units are categorized as fully or substantially ready for
combat.''

Mr. Weinberger did not specify how many units had been ready in 1981 nor how
many were ready today. Those figures are classified, although they have
occasionally become public knowledge.

Since Mr. Weinberger's report, however, the degree to which the armed forces are
ready to fight and to sustain conventional war has been increasingly disputed in
Congress and the press.

Many Guns, Few Bullets


Some Congressmen, mainly Democrats, have argued that too much has been spent on
weapons but not enough on ammunition and spare parts, contending, in effect,
that the Administration has bought too many guns and not enough bullets.

In addition, Pentagon documents finding their way into the press have suggested
that the Army and Air Force have fallen in readiness ratings, while other
official reports have said the Navy has a critical shortage of missiles,
torpedoes and other munitions.

At the request of Mr. Weinberger, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
called a news conference in March to assert, ''The force is simply far more
ready than it was three years ago to do the things that the taxpayers of this
country expect.''

''I would tell you that we have better people,'' said the Chairman, Gen. John W.
Vessey Jr. ''They're armed with more and better equipment; their training has
been improved and they have better support behind them, The maintenance backlogs
are down, the ammunition supplies are up, spare parts are improved, the
strategic mobility has improved.''

'More Money Than Needed'


Still another view came in late April from Representative Les Aspin, Democrat of
Wisconsin, a senior member of the Armed Services Committee, who asserted in a
statement that operations and maintenance, a key element in readiness, ''may
well have been overfunded.''

Mr. Aspin, regarded as a critic of military spending, contended, ''It looks like
the Administration is asking for more money than needed to operate everything at
a tempo that will keep the forces ready to act in an emergency.''

The colonels and captains, sergeants and petty officers interviewed in the
field, as well as military and civilian officials in public testimony in
Washington, have cited these deficiencies:


- Insufficient ammunition: All the forces were said to lack enough ammunition
for training and for prolonged combat. Military leaders said there were
shortages of pistol and machine- gun bullets, tank and artillery shells, and a
variety of missiles, torpedoes and bombs.


- Inadequate supply of spare parts: Most combat leaders said they had enough
parts, with occasional shortages, to train and operate properly. But senior
officials reported shortages in war reserves they said would be needed to
sustain the battle in a prolonged war.


- Shortages of noncommissioned officers: Although the number officers has
increased, military leaders cited shortages of infantry squad leaders or tank
commanders, technicians in ship crews and electronics specialists in combat
units.


- Insufficient transport to sustain forces in protracted conventional war: Gen.
Thomas M. Ryan Jr., head of the Military Airlift Command, told Congress that air
transport capacity was 33.6 million ton-miles a day, while an estimated 66
million ton-miles a day would be needed in an extended war. Sea transport is
similarly short of stated goals.

Chiefs Cite Shortages


''Notwithstanding gains made by the services,'' the Joint Chiefs of Staff said
in their annual report to Congress, ''Shortfalls in authorized end-strength,
senior grade enlisted personnel, spare parts, munitions, training funds,
chemical defense, survivable command, control, and communication systems, and
intelligence-support capabilities continue to inhibit readiness.''

''Ammunition shortfalls are the most critical problem in materiel
sustainability,'' the chiefs added. ''Commanders continually identify inadequate
ammunition resources as a major constraint on their combat capabilities.''

Since January 1981 the Reagan Administration has poured money into new arms and
equipment. Mr. Weinberger got from Congress a small addition to the Carter
Administration's 1981 proposed budget for weapons and equipment to bring it to
$57.6 billion, as measured in 1985 dollars.

After that the Defense Secretary persuaded Congress to approve big increases in
1982 and 1983 and a smaller increase to $89.1 billion for the fiscal year that
ends Sept. 30. The increase for new arms and equipment is by far the largest
expansion in the military budget.

Quality of Personnel


The size of the armed forces has increased by 82,000 men and women, to 2.18
million this year. Military leaders say the quality of the force has steadily
improved as recruits have been able to meet higher standards and more
experienced people have been retained.

Improvements in training, operations and maintenance, however, appear to have
been uneven. A Pentagon report shows a 15 percent decrease in the readiness of
Air Force squadrons and a 25 percent decrease in readiness by Army battalions
over the past three years.

At the same time, the report says the number of Navy ships rated combat- ready
has doubled. Those figures were averaged to get the 39 percent increase in
readiness cited by Mr. Weinberger in his annual report, Pentagon officials said.

Finally, the capacity to sustain combat was reported as lagging in comparison
with the acquisition of weapons. The budget for ammunition, spare parts and
other items in war reserve stockpiles has risen from $8.3 billion in 1981 to
$10.8 billion in 1984, a much slower growth rate than that for weapons and
equipment.

Sources of Imbalance


The apparent imbalance in changing combat capabilities seemed to stem from
several sources. One was restrained military budgets under President Carter. A
second has been the emphasis on new weapons under President Reagan.

A third has been cuts made by Congress. Its members have long shown little
support for operations that bring little spending to home districts or
unglamorous items like ammunition for war reserves, which is made in relatively
few places.

In annual reports to Congress, field commanders cited deficiencies. Gen. Wallace
H. Nutting of the Army, who heads Air Force and Army units within the United
States, testified that low levels of combat readiness in his command ''remained
virtually unchanged'' over the past year.

''Army forces report equipment and personnel shortages as the primary degrading
factors,'' the general said, ''and Air Force units continue to report deficits
in war readiness spares kits as the major problem.''

Navy 'Stretched Thin'


The Atlantic commander, Adm. Wesley L. McDonald, said his forces were
''stretched so thin that very little surge capability exists for rapid response
to crises.'' Inadequate supplies of munitions, he said, ''remain the most
serious detriment to current war-fighting capability.''

Adm. William J. Crowe Jr., whose Pacific Command has forces in Korea, Japan, the
Philippines and the Indian Ocean, told The Armed Forces Journal that his first
concern was ''whether we have enough ammunition, enough spare parts, enough oil
in the right places, enough consumables and sustainables for a protracted
conflict out here.''

Gen. Bernard W. Rogers, the American commander in Europe, told Congress his
command would be ''simply unable to sustain its conventional forces in combat
for long'' and still have ''manpower, ammunition, and war reserve materiel to
replace losses.''

Fifteen percent of the United States military forces are based in Europe. The
deputy American commander there, Gen. Richard L. Lawson of the Air Force, gave
more details, saying, ''Battalion field training days, aircraft flying hours and
ship steaming time are well below the level where we can feel confident.''

''Some munition stocks, most notably air-to-air missiles, naval munitions, and
specialized, high-technology munitions, are well below our required stockage, to
the point where they could be classified as war-stoppers,'' General Lawson said.


17th Formed in 1982


At Shaw Air Force Base, the 17th Tactical Fighter Squadron was formed in October
1982, with 18 F-16 fighters and 16 pilots. Since then it has come close to full
strength, with 24 planes and 30 pilots and most of the ground crew.

Lieut. Col. Benjamin D. Smith, who flew combat missions in Vietnam, commands the
17th, and Lieut. Col. Scott W. Pilkington, who flew Phantom fighters for six
years before going to Shaw, is the operations officer.

Capt. Charles Simmons and 16 other pilots are rated ''experienced,'' each having
had more than 500 hours of flying time in the F-16. First Lieut. John Brandon
and 12 others are rated ''inexperienced,'' but Lieutenant Brandon has already
had 450 hours in the F-16.

''The inexperienced guys we're getting now are the best I've ever seen,'' said
Colonel Pilkington, who has been in the Air Force since 1968.

275 in Maintenance Unit


The maintenance unit has 275 airmen, most of them experienced enough to hold
middle-grade noncommissioned rank. The Air Force demands that 75 percent of a
squadron's planes meet the criterion of being capable of going on a mission on a
given day. The 17th ranges from 83 percent to 90 percent.

Senior Master Sgt. Gerald G. Arruda said he had on hand 90 percent of the spare
parts the squadron needed. But he added, ''We don't always have what we need, or
they don't always come in on time.'' He said parts for landing gear and aviation
electronics were sometimes troublesome.

Backing up the flight-line maintenance crews are several shops for repairing
electronic equipment, weapons and engines. Chief Master Sgt. James B. Hall, who
supervises engine overhauls, has been working on engines for 23 years.

With all that, the 17th Squadron is rated by the Joint Chiefs of Staff as not
ready for sustained combat because it lacks vital spares for the F-16 engines,
electronics and weapons. High-powered machines like F-16 fighters wear out some
parts quickly.

Entire Fleet Is Short


Moreover, senior officers said, the Air Force is short of spare parts for the
entire fleet of F-16's. A few squadrons of F-16's, like the 19th Tactical
Fighter Squadron nextdoor at Shaw, have been made ready for combat by draining
spare parts from other squadrons.

Lieut. Gen. Leo Marquez, the Air Force chief of logistics, told Congress that no
fleet of aircraft was entirely ready or able to sustain combat. The fleet of C-5
transports will be the first to be able to sustain operations fully, he said,
but not until 1988.

The Air Force's comptroller, Lieut. Gen. George M. Browning, told Congress that
the backlog of maintenance done by specialists in depots leaped from $23 million
in 1983 to $317 million this year and that the backlog of maintenance on
facilities such as hangars and barracks rose from $653 million to $718 million.

Infantry Trains in Georgia


In the swamps and scrub pine of Fort Stewart in Georgia, the Army's 24th
Infantry Division (Mechanized) prepares for possible battle in the deserts
around the Persian Gulf. It is the heavy arm of the Central Command, formerly
known as the Rapid Deployment Force.

The division's chief of staff, Col. Daniel R. Schroeder, is quietly
enthusiastic. ''We are so much better off today than we were a couple of years
ago,'' he said. He cited new tanks that can fight at night, artillery fire
control devices, and rocket launchers.

The officer in charge of absorbing new equipment into the division, Lieut. Col.
James H. Askew 3d, said the division had received 54 new systems over the last
three years and would bring in 33 more this year. Among them are antitank
missiles, helicopters, laser devices to mark artillery targets, trucks, warning
devices for foot soldiers, radios, radar, antiaircraft missiles, and filters for
gas masks.

Colonel Askew has set up a center to train key soldiers on the new weapons.
Instruction runs from half a day on new trucks to 17 weeks for a rocket
launcher, culminating in a live firing exercise. He said he had been given
enough time and money to train the troops properly.

High Rate of Turnover


But the officer in charge of regular training, Lieut. Col. James R. Childs, said
the constant coming and going of soldiers was ''the biggest distractor that we
have.'' He said the turnover averaged 13 percent a month in the division.

The amount of training ammunition is insufficient, he said, and this is
compounded by the turnover. No sooner was a tank gunner trained, for instance,
than he left and a new gunner had to be trained. One tank gun shell for training
costs $135.

A tank commander, Sgt. Leon B. Graves, said his crew did not get enough shooting
on the range. ''That's where the fun is,'' he said, ''putting steel on steel
downrange. That's what counts in what we do.''

A battalion commander, Lieut. Col. Douglas B. Campbell, said that supplies of
spare parts had increased but that pilots in his helicopter unit still did not
get enough flying time because shortages had not been completely overcome. They
did have enough fuel, he said.

Short on Mechanics


One company was hampered because its motor pool had only 8 of 12 authorized
mechanics, said the motor sergeant, Staff Sgt. Rashid A. Charania. A neighboring
company was short 5 mechanics, according to First Sgt. Willam D. Lovett.

The executive officer of an artillery battalion, Maj. Raymond M. Chapman, said
the battalion's self-propelled howitzers had enough fuel so that gunners could
practice on maneuvers and enough spare parts to keep most guns operating but not
enough ammunition to train properly.

Sergeants who command tanks were unanimous in criticizing Fort Stewart as a
training ground. They said they had little open area in which to train for
desert warfare. But the division plans to clear 2,500 acres so that tanks can
practice maneuvers.

The division sent tank crews to the desert in Egypt last summer in Operation
Bright Star. ''That was the best training I ever had,'' said Specialist 4 Bruce
J. Dutton, a gunner. Other crews will go to Fort Irwin, in the California
desert, for maneuvers in September.

Not Enough Sergeants


But it is more expensive to ship tanks and crews such distances to train than to
train at a home base. Officers said the division had been posted at Fort Stewart
because it was close to the port of Savannah, from which forces could be
deployed overseas.

Asked about experienced personnel, the division's operations officer, Lieut.
Col. Ronald R. Leonard, said that ''we don't have sufficient senior grade
NCO's'' but that schooling for middle- grade noncommissioned officers was
preparing them for senior positions.

The annual report to Congress by the Secretary of the Army, John O. Marsh Jr.,
and the Chief of Staff, Gen. John A. Wickham Jr., also noted the shortage of
sergeants. They said 18 of about 70 Army units were not ready for combat because
of personnel shortages. In April 1981, 35 units were rated not ready for combat,
they said.

The Army leaders reported shortages in war reserves of repair parts,
cold-weather clothing, body armor, helmets, medical items, tank and artillery
ammunition and Hawk air defense missiles. They said it would take one to two
years for contractors to turn out enough to sustain Army forces in combat.

Marine Division Modernizing


From another pine forest, around Camp Lejeune in North Carolina, the Second
Marine Division has deployed troops to guard the Beirut airport and to take part
in the invasion of Grenada.

At the same time, the division has been modernizing. ''This year, the Marine
Corps is picking up more weapons than at any time since World War II,'' said the
training officer, Lieut. Col. Donald F. Anderson.

The division has been reorganized so that infantry battalions have been reduced
marines to 822 from 913 but have had their firepower increased with more machine
guns, grenade launchers and antitank weapons. Some weapons have been delivered,
others are on the way.

Marine artillery has been equipped with new 155-millimeter howitzers. An
artillery regimental commander, Col. Larry R. Williams, said he had enough
ammunition to train crews on the new guns but was worried about future supplies
because of high costs. He also said his regiment was short of staff sergeants.

In Washington, the Marine Corps chief of logistics, Lieut. Gen. Harold A. Hatch,
told Congress that the Corps would be able to fill only 32 percent of what it
considered its ammunition needs by the end of 1985.

Backlog in Maintenance


In war reserve stocks, the Marine Corps objective is a 60-day supply, General
Hatch said. By the end of this year, the Corps will have only a 27-day supply
and combat rations for only 30 days, he said. A backlog of specialized
maintenance, nearly eliminated in 1983, will be back up to $6.5 million by
September, he said.

Marine Corps commanders say they have the few good men they seek. Lieut. Col.
Edwin C. Kelley Jr., who led the relief force to Beirut after the suicide
bombing last October that killed 241 Americans, said he has good young officers
in his battalion.

Sgt. Maj. Victor J. Guerra Jr. said the battalion was short of corporals and
sergeants because some had transferred and others had gone to school to learn
new skills. ''But we'll make some of our own,'' he said.

Division Sgt. Maj. Arthur R. Cowan said the quality of marines had improved
because ''we put a lot of marines out of this division in the last couple of
years.'' He estimated that 4,000 of the division's 19,600 marines had been
discharged for failing to meet standards.

He also said marines had been easier to train after Beirut and Grenada. ''Today
you may be reading about it, tomorrow you may be doing it,'' sergeants tell
trainees. ''Certainly that's an attention-getter,'' said Sergeant Major Cowan.

Navy Cites Shortages


The Navy, despite higher readiness ratings, says it has significant shortages
that a Deputy Chief of Naval Operations, Vice Adm. James A. Lyons Jr., told
Congress would not be overcome until 1989.

The aircraft carrier Independence returned to Norfolk recently after supporting
the invasion of Grenada, sailing off the coast of Lebanon and taking part in an
exercise near northern Norway.

As he prepared his ship to return to sea in several weeks, Capt. William A.
Doughtery Jr. said that deploying ships got first crack at munitions and
supplies. ''I want to go with a full bag,'' he said. ''I'll demand it, and I'll
beg, borrow or steal to make it happen.''

But ''somebody has to pay for it,'' he noted, and other ships with lower
priorities will have to do without. Some deploying ships pick up munitions and
supplies from returning ships, a process the Navy calls ''cross-decking.''

Little Torpedo Practice


''Cross-decking of some categories of weapons to complete loadouts for our
deployed forces still occurs in a number of important ordnance areas,'' Admiral
Lyons said. ''Inventories are improving, but they are not yet at levels to
prevent this action.''

The captain of a destroyer, Comdr. A. R. Brittain Jr., runs what sailors on the
waterfront consider a good ship. But he said he would like to have 10 percent
more fuel for training, a little more ammunition when he deploys, and a few more
rated seamen.

Similarly, the captain of the submarine Cincinnati, Comdr. Robert E. Hawthorne
Jr., has most of what he needs in experienced officers and sailors, spare parts
and torpedoes. But his submarine may fire only eight practice torpedoes a year
because of the expense.

A Navy spokesman in Washington said it was impossible to determine the cost of
firing those training torpodoes. Senior officers added that submarines like the
Cincinnati would go to war with a full load of torpedoes but that there were not
enough for a second load.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of maintenance worker cleaning jet fighter (page B12); chart of
military budget (page B12)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 14, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SECURITY ADVISER TO REAGAN BACKS COVERT ACTIVITIES

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 13


President Reagan's national security adviser said today that covert action in
such regions as Central America was increasingly necessary to give the United
States an alternative between going to war and doing nothing when a friendly
nation is under attack.

His comments constituted one of the strongest Administration justifications for
the activities being carried out in Central America under the supervision of the
Central Intelligence Agency.

The security adviser, Robert C. McFarlane, said Americans have to wrestle with
the question of ''should we or should we not have some intermediate option of
policy, covert action?''

''The real issue which is being challenged by people on the Hill and publicly is
should you do these kinds of things at all, and I think we ought to come to
terms with that,'' he said, referring to the Congressional opposition to covert
activities.



No Plans to Send G.I.'s

In an appearance on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press,'' he said his
personal view was that the United States should use covert activities.

While repeating that the Administration had no plans to send United States
combat troops to Central America, Mr. McFarlane did not rule out the possibility
that this could happen if Congress fails to give the aid the Administration says
is necessary to let the Salvadoran Government survive a predicted increase in
rebel activity in the fall.

Discussing the covert activities, Mr. McFarlane said: ''At issue here is what
kind of competition we are in. Now it seems to me that in the late part of the
20th century, we are going to face in many countries, not only Central America,
a determined effort by the Soviet Union to subvert friendly governments.''



3 Kinds of Aid

''Now, when they do that, using great violence, do the American people really
want their President, when faced with the question of whether a friend like
Salvador, or Korea, or Israel, is being attacked, to have no other option than
to go to war, or to do nothing? I don't think so.

''Now that question is should we or should we not have some intermediate option
of policy, covert action?'' he said. ''And I think the American people have to
wrestle with that question.''

United States aid in Central America falls under three broad headings. The first
is direct, public support in military and economic aid of friendly nations such
as El Salvador and Honduras. The second is covert backing for anti-Sandinista
rebels based in Honduras and Costa Rica who have been fighting the Nicaraguan
Government. The third is the presence of United States forces in the area to
demonstrate the ability to respond directly.  Senior Administration officials
have said that Mr. McFarlane has been a leading advocate among Mr. Reagan's
advisers for concentrating on gaining public support for both the public and
covert aid programs.  Mr. McFarlane has told associates that the public has to
be educated to the fact that there is a ''gray area'' between ''total war'' and
''total peace,'' and that the United States cannot afford to give up covert
activity.

The criticism of covert actions in Nicaragua increased when it was disclosed
that the C.I.A. had been involved in the mining of Nicaraguan harbors.
Administration officials have said that the mining stopped at the end of March
and that it would not be resumed.

Programs of covert action in Nicaragua are in danger of ending, Administration
officials have said, because of lack of money. Congress has not passed a request
for $21 million for the anti- Sandinista guerrillas and there is a strong
possibility it will not do so.

Mr. Reagan did not directly mention covert activity in his speech on Central
America Wednesday, instead concentrating on the need for the aid to El Salvador.

The next day the House, in a symbolic vote of support for Mr. Reagan, narrowly
approved a bill that would allow House committees to appropriate up to $129.4
million more for the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30, and $132.5 million more for
the 1985 fiscal year. It did so without attaching the conditions that had been
opposed by the Administration, but also without approving any aid for the
anti-Sandinista rebels.

That bill is an authorization, not an appropriation measure.



Other Pending Requests

The bill approved Thursday was distinct from the pending and more important
requests for what the Administration calls emergency aid for El Salvador and for
the Nicaraguan rebels. Those funds depend on the House-Senate appropriations
conference, which will discuss requests for $62 million in military aid for El
Salvador and $21 million for the Nicaraguan rebels.

Both were passed by the Senate in early April, but have not been voted on by the
House. Because the House last week approved the other El Salvador aid request,
it is expected that the conferees will approve substantial emergency aid for El
Salvador.

There is less of an emergency character now to the $62 million Salvadoran
request because the Administration has used a special feature of law to allocate
$32 million in military aid to El Salvador. The major question is whether the
President's speech urging a fight against Communism in Central America has
convinced Congress to approve the $21 million for Nicaragua.

Mr. McFarlane said United States intelligence had picked up information in the
last six weeks suggesting that the Cubans had decided to ''roughly double'' the
violence being carried out by Salvadoran rebels, who the Administration says are
receiving Nicaraguan and Cuban backing.

He said he believed this would result in a ''Tet-like'' rebel offensive this
fall in El Salvador, referring to the heavy attacks by the Communists in South
Vietnam during the 1968 Tet holiday period.

Advance Preparation

Mr. McFarlane said that ''we believe honestly that the only way the Salvadoran
Government is going to be able to deal with that is to prepare the army in terms
of training and equipment and so forth, to be able to pre-empt it.''

''Our expectation is the Salvadorans can do the job if they're given enough in
the way of resources,'' he said.

Mr. McFarlane was asked if the United States was not being drawn into a
situation analogous to that in Vietnam, where American involvement that was
limited to aid and advisers grew into direct combat participation.

''Only if we don't do enough right now to enable the Salvadorans, Hondurans to
do it themselves,'' he answered. ''Now, it's important, whether it's in Central
America or somewhere else that we choose carefully problems where there is still
a possibility of retrieving it before there is any need for U.S. involvement.''

He said that if not enough aid is supplied, ''then we are assuring that later on
they will lose.''

When he was asked if this did not mean logically that the United States would
send in troops, rather than ''lose'' in El Salvador, Mr. McFarlane said: ''The
United States at all times and today will defend its interests. That condition
simply doesn't exist today and I'm confident we can prevent its occurrence.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert McFarlane

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 14, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

OLYMPIC BOYCOTT IS CALLED FIRM

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 277 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 13


The Soviet Union appears unlikely to reverse its decision to boycott the Olympic
Games in Los Angeles, United States and Soviet officials said today.

Afghanistan announced that it was also withdrawing from the Games.

Georgi A. Arbatov, director of the U.S.A. Institute and a member of the Soviet
Communist Party Central Committee, said the United States would have to make
''rather serious changes'' to improve overall relations with Moscow and dispel
the Kremlin's concerns over security at the Olympics.

''We haven't seen a more anti-Soviet Government in the history of our
relations,'' Mr. Arbatov said on the CBS News program ''Face the Nation.''

''I don't know whether now your Government can do anything,'' he said when asked
what Washington would have to do for the Soviet athletes to participate.

Deputy Secretary of State Kenneth W. Dam said that the decision by the Soviet
Union not to attend the Games was deliberate and that the Soviet Union normally
stuck by such decisions.

''It's hard for me to understand exactly what they want us to do,'' he said.

Mr. Dam said he doubted Moscow's decision was tied to President Reagan's
criticism of the Soviet Union during his trip to China. ''I think they are
making a political decision,'' he said.



Afghanistan Joins Boycott

VIENNA, May 13 (Reuters) - Afghanistan has decided to join the boycott of the
Olympics, the Czechoslovak press agency reported today from Kabul, the Afghan
capital.

Afghanistan is the seventh nation to join the Soviet Union in its boycott of the
Olympics. The others are East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Vietnam, Laos
and Mongolia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

OLYMPICS DECISION FINAL, SOVIET SAYS

BYLINE: By SERGE SCHMEMANN , Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 14


The top Soviet sports official said today that the decision not to participate
in the Los Angeles Olympic Games was final.

The official, Marat V. Gramov, head of the State Committee for Physical Culture
and Sports, spoke at a news conference six days after Moscow announced its
decision not to participate. He said the decision was made after it was
concluded that the United States ''cannot be expected to insure any radical
change toward making the Games a festival of peace and friendship, secure for
athletes.''

''This decision of ours is irrevocable,'' said Mr. Gramov, who also heads the
National Olympic Committee.

He said the decision came after a meeting in Washington on April 27 at which the
State Department had labeled avowed Soviet concern about the safety of athletes
as ''false accusations.''

(In Washington, the State Department called the Soviet description of the
meeting a ''complete distortion and twisting of facts.'')

Mr. Gramov's statement effectively ended speculation that the Soviet Union might
reconsider its boycott, which has been joined by East Germany, Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, Vietnam, Laos, Mongolia and Afghanistan and is likely to include
other Moscow allies. Mr. Gramov declined to speculate on the effect of the
boycott on the Seoul Olympics of 1988. ''Let us get the Los Angeles Games behind
us,'' he said, ''then we can think about Seoul.''

Mr. Gramov said that he would attend a session of the International Olympic
Committee in Lausanne, Switzerland, on Friday, but that this would not affect
the Soviet decision.

''The International Olympic Committee is not competent to discuss Soviet
nonparticipation,'' he said.

Nor was he encouraging about plans announced by Juan Antonio Samaranch of Spain,
the president of the International Committee, to come to Moscow.

''We don't know what he wants to discuss, nor do we know when he will come,''
Mr. Gramov said.

Mr. Samaranch has said that he wants to deliver a letter from President Reagan
giving new assurances of security for athletes. The text, already published, has
been scorned by Tass, the Soviet press agency.

Mr. Gramov repeated the position that anti-Soviet groups, acting in
''connivance'' with Washington, had made it unsafe for Soviet and allied
athletes to compete in Los Angeles.

International Body Is Praised

The International Olympic Committee, at a meeting in Lausanne on April 24, found
the Soviet concerns ''legitimate, substantiated and just,'' he said.

But in the meeting at the State Department three days later, Mr. Gramov said, an
American official ''peremptorily denied that the United States authorities were
violating the Olympic Charter's rules and qualified as 'false accusations' the
legitimate demands of the Soviet National Olympic Committee.''

''Moreover,'' Mr. Gramov said, ''the representative of the State Department,
strange as it may seem, held the Soviet Union responsible for the stepped-up
activities of all sorts of extremist, terrorist organizations that had been
formed in the United States.

''Such was the reply to the joint efforts that were undertaken in Lausanne,''
Mr. Gramov said. ''After that it became obvious that, with the United States
Administration holding such a stand, the actions undertaken by us were
senseless.''

Major Blame Placed on Reagan

Following the trend of the Soviet press, Mr. Gramov placed the major blame on
President Reagan.

''Our nonparticipation is on the conscience of the Reagan Administration,'' Mr.
Gramov said, ''which in the entire period of preparations for the Games did
everything possible to thwart our participation.''

He distinguished three stages.

The first stage, Mr. Gramov said, was a meeting in March 1983 between President
Reagan and American Olympic officials, at which ''the position came out clearly
that 'we need victory at any cost.' ''

The next stage, he said, was the formation of the ''Ban the Soviets'' coalition
after the shooting down of the South Korean airliner in Soviet airspace last
fall.

The third stage, Mr. Gramov said, was a plan to apply ''psychological
pressures'' on Soviet athletes to undermine their performance. He said these
included ''methods devised for the abduction of Soviet people, for compelling
them not to return to their motherland, and for treating them with special
drugs, including psychothropic preparations that destroy the nervous system.''

He insisted that what he called Soviet nonparticipation was not a boycott, and
thus was not comparable to the American-led boycott of the 1980 Olympics in
Moscow after Soviet intervention in Afghanistan.

''Some Western press media describe the decision of the Soviet National Olympic
Committee as a boycott,'' he said. ''This is absolutely untrue. Every National
Olympic Committee has the right to decide whether it will attend the Games.''

In 1980, he said, President Carter urged other countries to stay away from
Moscow and organized ''a whole set of economic sanctions.''

By contrast, Mr. Gramov said, Moscow intends to meet its contractual
obligations, which include 4 million rubles ($5.2 million) worth of equipment to
be supplied to Los Angeles. He did not say whether Soviet officials would attend
the opening ceremonies or whether the Soviet flag would be flown.

President Carter refused to have the American flag displayed in Moscow.

Soviet officials have tried to give the impression that allied countries joining
the boycott are doing so of their own volition. Mr. Gramov said the allies were
advised of the Soviet decision on the day it was announced.

An informed Western source who has been meeting with Soviet sports officials
said the boycott was apparently decided at a meeting of the Soviet Olympic
Committee on March 28, after which Mr. Gramov reportedly met with East German
officials.

Soviet Bloc Met on April 5

On April 5, four days before the Soviet Union issued its first official
statement about an anti-Soviet campaign in Los Angeles, Tass reported a meeting
of the Soviet Union and 11 allies to discuss ''questions of the development of
the international Olympic movement.''

Mr. Gramov denied that the Soviet action was motivated by a desire to retaliate
for the 1980 boycott.

''From the very beginning of preparations for the Los Angeles Olympics we have
said that no revenge, no form of vengeance was planned for the non-
participation of American athletes at our Olympics,'' Mr. Gramov said.

''We were planning to go to Los Angeles,'' he said. ''If not, we would not have
transferred millions of dollars to American television companies and to the
American organizers. We would not have sent hundreds of athletes to pre-Olympic
meets.''

He said the Soviet Union had no plans to organize ''alternative'' or
''parallel'' games while Olympics were being held in Los Angeles.

''This is something invented by the Americans,'' he said.



Poles Talk of Substitute Events

WARSAW, May 14 (AP) - The Soviet bloc is preparing to sponsor sports events in
various nations to substitute for the Olympic Games in Los Angeles, Polish
sports officials said today. One official said the competitions would not be
held at the same time as the Games in Los Angeles since the Olympic Charter
specifically forbids ''countergames.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Marat V. Gramov (page A12)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY;
 Reunion Overflow

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and Maurice Carroll

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 180 words


What happens when you throw a

party and nearly everybody wants to come? That was the happy predicament facing
the organizers of a reunion for the classes of '63, '64 and '65 at Jamaica High
School in Queens, about 3,000 alumni.

The organizers originally figured that about 300 people would want to show up
for dinner Saturday at the La Guardia Marriott. Instead, the response was so
overwhelming that there wasn't room. Some of those who couldn't be accommodated
for dinner came anyway, though, to mingle in the lobby until the lucky 350
alumni who got in finished dinner.

Then, everyone got more nostalgic by dancing to songs made famous by Chubby
Checker and Johnny Mathis.

Ronnie Gidseg Harrison cried when she saw a friend for the first time in 20
years. Connie Blaser Rubin looked for old boyfriends. Everyone laughed about
hair lost and weight gained.

Jesse Waldinger waxed philosophical about how the Vietnam War had sidetracked
the lives of so many 60's graduates.

''There are hundreds of people here,'' he said. ''There's a story in each one of
them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 15, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CRITIC OF CBS YIELDS TAPES TO WESTMORELAND LAWYERS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 997 words


A former TV Guide reporter, angered by CBS attacks on his book, last week gave
Gen. William C. Westmoreland's lawyers 37 tape recordings of telephone
interviews with CBS officials.

The recordings include an ''off-the- record'' conversation with a senior editor
of CBS News who said he had ''suspicions'' about the fairness of the journalist
primarily responsible for reporting and producing a controversial CBS
documentary about Vietnam. The editor, Howard Stringer, has said subsequently
that those remarks did not reflect his true feelings.

General Westmoreland, who commanded United States forces in Vietnam, has filed a
$120 million libel suit against CBS Inc., over the program's charge that top
military intelligence officers conspired to falsify estimates of enemy strength.


Did Not Fight Demand

In a telephone interview yesterday, the former TV Guide reporter, Don Kowet,
said he surrendered the 37 tapes in response to a subpoena from the general's
lawyers. He said he did not fight the demand because CBS has strongly challenged
his book, ''A Matter of Honor,'' by suggesting that he did not have many sources
for statements about the internal workings of the news division.

''The last thing I was going to do was resist the subpoena when they had been
calling me a liar,'' he said.

Reporters almost always fight giving litigants notes or tapes of interviews,
even when those interviews are ''on the record.'' TV Guide successfully repelled
an earlier subpoena for materials about the case, and its editor, David Sendler,
yesterday criticized Mr. Kowet for releasing the records of his interviews. Many
journalists say that if they are or appear to be taking sides, it undermines
public confidence in their fairness.

They also say that agreeing to discuss a matter ''off the record'' constitutes a
solemn pledge not to reveal even that the conversation took place, and that
unless such promises are kept, sources will not talk to journalists about
sensitive issues that are important to public understanding. Some reporters have
gone to jail rather than reveal their sources.

Sally Bedell Smith, the co-author with Mr. Kowet of a TV Guide article that said
the documentary violated CBS guidelines by omitting information favorable to
General Westmoreland, yesterday sent a formal letter of protest to Mr. Kowet.
Mrs. Bedell Smith, who is now a reporter for The New York Times, said Mr.
Kowet's action breached ''a principle of confidentiality'' and that he should
not release any material she had gathered.

The complicated case under way in a Federal District Court in New York City has
focused on whether the documentary's producer, George Crile, deliberately
omitted material that contradicted the program's theme. Mr. Stringer, who is now
executive vice president of CBS News, oversaw Mr. Crile's work for the 1982
program, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception.''

Copies of Conversation Released

''As you may have gathered,'' Mr. Stringer told Mr. Kowet in the tape- recorded
interview, ''we have our own suspicions about George Crile anyway.'' A few
moments later he said that if Mr. Kowet's beliefs about Mr. Crile's journalistic
conduct were correct, ''it does devolve on me because I should have known I
wouldn't get fair journalism off him.''

In the conversation, copies of which were released by General Westmoreland's
lawyers, Mr. Stringer repeatedly emphasized that his remarks were ''off the
record,'' not to be made public. Despite that admonition, which is often used by
news sources talking to reporters, Mr. Kowet tape- recorded the conversation. He
did not, however, refer to it directly in the magazine's article questioning the
documentary or in a subsequent book about the same subject.

John Scanlon, a spokesman for the CBS lawyers, called Mr. Kowet's release of the
tapes ''deceitful'' and said he believed that Mr. Kowet had been working with
General Westmoreland's lawyers for six months. He noted that a term,
''conspiracy- thinker,'' that Mr. Stringer used in the conversation with Mr.
Kowet was also used by the general's lawyer when he took a deposition from Mr.
Stringer several months ago.

Mr. Kowet said he gave the tapes to those lawyers, the Capital Legal Foundation,
last week.

He said there was no significant difference between recording a telephone
conversation and making hand-written notes of it. He said that because he was
originally interviewing Mr. Stringer ''on the record,'' he did not reveal he was
taping the call.  TV Guide has a policy against undisclosed taping, Mr. Sendler
said. CBS suspended Mr. Crile last year following the disclosure that he had
secretly recorded a telephone conversation with Robert S. McNamara, the former
Defense Secretary.

Mr. Kowet said he had not treated Mr. Stringer as a ''confidential'' source
whose identity had to be protected because Mr. Stringer had been speaking, at
first, for attribution. He said that Mr. Stringer placed himself in peril by
asking during the course of the conversation to be allowed to speak ''off the
record.''

According to the transcript, when Mr. Kowet asked Mr. Stringer to discuss his
feelings about the documentary and the controversy it had engendered, the
producer said, ''I take this is on the record, right?''

''Well, whatever you want,'' Mr. Kowet replied. ''It can be off the record.''

Yesterday Mr. Kowet said that because Mr. Stringer and other CBS officials
attacked his book ''that gentlemen's agreement with me is void.''

Mr. Stringer said in the deposition that he stood behind the premise of the
documentary and praised Mr. Crile's work, noting that he gave him other
sensitive assignments after the Vietnam documentary was assailed. In an
interview Friday in The Los Angeles Times, Mr. Stringer said he made the remarks
about Mr. Crile when he was ''angry and depressed'' about the criticism of the
documentary and that they did not reflect his true feelings about Mr. Crile's
work.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MCNAMARA ON RECORD, RELUCTANTLY, ON VIETNAM

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2100 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 15


In two days of questioning this spring, Robert S. McNamara said he ceased to
believe that the Vietnam War could be won not long after American combat troops
were committed to the conflict in 1965.

Mr. McNamara, the Seretary of Defense in the Kennedy and Johnson
Administrations, who was known for his appetite for facts and figures, also said
he lost faith in the military statistics that he helped create because ''they
made no sense.''

Mr. McNamara has resolutely refused to discuss in public the Vietnam War and his
role in it since he resigned as Secretary of Defense on Feb. 28, 1968. However,
in late March of this year he was subpoenaed to give a deposition in the libel
suit brought by Gen. William C. Westmoreland against CBS Inc.

The suit arose after CBS News suggested in a documentary broadcast Jan. 23,
1982, that the American military, and specifically General Westmoreland, had
altered figures on the strength of enemy forces in Vietnam to make it appear
that the United States was winning the war. The general, now retired, commanded
American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

Reluctant and Unresponsive

The initial McNamara deposition runs to 444 pages, and lawyers said he would
probably be called for futher deposition.

Despite Mr. McNamara's strong reluctance to discuss the war at all and his
apparent unresponsiveness to many questions, his deposition portrays a public
servant unwilling to come to terms with his past record and a one-time policy
maker who grudgingly continued to administer what he believed was a lost war.

At one point in the two-day questioning, Mr. McNamara said he would resist to
the limits of his legal power having to discuss the war. After an
''off-the-record'' interlude, in which his own attorney may have convinced him
that he had little recourse, he went on to give what students of the Vietnam
conflict may regard as his most complete accounting of his stewardship.

However, early in the deposition, taken in Washington, he said: ''I want it
clear on the record that you are extracting these answers from me against my
wishes. I have never spoken publicly on Vietnam. I have no intention of doing
so.''

Mr. McNamara said the events in question occurred 20 years ago and ''my memory
is imperfect.''

''I was a particpant in a decision- making process,'' he added. ''I do not
believe a participant should be judge of his own actions or the validity of
those actions.''

Unable to Recall His Opinions


On more than 100 occasions, Mr. McNamara protested that he could not recall his
opinions or those of others during the war or basic facts about the conflict. At
one point he said he was unable to recall the opinions of any other major policy
maker. Yet, at other points in the deposition, his memory seemed more firm.

Under the persistent questioning of David Boies, a lawyer in the New York firm
of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, which represents CBS, Mr. McNamara made these
points:


- Of the war, he testified, ''I did not believe it could be won militarily.'' He
said he came to this view in 1966 ''if not earlier.'' He later said that it
might have been 1965.


- He was almost contemptuous of the bombing program in North Vietnam, testifying
that he doubted it had any chance of forcing North Vietnam either to end the war
or to neogtiate. He said he never recommended a sharply reduced bombing schedule
but, instead, tried to hold bombing to moderate levels.


- ''For a considerable period of time,'' the former Defense Secretary said, he
and President Johnson disagreed about the conduct of the war and ''eventually
came to a parting of the ways.'' But he professed to be totally unable to recall
his discussions with the President before leaving office. Did he resign or was
he asked to do so? ''I'm not sure I decided. It would have been the President
who decides.'' Mr. McNamara asserted the President never gave him an explanation
of the necessity for his departure from the Pentagon.


- Throughout 1967, Mr. McNamara testified, he successfully resisted a request by
General Westmoreland that 200,000 troops be added to the more than 500,000
troops already fighting in Vietnam. ''I believed it would carry human and
political costs disproportionate to any military advantages it would bring,''
the former Secretary said. ''At a certain point one would come to the
conclusion, as I did in 1967, that we had gone as far as we could or should to
assist the South Vietnamese to help themselves, and if they couldn't we
shouldn't go further.''


- At one point Mr. McNamara said it was fair and correct to say that he had
asked for more and more statistics by which to measure the conduct of the war.
He added, ''Statistics are nothing other than the means of convenying
information and recognizing that information is frequently imprecise; it is
better to have as much coverage as one can get.''


- But he subsequently stressed and re-stressed his growing disenchantment with
the military reporting from Vietnam. ''Because,'' he said, ''you couldn't
reconcile the number'' of the enemy, ''the level of infiltration, the body count
and the resultant figures. It just didn't add up. I never did get the answer,
because there weren't any answers.'' Mr. McNamara protested he could never get
''a balanced equation.''

Mathematical Inconsistency


This was a reference to the mathematical inconsistency, often noted by reporters
who were thereafter derided, of high ''body counts,'' relatively low estimates
of infiltration from North Vietnam, low estimates of recruitment by Communist
forces and essentially no total of wounded and sick forces. A Central
Intelligence Agency document that came to light in preparations for the
CBS-Westmoreland trial said the United States was statistically, although not
actually, running out of ''people to fight.''

Another C.I.A. document called the military figures ''the greatest snow job
since Potemkin built his village.''

''People have criticized me for stressing this very brutal concept of body
count,'' Mr. McNamara testified. ''It was, in a sense, a terrible thing, but if
you're Secretary of Defense and you're concerned about whether you are
progressing militarily and it is said to be a 'war of attrition' then it is
important to try to understand whether you are accomplishing the attrition or
not.''

Deception Was Inconceivable


Mr. McNamara, who could be a witness on behalf of General Westmoreland when the
case comes to trial, repeatedly stated his belief that it was inconceivable that
the general or the Military Assistance Command in Vietnam could or would have
attempted to deceive Mr. McNamara.

However, he also testified that he had long believed that infiltration of North
Vietnamese troops into the South was substanially larger than the ''reports had
indicated.'' In one of the most arresting statements of his deposition, the
former Defense Secretary said, ''It could have been substantially higher, by,
uh, a factor of two or three or 10.''

Could infiltration have been 50 percent higher than reported? he was asked.
''Oh, at least,'' the former Secretary answered.

At one point, Mr. McNamara said he had stopped arguing about statistics and went
on to tell General Westmoreland that if he needed 200,000 more troops ''it
doesn't sound to me like you are winning.''

Cables and documents uncovered in preparations for the trial show that General
Westmoreland was asking for more troops on the military doctrine of
''reinforcing success.'' It was General Westmoreland's contention from April to
December of 1967 that the war was being demonstrably won.

To add 200,000 men to the troop strength in Vietnam, Mr. McNamara testified,
would have required the United States to call up 500,000 more draftees or
reserves and to add $10 billion to the nation's 1968 military budget. Although
such a dollar figure now seems low, it was substantial in 1967.

'Evidence of Progress'


At one point in the deposition, Mr. McNamara was handed a declassified
memorandum by Walt W. Rostow, the national security adviser to President
Johnson, written in 1967. The memo contained charts purporting to show that
effective enemy military strength had dropped from 285,000 in the third quarter
of 1966 to 242,000 in the third quater of 1967, and said the statistics were
''evidence of progress'' in the war. (The validity of these figures are central
to the Westmoreland libel case.)

''By implication,'' Mr. McNamara said, Mr. Rostow was suggesting that ''McNamara
doesn't know what the hell he is talking about.''

This, however, was one of the few hostile or semi-hostile remarks in the former
Secretary's extended testimony. In fact, Mr. McNamara repeatedly stressed that
he was uncertain, or at least reluctant to state, that he had been right and
others had been wrong. ''They could well have been right,'' he testified.

Despite his oft-repeated ''skepticism'' about Vietnam War statistics, Mr.
McNamara strenuously reiterated a belief that it was simply not possible that
either Pentagon or White House bureaucrats would have attempted to deceive him
about the course of the war or about the statistics meant to chart that course.

Confronted With Affidavits

In some ways this was the most interesting part of the former Defense
Secretary's deposition. Although he originated a number of weapons systems that
ran into serious production and cost problems, he testified in the deposition
that ''no responsible military officer would ever hold information from a
superior that conceivably could bear on the superior's rightful decision-making
power.''

When confronted with affidavits and depositions from former and present military
intelligence officers who had sworn that they engaged in wrongful or
intellectually dishonest practices in Vietnam, Mr. McNamara expressed disbelief,
saying, ''That is not the nature of a Government - when people understand that a
wrong is being done, somebody talks about it.''

Partly because the heart of CBS's defense against the libel suit is that a
substantial number of field grade and junior officers, as well as civilian
officials of the C.I.A., have said they knew they were engaged in wrongful
behavior by suppressing high estimates of enemy strength, Mr. McNamara was
repeatedly brought back to this point. Repeatedly he said it was
''inconceivable'' that this could be the case.

He also said, however, that ''if it occurred, I think I was derelict in not, uh,
being aware of it.''

Testimony to Congress


Mr. McNamara also strongly denied that he ever misled Congress or the public
about his increasingly gloomy views about Vietnam or told them anything
different from his dissent to President Johnson, which was exemplified by a
strong memorandum to the President in the spring of 1967.  Mr. Boies, the
examining attorney, then drew Mr. McNamara's attention to testimony he gave to
Congress in 1967 in which he said that as ''best we can tell,'' the Vietnamese
Communists suffered 50,000 killed in 1966 as well as serious losses to
defection, wounds and disease. ''When you recognize that a force of some
250,000- 270,000 is absorbing losses at this rate,'' he testified before
Congress, ''I think you immediately ask yourself how long will that force be
willing to fight.''

''What I think I was trying to indicate to that committee,'' Mr. McNamara said
in the deposition, was that ''I had been skeptical for a long, long time about
the data relating to operations in Vietnam. It's typical of my concern at the
time, and I never withheld that concern, to the best of my knowledge, from the
Congress or the public.'' He added, ''I didn't say one thing to the President
and a different thing to the Congress, ever.''

Mr. McNamara's attention was then drawn to his appearance at a January 1967
hearing of the Senate Armed Services Committee, in which Senator John L.
McClellan, Democrat of Arkasnsas, now deceased, asked if Mr. McNamara could give
the people some ''reassurance we are on the right track and that we can expect
to be successful in the course we are pursuing?''

''Yes,'' Mr. McNamara answered, ''I think we can definitely give such a
statement.'' He cited an optimistic statement by Gen. Earle G. Wheeler, then
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and said, ''I think he can give you a
statement which indicates that we believe we are on the right track and that
will lead to a successful conclusion of the war, but he cannot predict when it
is going to end.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert McNamara

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 16, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTIONS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 62 words


An article in Metropolitan Report on April 10 about a bill in the New York State
Legislature to provide tuition assistance to Vietnam veterans incorrectly
reported criticism of the bill's Assembly sponsor, John F. Duane, Democrat of
Queens. While individual members of the Jewish War Veterans of New York
criticized him, the state organization itself took no position.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 17, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GARY, BACK MONDALE; FRITZ, RUN WITH HIM

BYLINE: By Ted Van Dyk ;
Ted Van Dyk, president of the Center for National Policy, a research
organization, has been active in national politics since 1961 and has worked
closely over the years with both Walter F. Mondale and Gary Hart.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 777 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It is time for Gary Hart to withdraw from the race and to endorse Walter F.
Mondale. It also is time for Mr. Mondale to announce that he intends to ask the
Democratic National Convention to nominate Mr. Hart as his running mate.

This should be done now, with almost three weeks remaining before the June 5
contests in California, New Jersey and three smaller states, before the struggle
becomes so draining and destructive as to sink both men's hopes for 1984 and the
future. And it should be done even though Mr. Hart won victories in Tuesday's
Nebraska and Oregon primaries.

Both sides may greet this proposal with derision. But as they simmer down, they
may conclude it's the best route to survival in a looming no-win situation.

Why should Mr. Hart withdraw? Mathematically, he cannot now gain a first-ballot
nomination at the convention, in July. And unless he has a first-ballot victory
assured before the convention, he has no chance whatever of getting the needed
delegates once he gets there. He has foreclosed that possibility - no matter how
strongly he performs in the June 5 primaries - by running hard against
organized-labor leaders, Democratic Party regulars and other constituencies who
will hold the balance of power at the convention. You can't run against city
hall and expect the mayor's endorsement.

Moreover, the states Mr. Hart has carried in the primary campaign have been
those where Republicans tend to do well in in the general election. His
performance has been weaker in states any Democrat must start with to win in
November. And although he has policy differences with Mr. Mondale, they are
largely differences of approach and degree - whether to rebuild industrial
competitiveness industry-by-industry or company-by-company; whether to increase
real defense spending by 3 or 4 percent. There is no central differentiating
issue to justify the kind of fervent struggle that characterized, say, the 1948
(civil rights) or 1968 (Vietnam) Democratic conventions.

Why should Mr. Mondale seek Mr. Hart? The tradition in both major political
parties has been that the Vice Presidential nominee most often is the
Presidential nominee's strongest rival for the nomination. As Richard M. Nixon
remarked the other day, if John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson could patch
things up in 1960, then surely Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart could find it possible
in 1984. Mr. Mondale, too, is in debt. While he has a strong base in the old
coalition, and in the traditionally Democratic Northern industrial states,
neither will be enough to defeat President Reagan in November. Mr. Hart attracts
precisely those economically conservative, socially libertarian and politically
unaligned 30- to 45-year- old voters who could make the Democrats competitive in
a large number of states they otherwise stand to lose.

A Mondale-Hart ticket also would provide the generational and cultural bridge so
badly needed in the Democratic Party. If you scratch the surface, you find that
Mr. Mondale's and Mr. Hart's most committed supporters are not divided so much
over substance as over values and class. Mr. Hart's Yuppies feel they're running
against hopelessly ossified big government/big labor/vested-interest pols whose
thinking stopped with Tax and Spend, while Mondale and Company regard their
opponents as

opportunistic/uncommitted/Me Generation brats who probably haven't repaid their
student loans. They're both right - and wrong.  What if things continue as they
are? The level and tone of the campaign will become increasingly negative and
personal. Because the ground is favorable to him, Mr. Hart probably will win the
California primary and as many as two others June 5. Mr. Mondale will come to
the convention with a first-ballot nomination in sight but weakened by a
California defeat and thus subject to shakedown by the interest groups and
constituencies Mr. Hart professes to disdain. Mr. Hart and the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, seeking targets of opportunity, inevitably will join to create rules,
credentials and platform controversies designed to weaken or discredit Mr.
Mondale. Shrill petitioners will do the same outside the convention hall. A
brief but noisy ''third candidate'' movement will sweep the convention, then
disappear. Mr. Mondale will be crippled. Mr. Hart will be blamed.  Thus, in
November, unless he has been hurt by some unforeseen event or major setback,
Ronald Reagan will carry electorally up to 40 of the 50 states, cement
conservative control of Congress and enter a second term with a free policy
hand. Neither Fritz Mondale nor Gary Hart is a Kamikaze. They should get
together now.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 17, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
New Clashes Reported By Vietnam and China

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, May 16


The official Vietnam press agency reported today that Vietnamese troops and
civilians killed or wounded hundreds of Chinese troops who crossed the border on
Tuesday. The official New China News Agency reported clashes, but said they were
with Vietnamese troops who occupied a strip of Chinese territory.

The Vietnamese press agency accused Peking of sending ''an infantry regiment
from Kunming, southern China, across the border to carry out nibbling attacks''
after firing more than 6,000 artillery shells into Vietnam.

The Chinese press agency, in a report from China's southern Yunnan Province,
quoted military sources as saying Vietnamese fortifications had been destroyed
and Vietnamese troops had suffered heavy casualties.

Both China and Vietnam have reported border clashes since early last month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 17, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Hungary Joins Soviet In Quitting Olympics

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 191 words

DATELINE: BUDAPEST, May 16


Hungary today announced its withdrawal from the Olympic Games in Los Angeles. It
is the ninth Soviet ally to withdraw, leaving only Poland and Rumania.

''The Hungarian Olympic Committee considers that the present conditions in the
organization of the summer Olympics do not allow Hungarian athletes to
participate in the Games,'' the committee said in a statement issued by the
official press agency.

Moscow announced its decision to stay away from the games on May 8 and was
followed by Bulgaria, East Germany, Czechoslovakia, Vietnam, Laos, Mongolia and
Afghanistan.

LAUSANNE, Switzerland, May 16 (AP) - The United States and the Soviet Union will
attend a meeting of the International Olympic Committee here on Friday
concerning the Soviet pullout.

WASHINGTON, May 16 (AP) - Senator Bill Bradley, a New Jersey Democrat, and
Representative Stan Parris, a Virginia Republican, each introduced a resolution
on Tuesday that would call for establishment of a permanent site for the Olympic
Games to insulate them ''from the unwarranted and disruptive international
politics that have plagued the Games in recent years.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

POLES RELUCTANTLY JOIN OLYMPIC BOYCOTT

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: WARSAW, May 17


In what it called ''an unpleasant decision,'' Poland today became the 10th
nation to announce that its athletes would not take part in the Olympics in Los
Angeles this summer.

After voting to follow the Soviet lead, the 45-member Polish Olympic Committee
said it was ''fully aware'' its decision was unpleasant for its athletes and
''for the millions of sports fans in Poland.'' Like Moscow, it criticized the
security arrangements made for athletes in Los Angeles, but it did so in milder
terms than those of the Soviet Union.

The Polish announcement came nine days after Moscow said it was withdrawing from
the Games.

''I had great hopes that things would turn out differently,'' said one of the
Polish team's stars, Janusz Piecak, who won a gold medal in the pentathalon at
Montreal in 1976. ''Now I can say I am very disappointed.''

Much Money Came From U.S.

One reason for the apparent Polish reluctance to withdraw was that, in an
unusual arrangement, much of the financing of the Polish Olympic team was
provided by contributions from people of Polish descent living in the United
States. Western diplomats estimated that Polish-Americans were the source for
more than half of the money for the team.

The Polish withdrawal statement took note of this, saying, ''The absence of
Polish representation at the Games will also come as a disappointment for those
Poles living abroad who have always held Polish sports dear and who deserve our
gratitude for the support they have repeatedly demonstrated.''

Although the Polish announcement was delayed, diplomats in Warsaw said they felt
the decision had been foreordained.

Bulgaria, the Soviet Union's closest ally in Eastern Europe, took less than 24
hours to withdraw, followed by East Germany, Czechoslovakia and, on Wednesday,
Hungary. Of the Soviet allies in Eastern Europe, only Rumania, which often
pursues a somewhat independent policy, has remained silent.

Mongolia, Afghanistan, Laos and Vietnam, all with Communist Governments
supported by Moscow, have also withdrawn.

Strong Showings Were Expected

Poland's Olympic team had been expected to make a strong showing in track and
field, boxing, wrestling and volleyball.

The committee's announcement, issued after a two-hour meeting this morning,
noted that ''Polish sportsmen have taken part in the Olympic Games without
interruption since 1924.'' It said the Polish Olympic Committee had been
''making all-out preparations'' for this year.

The statement said the decision was made ''in connection with the situation
surrounding the Games.''

Last week Mr. Piecak, the Polish pentathlon star, told Western reporters: ''I
have been to the U.S. many times and never had any problems with security or
anything like that. I don't know about the Russians, but I know that Poland
wouldn't have any problems.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Frees American 11 Months After Capture

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 105 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 17


A 19-year-old American who went looking for buried treasure in Vietnam and was
imprisoned for 11 months was freed today.

''I feel great,'' Frederick Graham of Belmont, Calif., said when he arrived in
Bangkok on his way home from Ho Chi Minh City.

Mr. Graham was captured last June off the Vietnamese island of Phuquoc along
with a British companion, Richard Knight, 47. They were looking for treasure
they thought was buried by the 17th-century pirate Captain Kidd.

Mr. Graham was released after his family paid a $10,000 fine. Mr. Knight, who
has been unable to raise the money for his release, was still being held.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NEW AGENT-ORANGE SUIT FILED

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 364 words


A suit seeking to compel the Veterans Administration to provide a ''uniform
system'' of ''complete medical care'' for thousands of Vietnam veterans and
their families who claim harm from Agent Orange was filed yesterday evening in
Federal District Court in Brooklyn.

The suit was filed 10 days after another suit stemming from United States use of
the herbicide in Vietnam ended in a tentative settlement in the same court. In
that suit, seven companies that made Agent Orange agreed to create a $180
million fund to pay veterans and their families for medical treatment and pain
and suffering.

Yesterday's class action suit involving at least 18,000 veterans was filed by
two law firms, including that of Victor John Yannacone Jr., who in 1979 filed
the action that led to the $180 million fund agreement.

The Federal Government was not a party to that settlement, which explicitly
stated that the veterans, like the companies, reserved the right to file claims
against the Government.

Harvey F. Wachsman of Pegalis & Wachsman, the second law firm in yesterday's
suit, held that the new action was necessary because the Veterans Administration
was giving ''short shrift'' to veterans who fear that their exposure to Agent
Orange in Vietnam has caused them cancer or other illnesses, or has caused or
threatens to cause miscarriages in their wives and birth defects in their
children.



Information on Risk

Some 80,000 Vietnam veterans have undergone screening by the veterans agency for
possible Agent Orange effects. But the suit charges that the agency has
''conspired to disseminate false and misleading information'' to veterans about
the risk of exposure to Agent Orange, which was used to defoliate jungle areas
in Vietnam.

The V.A. has held that the scientific evidence linking Agent Orange with
particular diseases is far from conclusive. The companies that agreed to
establish the fund said they believed Agent Orange was not the cause of the
illnesses it is blamed for.

Among the things the suit demands of the agency are complete diagnoses of
symptoms that might be attributed to Agent Orange. Genetic and psychological
counseling is also sought.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLISHING: NIXON DOING BOOK ON VIETNAM POLICY

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1017 words


RICHARD NIXON'S latest book, ''No More Vietnams,'' has been acquired by Arbor
House and will be out early next year. ''We will have it by Sept. 1, and it will
be published in April,'' Eden Collinsworth, publisher of Arbor House, said.
''That's the first month of our spring-summer list, but the book will be
available in bookstores in February, which will be the 10th anniversary of the
fall of Saigon.''

Irving Paul Lazar, Mr. Nixon's literary agent, said of the book: ''It's Mr.
Nixon's opinion about why we went into Vietnam, what in his view we did right
and wrong and what we can learn from that now. It touches on Central America,
although it has a global viewpoint. He believes that we shouldn't repeat the
mistakes of Vietnam in other parts of he world.''

Mr. Lazar said he offered the book to several publishers based on a long
outline. ''There were other publishers interested, but Arbor House seemed to
offer the best possibilities in terms of how they felt about it and how they're
going to sell it.''

Miss Collinsworth said she received the proposal late one Friday and took it
home over the weekend. ''I phoned Mr. Lazar and asked a couple of questions, and
I pushed the pencil very quickly and made some phone calls to the staff,'' she
said. Early on Monday, after working up a profit-and- loss statement, she
submitted a floor (or minimum guarantee) for the book, together with a 15
percent ''topping'' privilege, reserving for Arbor House the right to top the
highest bid by offering 15 percent more. ''I wanted to make it worth his
while,'' she said of Mr. Lazar, ''and perhaps discourage competitors by making a
very determined bid.''

The strategy appears to have worked.

Roger Donald, editor in chief of Little, Brown, which published Mr. Nixon's
''Real Peace'' this January, said of the new book, ''We were interested, we
received the proposal, we were going to ask for more information, but having
heard that it was sold, we decided to bow out.''

Howard Kaminsky, publisher of Warner Books, which brought out Mr. Nixon's ''Real
War'' in 1980 and ''Six Crises'' in 1979, said, ''I would have made an offer,
because we have had a long, good association with the former President, but it
was beyond where I think we wanted to go.'' Neither Mr. Lazar nor Arbor House
would say how much money was involved, except that Miss Collinsworth described
it as ''substantial.''

Social Research Journal Marks 50th Anniversary

On Oct. 4, 1933, The New York Times carried a photograph of 10
distinguished-looking scholars. It was captioned ''University in Exile Opens
First Semester in New York.'' All 10 people in the photograph were former German
professors who had fled their homeland and were now members of the graduate
faculty established by the New School for Social Research to rescue European
scholars from Nazism and Fascism. Through 1945, the school brought to the United
States 167 European scholars, intellectuals, political leaders and artists.

Six months after the first group of refugee scholars arrived at the New School,
they published the first issue of Social Research, a quarterly journal. The
50th-anniversary issue of Social Research has just been published, containing 22
articles from the more than 2,000 that have appeared since the journal began - a
selection process that Arien Mack, the journal's editor for the last 13 years,
described as ''simultaneously pleasing and painful.''

The roster of authors in the anniversary issue, who were all connected with the
New School, reads like a Who's Who of past and present scholarship. Among them:
Hannah Arendt, best known for ''The Origins of Totalitarianism''; Hans
Morgenthau, the political scientist; Jean Piaget, the professor of psychology;
Leo Strauss, the political philosopher; Talcott Parsons, the Harvard
sociologist; Alvin Johnson, principal founder of the New School; Daniel Bell,
Henry Ford 2d Professor of Social Sciences at Harvard University; Peter Berger,
university professor at Boston University, and Robert Heilbroner, Norman Thomas
Professor of Economics at the New School.

The journal has a circulation of about 3,000, mostly through subscriptions,
although it is also sold at newsstands in and around academic communities. In
his introduction to the anniversary issue, Jonathan F. Fanton, president of the
New School, said that few scholarly journals maintain their permanence for so
long. Why, then, has Social Research? ''I think,'' he writes, ''because it has
remained faithful to its founders - emigre scholars in America who rigorously
maintained the commitment to a historical, theoretical, and, above all, a
critical approach to social science that was their European heritage.''

Olympic Season Is On For Book Publishers

The Russians and their allies may not be coming to the 1984 Olympic Games in Los
Angeles, but a number of book publishers will be there. In fact, Jameson Books,
an imprint of Green Hill Publishers in Ottawa, Ill., will produce an ''instant''
art book, ''Shooting for the Gold: A Portrait of America's Olympic Athletes,''
photographed by Walter Iooss Jr., with foreword and additional text by Dave
Anderson, sports columnist for The New York Times.

The 128-page clothbound book is scheduled for publication in October, about five
weeks after the Olympics, and will include photos taken by Mr. Iooss during the
games, as well as photographs of American athletes training for them.
Publication is being underwritten by Fuji Photo Film U.S.A., which will donate
net profits from the book to the national sports federations whose athletes were
chosen for the United States Olympic team.

Even before the games begin, the University of Texas Press plans to publish
''Sport and Political Ideology'' by John M. Hoberman, an assistant professor of
Germanic studies at Texas. The book, due in July, does not discuss the current
controversy, but it does examine the relationship between sports and political
ideology as perceived by European intellectuals and by officials of Nazi
Germany, the Soviet Union, East Germany and China before and after Mao.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'FINDERS KEEPERS,' COMEDY DIRECTED BY RICHARD LESTER

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Page 10, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 844 words


FOR a farce, especially a farce directed by Richard Lester, ''Finders Keepers''
takes an unconscionable amount of time to get going, but don't be too impatient.

It begins with a bizarre but not immediately funny sequence in which a man is
seen in the middle of the night walking up the drive to a mansion, carrying an
ordinary kitchen chair. When he arrives at the front steps, he carefully puts
the chair down, climbs onto the seat, and jumps to the third step, thus, the
camera shows us, avoiding the electric-eye alarm system.

Once in the house, the burglar and a young, very blond woman, dressed in saucy
widow's weeds, relieve the mansion safe of its contents, which turn out to be $5
million in cash belonging to the ''widow's'' father.

Cross-cut with these particulars is a sequence about an earnest young man who
manages a women's Roller Derby team, the members of which become dangerously
antagonistic when they learn their latest booking is nonexistent.


Not until the absconding couple and the fleeing, failed Roller Derby manager
meet aboard a train heading from Oakland, Calif., to New York, does the movie
begin, but when it does, ''Finders Keepers'' becomes a genially oddball comedy
of a sort not often successfully made these days. The film, which opens today at
the Warner Twin and other theaters, is full of irreverent gags and mini- minded
characters who would be quite at home in Preston Sturges's Morgan's Creek.

There are, most prominently, Michael Rangeloff (Michael O'Keefe), the erstwhile
Roller Derby entrepreneur, and Standish Logan (Beverly D'Angelo), a pretty,
exceptionally foul-mouthed actress Michael meets on the train. Also aboard the
train is the stolen $5 million hidden in a casket that supposedly conceals the
remains of a Vietnam veteran - the movie is not heavy with good taste.

Michael, having accidentally found the hiding place of the loot, is now
disguised as a soldier, accompanying the vet's body home. Standish, whose career
is stalled, is on her way to Denver to have a nervous breakdown. Among their
fellow passengers are Michael's foster father (Louis Gossett Jr.), who's a
breezy con man, and the fellow who originally stole the money (Ed Lauter). The
burglar's accomplice (Pamela Stephenson), still wearing her startling widow's
weeds, must follow the train in a bus, which, as we are shown, is filled with
cheery nuns who will not stop singing rounds of ''Row, Row, Row Your Boat'' when
she's trying to worry about the money.

Other characters who figure in the proceedings are Stapleton (David Wayne),
''the world's oldest railroad conductor,'' and a number of greedy, scheming
citizens in the small Nebraska town where everything comes to a manic
conclusion.

''Finders Keepers,'' which was adapted by Ronny Graham, Terence Marsh and
Charles Dennis from a novel by Mr. Dennis, has a lot of charm best described as
loose jointed. It's not especially graceful, but it grows increasingly funny as
it approaches the Nebraska showdown. Involved in these sequences are the small
town's crooked Mayor (Brian Dennehy); a two-story farmhouse, atop a flatbed
truck, being moved to a new location; a real soldier who has deserted, and the
resurrection of someone thought to be dead, a situation that prompts a credulous
young woman to report to her uncle breathlessly, ''Cousin Lane has risen!''


Some of the film's best lines go to Mr. Wayne's Stapleton, a meddling old fellow
who can telephone President Nixon - the time is 1973 - and get through to him.
For reasons that don't have much to do with the plot, Stapleton also has a
fondness for dogs, including, he says, English settlers and Labrador repeaters.

Though the pacing of the film is uneven - its highpoints stand out like clumps
of trees in the flat Nebraska landscape, ''Finders Keepers'' is unexpectedly
satisfying. The good humor and the wit are even retroactive, making the opening
sequences seem funnier than they actually were.

The cast members, beginning with Mr. O'Keefe, Miss D'Angelo and Mr. Wayne, are
as talented a group of comic actors as has been collected in an American film
since Jonathan Demme's ''Melvin and Howard.''

Mr. Lester (director of ''A Hard Day's Night,'' ''Help!'' and the last two
''Superman'' films) wastes too much footage setting up the basic situation, but
once that's out of the way, ''Finders Keepers'' is a breeze.

Strangers on a Train

FINDERS KEEPERS, directed by Richard Lester; screenplay by Ronny Graham, Terence
Marsh and Charles Dennis; director of photography, Brian West; edited by John
Victor Smith; music by Ken Thorne; produced by Sandra Marsh and Terence Marsh;
released by Warner Bros. At the Warner Twin, Broadway and 47th Street; Art,
Eighth Street and University Place, and other theaters. Running time: 92
minutes. This film is rated R. Michael RangeloffMichael O'Keefe Standish
LoganBeverly D'Angelo CenturyLouis Gossett Jr. Georgiana LatimerPamela
Stephenson Josef SirolaEd Lauter StapletonDavid Wayne Mayor FrizzoliBrian
Dennehy OrmondJack Riley


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Michael O'Keefe

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BROADWAY

BYLINE: By Leslie Bennetts

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1132 words


IT has been 20 years since Neil Simon made

''The Odd Couple'' part of the language as

well as a hit Broadway show, and the characters of Oscar (the messy, amiable
roommate) and Felix (the fussy, hypochondriacal one) part of popular culture.

These days, Mr. Simon is his usual prolific self, busily engaged in writing a
play for the next Broadway season. It, too, is called ''The Odd Couple,'' but
its protagonists are named Olive and Florence.

''You will recognize the same basic play, but I've changed all the dialogue,''
Mr. Simon explains. ''From moment to moment, the same things happen, except that
since the characters are women, their attitudes are quite different. I tried to
think of it as a new play.''

Rita Moreno and Sally Struthers will star as Olive and Florence, and Mr. Simon's
older brother, Danny, will direct - an appropriate choice, since it was Danny in
the throes of separation from his wife who inspired his brother to write ''The
Odd Couple'' in the first place.

Although Mr. Simon has recast the play to reflect a female point of view, not to
mention 20 years' worth of changes in women's lives and attitudes, he is hoping
that the appeal will remain the same. ''It's still basically an entertaining
play without any real message except that we are all human and fallible, and
it's tough getting along together,'' he observes. ''I think one of the main
reasons the play was so successful all over the world was that it had a
universal message. Two people living together are basically a microcosm of all
the troubles in the world. If they can't do it, how can Russia and the United
States get along?''

The new ''Odd Couple'' goes into rehearsal in September and begins a 10-city
tour in Dallas in October. It is expected to arrive in New York by mid-February
- only a few weeks before Mr.  Simon's new new play, ''Biloxi Blues.'' A sequel
to ''Brighton Beach Memoirs,'' ''Biloxi Blues'' will again star Matthew
Broderick as Eugene Jerome, five years older and in the Army now, with Biloxi
the setting for the basic-training blues.


A few weeks ago, Jason Brown was an ordinary seventh grader from Pittsburgh. But
for the moment, he is a famous playwright, with his hometown newspaper writing
about him, CBS Morning News calling to book him and critics rhapsodizing.

The reason is his autobiographical play, ''Tender Places,'' which is appearing
in the Young Playwrights Festival at the Public Theater through Sunday. ''I'm
really surprised, because I'm not that lucky,'' says Jason, who is 13 years old.
''I didn't expect to win anything. But my mom taught me a little about structure
- that there's supposed to be a problem that has to be solved - so I thought of
a problem and solved it.''

The problem is that of a boy caught between his divorcing parents as they battle
over custody. ''My parents got divorced, and that's hard on a kid, because he's
tugged between his parents and doesn't know what to do,'' Jason explains.
''They're each saying, 'You want to live with me, don't you?'''

His success has inspired him to begin another play, about four stepbrothers, and
to make career plans. ''I'd like to act, direct, produce, write, anything, as
long as I can stay around theater,'' he says. ''You get to show other people
what you can do and meet new people and make new friends. It's really fun.''


May Day marked the first anniversary of Twiggy's Broadway debut, and as she
headed into her final six months in ''My One and Only,'' the woman who became
famous as a 91-pound teen-age waif was finding that life as a 110-pound,
34-year-old Broadway star suited her just fine.

''It's been quite an amazing experience for me,'' the former model says. ''In
the beginning, the thought of going out on a stage was so terrifying to me that
I didn't think I could ever do it. But when you get into it, you start relaxing
and experimenting with different ways of doing it. I'm really enjoying it now.
It's such an up show.''

Twiggy and her co-star, Tommy Tune, will leave ''My One and Only'' on Oct. 31,
after which Twiggy's first order of business will be a vacation with her
5-year-old daughter, Carly. She then hopes to do a film, but is also considering
other theater and singing projects. ''I don't think I'm the kind of actress who
could take on any role,'' Twiggy remarks. ''I think it would have to be
something kind of close to the sort of personality I am. There's no way I'm
going to step into the role of a 50-year-old woman from Texas, but I'd love to
play a bad lady. I'll probably never get offered one, but I should think it's
much more fun to play a baddie than a good girl.''

For Twiggy, the now-familiar routine of a Broadway show has offered a haven in a
year that included both her separation from her husband, Michael Whitney, and
his sudden death from a heart attack. ''At this point, the theater is like my
second home,'' she says. ''And the audiences are so sweet. I've learned so much
in the last year: how to sing, how to dance much better, how to react to
different audience reactions, how to go on when you're not feeling great,
mentally or physically. There are times when you say, 'I'm never going to get
through that dance,' but you do.''


The Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company was founded four years ago by a
group of Vietnam veterans seeking new ways to communicate their experiences of
war and its aftermath. On May 30, the company's production of a new play called
''Ice Bridge,'' which marks the playwriting debut of John Forster, will begin
performances at the Public Theater. Set in a nuclear-missile silo in northern
Greenland, ''Ice Bridge'' focuses on five Air Force soldiers as one of them
suffers a crisis of conscience over his personal moral responsibility to respond
- or to refuse to respond - to an order to launch nuclear weapons.


''On Your Toes'' will close after 505 performances on Sunday, the same day
''Painting Churches'' will end its run after 206 performances. . . . Starting
June 19, the Roundabout Theater Company will stage the late William Inge's
''Come Back Little Sheba,'' which has not had a major New York production since
its 1950 premiere. Starring Philip Bosco (a Tony nominee for his performance in
''Heartbreak House''), Shirley Knight and Mia Dillon, it will be directed by
Paul Weidner. . . The 1984 winner of the Richard Rodgers Award for the best new
American musical, ''Brownstone,'' will start performances next Wednesday as this
season's final production for the Hudson Guild Theater. Maureen McGovern, Ralph
Bruneau, Loni Ackerman, Kimberly Farr and Lenny Wolpe star as five tenants in a
Manhattan brownstone. The director and book author is Andrew Cadiff, who shares
honors with the composer Peter Larson and the lyricist Josh Rubins.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: caricature of Twiggy

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Gordon Sinclair, 83, Is Dead; Broadcaster Defended U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 30, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 169 words

DATELINE: TORONTO, May 18


Gordon Sinclair, the irreverent Canadian newsman who became a folk hero to many
Americans in 1973 when he scolded the world for being ungrateful to the United
States, died Thursday, two days after suffering a heart attack. He was 83 years
old.

In 1973, when the United States was battered by the energy crisis, Watergate and
the Vietnam War, Mr. Sinclair told off the world in a broadcast for turning
against the United States after accepting billions of dollars in American aid.

The broadcast was made into a record that he said brought him ''the biggest mail
of my career.''

''This Canadian thinks it's time to speak up for the Americans as the most
generous and possibly the least appreciated people in all the world,'' the
broadcast on June 5, 1973, said.

Mr. Sinclair had a career that included interviewing Adolf Hitler and posing
nearly nude for a takeoff on a Playgirl magazine centerfold. He wrote eight
books.

Mr. Sinclair is survived by his sons Gordon, Donald and Jack, and his wife,
Gladys.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL MOTORS GOES COURTING

BYLINE: By DANIEL F. CUFF

SECTION: Section 1; Page 31, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words


It might have been Fay Wray describing how King Kong had come calling at the
stake: ''When a company the size of G.M. approaches,'' H. Ross Perot, the
founder and controlling stockholder of Dallas-based Electronic Data Systems told
a business group Thursday, ''you have to consider it. We were flattered that
they came to us.''

Thus did Mr. Perot, a colorful Texas entrepreneur who once bankrolled and
organized a raid on an Iranian prison to free two of his employees, confirm
widespread rumors that the giant General Motors Corporation had come courting
his $2 billion E.D.S. several weeks before. The object: combination of an
unspecified nature.

The disclosure, confirmed by the auto maker yesterday in a three-sentence
statement, sent ripples of excitement through Wall Street as analysts and
investment bankers pondered the delicious prospects of the world's biggest auto
maker going on an acquisition spree.

Some of the many questions in circulation yesterday included: Is the auto maker
interested in buying all of Electronic Data, or does it just want an equity
position? If it wants the whole thing, why? Does E.D.S. have some technology
compatible with robotics or auto electronics?

The auto maker, which has a reported $9.2 billion in cash on hand as the result
of the sharp upturn in auto sales in recent months, recently bought into a small
computer company in Silicon Valley and a quality control consulting firm in
Florida. In light of those acquisitions, analysts sought to discern some pattern
in the auto maker's E.D.S. overture.

If G.M. is interested in buying the entire data-processing company, E.D.S.'s
current stock value would indicate a price of some $2.2 billion. Mr. Perot
founded the company in 1962 with $1,000.

Analysts have estimated that Electronic Data should command $45 to $50 a share
in any takeover. The stock of E.D.S. rose briskly earlier in the week but closed
yesterday in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange after the G.M.
announcement at $37, down $1.25, showing little interest in the prospects for
any big buyout.  Some other large companies, including the American Telephone
and Telegraph Corporation, were also said in published reports in Dallas last
week to be interested in E.D.S.  Mr. Perot and family trusts hold over 50
percent of the company's stock. Mr.  Perot, who is said to collect more than $5
million a year in dividends from the company, is known for his exploits as well
as his business acumen.  In 1979 he acknowledged that he was behind an assault
on a prison in Teheran in which two of his employees were among those freed.
During the Vietnam war, Mr. Perot tried to deliver planeloads of supplies to
American prisoners in North Vietnam.

Lately, Mr. Perot, who is 53 years old, has been busy as head of a special panel
urging reforms on the Texas school system and has left operating control of the
company to subordinates. Morton H. Meyerson, president of E.D.S., is now holding
the reins, analysts said.

Some analysts, citing G.M.'s growing cash position, have been saying for some
time that the company was about to embark on a program of major acquisitions.

Philip K. Fricke, an analyst at Goldman, Sachs & Company, wrote in a report in
February that the principal question facing G.M. this year would be what to do
with its cash. It had $9.2 billion at the end of the first quarter and by some
estimates was expected to have $15 billion by the end of the year.

Its options, Mr. Fricke wrote, were to increase its dividend, buy back vast
amounts of its stock or embark on an acquisition program.

G.M. recently purchased an interest in a small computer company called
Teknowledge Inc. for some $3 million. And it has made a 10 percent investment in
a quality-control consulting firm, Philip Crosby & Associates, of Winter Park,
Fla. It has also formed joint ventures with Japan's Toyota to build cars in the
United States and with Fujitsu Fanuc to design, develop and produce robots.

Only some 5 percent of General Motors is currently engaged in nonautomotive
activities and Roger B. Smith, chairman and chief executive of General Motors,
has said on recent occasions that G.M. planned to diversify over the next decade
into other fields but ''in areas where we have expertise.''

Analysts point out that Mr. Smith's qualification would take in electronics.
''G.M. internally relies an awful lot on electronics managing,'' said Ann
Knight, an analyst with Paine Webber. ''Managing the G.M. information flow is
like managing the information flow of a small country. In this area, I could
conceive of E.D.S. being synergistic, but I don't know what G.M. has in mind.''

Although Electronic Data is an electronics company, it specializes in doing the
computer paperwork on contract for businesses, medical plans, banks and
government.

Any acquisition of E.D.S. would be a continuation on the path that G.M. set out
on with its investment in Teknowledge, said Scott Merlis, an analyst at Shearson
Lehman/American Express. He added as well that G.M. would have an internal use
for E.D.S. computer services.

But Ralph Shive, an analyst with Rauscher Pierce Refsnes in Dallas, said he
could not ''possibly see how E.D.S. could fit in with G.M.''

E.D.S., he said, has a ''culture'' fostered by Mr. Perot that is akin to boot
camp, where employees are expected to work long and hard hours to earn their
spurs. ''This is the opposite of the way most larger copmpanies can operate,''
he said.

Analysts also point out that on the basis of revenues, General Motors is 40
times as large as E.D.S. Thus, E.D.S. would contribute only a relatively small
amount of earnings - ''nothing that would flatten out the sales cycle in cars,''
Mr. Shive said. ''My opinion is that it's unlikely any large corporation would
merge with E.D.S. Maybe they would take an equity position.''

The Dallas-based company has been reporting steady gains in profitability. For
the nine months ended March 31, the company said earnings gained 23 percent, to
$52.4 million, or 93 cents a share, on a revenue increase of 21 percent, to
$565.4 million.

Mr. Perot indicated last week that he did not want to sell E.D.S, but his
position was not entirely clear.

''I don't know what kind of game he may be playing,'' Mr. Shive said. ''The
stock is high now, and maybe he thinks that's as good as he will get.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: statistics of Electronic Data Systems Co. (page 33); photo of H. Ross
Perot

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GENERAL KEY ROLE IN U.S. POLICY ON LATINS

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1207 words

DATELINE: PANAMA, May 12


As United States policy in Central America has come to emphasize an increasing
military presence and cooperation with allied armies in the region, Gen. Paul F.
Gorman has emerged as a key American strategist, according to diplomats and
military officers.

General Gorman, 56 years old, was named chief of the Army's Southern Command a
year ago. He heads United States forces in Latin America and the Caribbean but
has focused his attention on Central America. He travels through the region more
often than his predecessor, Gen. Wallace Nutting, and has close ties to the
military in Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador.

According to Costa Rican officials, General Gorman's policies have become a
matter of dispute in Costa Rica, which has no army and has tried to remain
neutral.

Veteran of Vietnam and Korea

Western diplomats said General Gorman is convinced that the leftist rebel
movement in El Salvador can be militarily defeated if the United States provides
enough weapons, ammunition, training and logistical support to the Salvadoran
Army.

A veteran of the wars in Korea and Vietnam, General Gorman is described by
associates as intelligent, self-confident, vigorously anti-Communist and highly
ambitious. He is considered an accomplished strategist, and Central American
officers who have dealt with him say he is convinced that the United States must
establish a military presence in the area to prevent leftist gains.

Last year General Gorman tried unsuccessfully to revive the Central American
Defense Council, a pro- United States alliance that fell apart after the
Sandinista victory in Nicaragua in 1979. He called together officers from
Panama, Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala in October to discuss the project
but was said to have been unable to persuade them to put aside their differences
and unite to counter what he has described as subversion sponsored by Cuba and
Nicaragua.

Advocate of U.S. Maneuvers

General Gorman's efforts to modernize the armies of Honduras and El Salvador
have been more successful. Diplomats say he backs United States exercises in
Honduras, which are intended both to train Honduran soldiers and to warn
Nicaragua that the United States is prepared to back Honduras in any
contingency.

During maneuvers in 1983 General Gorman often traveled to Honduras from his
command post in Panama to review progress, according to an American diplomat.

Relations between Honduras and Nicaragua have been poor for the last two years.
They worsened further last week after a Honduran helicopter was shot down in
Nicaragua. Honduras expelled the Nicaraguan envoy and recalled its own.

The United States has begun a program of airborne surveillance of Nicaragua and
guerrilla-held parts of El Salvador. A 300-man United States Army intelligence
battalion has been stationed in Palmerola, Honduras, and C-130 aircraft based
there are among those conducting surveillance missions.

War Powers Act at Issue Some Congressional critics have suggested that the
program could be a

violation of the War Powers Act

because it involves the United

States in providing combat intelligence to the Salvadoran Army and

could expose American pilots to hostile fire.

The Guatemalans have not fully supported General Gorman's efforts and have
indicated they resent American criticism of human rights abuses.

United States officers consider Guatemala to have the best army in Central
America. In recent years, they say, it has turned to Israel and other countries
for supplies and is no longer dependent on the United States. Congress has
imposed restrictions on military aid to Guatemala, despite Administration
efforts to increase it.

According to Costa Rican officials, General Gorman has pressed President Luis
Alberto Monge to accept 1,000 National Guardsmen from the United States to build
roads and airstrips near the border with Nicaragua. An aide to President Monge
said General Gorman ''really exerted pressure,'' but there has been no
agreement.has been no agreement.

A Visit to Costa Rica

On an unannounced visit last week, General Gorman met with Costa Rican leaders
to discuss the project again and to offer an acceleration of military aid,
according to American and Costa Rican officials.

After the visit Ambassador Curtin Winsor said National Guardsmen might arrive
later this year to begin construction projects. But Costa Rica has not accepted
the project, and a Costa Rican official said there were fears it could
compromise Costa Rican neutrality.

In Nicaragua, the official newspaper Barricada said General Gorman's visit to
Costa Rica was associated with a ''climate of rumors,'' and the paper said it
was aimed at creating ''a psychological preparation for war.''

General Gorman, a West Point graduate, was deputy director of the Pentagon
Papers project and later served as the senior military officer at the Central
Intelligence Agency. He declined requests for an interview. He rarely speaks
with journalists and, according to an American businessman with extensive
experience in the region, ''he really does not like the press.''

Differed on Vietnam Strategy

During the Vietnam War General Gorman argued against some aspects of United
States strategy. He did not share Gen. William Westmoreland's belief in the
effectiveness of large- scale offensives, recommending instead the use of
repeated forays from secure bases.

Military officers and others who have worked with General Gorman cite his
mastery of detail as his most outstanding trait. He is said to be among the
Army's best briefers, able to speak at length and in great detail without notes.
''I think he has a kind of photographic memory,'' one of his former Pentagon
colleagues said.

Associates also said General Gorman was by nature an activist and not the sort
to sit back and let events take their course. He has clashed with several United
States ambassadors in Central America, and three of them who were considered
insufficiently promilitary have been transferred from the area in recent months.

''He's what we call the hard-charging type of commander,'' a retired American
officer said. ''He looks at a map and likes to envision the grand strategy.''

'Borders on Arrogance'

Representative W. G. Hefner, Democrat of North Carolina, told General Gorman at
a Congressional hearing last year that his approval of construction projects in
Honduras without informing Congress ''borders on arrogance.'' The general said
Pentagon lawyers had advised him the construction was not considered permanent
and thus did not require approval.

A three-member Congressional delegation visited Panama this month and met with
General Gorman. One member of the delegation, Bill Alexander, Democrat of
Arkansas, who is a critic of policy in Central America, said he disagreed with
those who portray General Gorman as ''a man who wants war down here.''

''We have got a President who sees the solution as military and not
diplomatic,'' Representative Alexander said in an interview. ''General Gorman is
a good soldier. In the absence of a defined diplomatic strategy, he is providing
military leadership to fill the void.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gen. Paul F. Gorman

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 655 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 28.

1. This new-born is black and white and was bred under unusual circumstances.
Explain.

2. A normally gentle ceremony of greeting at the White House was punctuated by a
blunt exchange of differences. Who were the participants and what was at issue?

3. ''It's integrated, but it's not desegregated,'' a lawyer said of a school
system where, 30 years after it was the subject of a landmark Supreme Court
decision, one-third of the students still attend virtually all- black schools.
Where is that school system?

4. Lillian Gish, Lionel Richie, Dame Margot Fonteyn and a Kabuki female
impersonator were among those who brought down the house - the Metropolitan
Opera House. What was the occasion?

5. ''I did not believe the war could be won militarily,'' a man who has
resolutely refused to discuss in public the Vietnam War and his role in it said,
in his deposition in the libel suit being brought by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland against CBS Inc. Who is he?

6. Joan Benoit, the women's world record-holder in the marathon, turned in a
memorable performance, even for her. What did she do?

7. ''I would presume that our instructions to our people to allow the opposition
to win some seats might have been taken too literally,'' said a head of state
about early returns in a parliamentary election. Who is he and what were the
circumstances?

8. The good news, the disappearance of pollution from the New York harbor,
brought bad news, the appearance of something else. What is it?

9. Prompted by a crisis, the Federal Government arranged a $7.5 billion aid
package, the biggest of its kind that it had ever assembled. What was the
crisis?

10. A Federal official denounced the ''alleged grandiose accomplishments'' of a
Federal program, saying it had acheived little and had taken credit for other
agencies' successes. What program is it?

11. A Special Tony Award ''for outstanding achievement in the lyric theater''
will be presented to a production that never competed either for a nomination or
for the award itself, as new plays and revivals must. What production is it?

12. There was a happy ending for this clock that, once upon a time, was where
many a romance began. Explain.

13. ''Congress did not intend to create an elaborate independent counsel
machinery - which makes sense only in the context of a distrust of the Attorney
General with respect to his official and political colleagues of the Attorney
General with - only to establish the Attorney General as the 'gatekeeper' of
that machinery, able without the slightest review by anyone, to open the gate or
slam it shut as it may suit his purpose'' said a Federal judge. What were the
circumstances?

14. An entertainer volunteered to a lend a hand, gloved, to help the Reagan
Administration in its campaign against drunken driving. Who is he?

15. Investigators searched the rubble at a setting of real and make-believe
horror. What had happened?

16. Psychological disorders of the extremely wealthy differ (very
little/greatly) from those of the very poor, according to research.

17. (The United States/the Soviet Union) was the world's leading exporter of
weapons to developing countries in 1983, with a total value of military sales
agreements that was more than double those of the other nation.

18. A long and successful association between a player and a team ended. Name
them.

19. A plan adopted by the House of Representatives would finance (all/
one-quarter/one-third/one-half/two -thirds) of the MX missiles that were
approved by the Armed Services Committee.

20. The timing of a heart transplant operation is crucial for surgeons because a
human heart can remain outside the body a maximum of (two/ four/eight/twelve)
hours.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Soldier in Vietnam War on Journey to Tomb of the Unknowns

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Honor guard carrying the coffin to the frigate Brewton in Pearl Harbor
for first leg of journey to the Tomb of the Unknowns at Arlington National
Cemetery. Coffin contains remains of an unknown U.S. soldier in Viet- nam and
was selected from among the four remains of servicemen not identified among
those recovered from Southeast Asia. The coffin will be brought to the Capitol
where it will lie in state until burial on Memorial Day.  United Press
International

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Miss Guggenheim, Account Executive, To Wed Frederick Z. Lodge on Sept. 2

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 65, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 228 words


Mr. and Mrs. Thomas S. Guggenheim of Cincinnati and Snowmass Village, Colo.,
have announced the engagement of his daughter, Susan Stix Guggenheim of New
York, to Frederick Ziegler Lodge, a son of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Sears Lodge of
Beverly, Mass. The wedding is planned for Sept. 2.

Miss Guggenheim, the daughter also of the late Joan Yarter Guggenheim, is an
account executive for M, a monthly magazine of Fairchild Publications. She
graduated from the Seven Hills School in Cincinnati and the University of
Colorado. Her father is president of the Charleston Hosiery Mills in Cleveland,
Tenn.

Her fiance, who graduated from the Groton School and the University of
Pennsylvania, is a member of the class of '85 at Fordham Law School, where he is
on The Fordham Law Review, and a summer associate with the New York law firm of
Milbank Tweed Hadley & McCloy. His father is the special assistant to the
president of Tufts University.

Mr. Lodge is a grandson of Mr. and Mrs. Henry Cabot Lodge of Beverly and the
late Mr. and Mrs. Frederick J. Ziegler of New York. Henry Cabot Lodge served as
a Republican Senator from Massachusetts, Ambassador to South Vietnam and chief
delegate to the United Nations. Mr. Ziegler was a director of Steinway & Sons,
the piano manufacturer founded by Henry Engelhard Steinway, the future
bridegroom's great-great-great- grandfather.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of Susan Guggenheim

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MONDALE-HART RACE DELIGHTS G.O.P.

BYLINE: By HOWELL RAINES

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1582 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


Walter F. Mondale's inability to knock Gary Hart out of the Democratic
Presidential contest has encouraged President Reagan's campaign planners and
stirred new doubts among some Democrats about Mr. Mondale's strength for the
general election, according to strategists in both parties.

The Hart-Mondale struggle has also produced broad agreement among political
professionals on both sides that, while the former Vice President is still the
likely Democratic nominee, he may be sustaining political damage that could send
him into the November election in a weakened condition.

A Republican strategist involved in the Reagan re-election effort said some of
Mr. Reagan's political managers believe that a Democratic nomination struggle
extending into June ''would be the biggest single plus we could hope for in the
general election.''



Electoral Demographics


Strategists for Reagan-Bush '84 acknowledge that they have become eager
observers of the battle for the Democratic Presidential nomination, and not
solely because they believe the conflict between Senator Hart and Mr. Mondale is
undermining Democratic unity. The Republicans are also looking for information
on the electoral demographics that are expected to play a major role in deciding
the outcome of the fall election.

In the view of some White House advisers, a Hart candidacy would inject an
element of political uncertainty into the general election contest. Because of
Mr. Hart's demonstrated appeal to younger voters, the Republicans believe the
Coloradan could threaten the substantial lead Mr. Reagan holds in public opinion
polls of younger voters.

Reagan strategists are counting on the President's standing among voters 18 to
39 years old to help withstand the Democratic Party's announced effort to spur a
heavy anti-Reagan vote among blacks, women and members of union households.



Two Important Themes


These observations underscore two important themes in the comments of political
professionals of both parties as they await the last five Presidential primaries
of the year on June 5.

First, this has become a time of increasingly critical scrutiny of the Mondale
candidacy. Second, it has also become a time of increasing emphasis on voter
turnout, voter registration and electoral demographics, with both the Republican
National Committee and the Democratic National Committee predicting that the
general election vote will surge to 100 million from the 1980 level of about 86
million.

Party officials see the 1984 general election as a competition for new and
expanded voter groups in which the main weapons will be registration programs
and candidate appeal.

On the first issue, there is substantial bipartisan agreement, as well, on why
Mr. Mondale's drive for the nomination sputttered once again as the nomination
battle reached the Ohio and Indiana primaries - contests that allowed
participation by a broad spectrum of Democrats and independents.



Difficulty in Extending Appeal


Mr. Mondale's critics in both parties believe the former Vice President's defeat
in 11 primaries, despite his advantages in money and endorsements, demonstrated
his chronic difficulty in extending his appeal to mainstream voters who
determine the outcome of big primaries and general elections.

Mr. Mondale's campaign chairman, James A. Johnson, responds that in the general
election any weakness in this regard would be more than offset by Mr. Mondale's
ability to inspire a heavy turnout from traditional Democratic groups.

Even so, some Democratic and Republican strategists use remarkably similar
arguments in defining what they say are the main weakness of the Mondale
candidacy.

''Mondale has thus far illustrated that he can only win when the party has
excluded the baby boomers, independents and others,'' said Horace Busby, a
Democratic political analyst. ''Where Democratic primaries are most
exclusionary, that's where Mondale wins.''

Robert Teeter, a Republican poll taker and White House political consultant,
makes the same point. A Reagan-Mondale competition would be decided ''by which
one really moves into the middle and picked up the ticket- splitters,
independents, undecideds and swing voters,'' Mr. Teeter said, adding, ''The
evidence is all Reagan.''



Flaws Found in Hart Argument


In response to such arguments against Mr. Mondale, Mr. Johnson suggested that
Senator Hart's boast that he can attract independents and Republicans is an
empty one since many of those voters will not stick with the Democrats in the
general election. Some exit polls indicate that one-third of the people who
voted for Mr. Hart in the primaries plan to revert to Mr. Reagan in the fall,
Mr. Johnson said.

''It's clear to me,'' he added, ''that to start out with an enthusiastic
Democratic Party where you have the basic elements committed to your candidates
is more important than being dependent on Republicans and non- Democrats,
because ultimately we will have to turn out high numbers of Democrats and expand
the electorate among Hispanics, blacks'' and others who lean toward the
Democratic Party. ''That is the way to win the election,'' Mr. Johnson
concluded.

Mr. Mondale's allies also contend that in the debate over the former Vice
President's ''electibility,'' the impact of the Rev. Jesse Jackson's candidacy
is too seldom taken into account. Without Mr. Jackson in the primaries, Mondale
supporters say, their candidate would have won heavy majorities by taking most
of the black vote that has gone to Mr. Jackson.

Setting aside the debate as to whether Mr. Hart or Mr. Mondale could best
stimulate a big Democratic vote, both Republican and Democratic officials agree
that voter turnout will be a key factor in 1984. Despite the Democrats' current
troubles, Richard Wirthlin, the principal pollster for the Reagan re-election
effort, has predicted ''a close, tightly fought contest'' in the fall that could
hinge on the voter-registration battle being waged by the national parties.



Republican Registration Effort


Alarmed at the heavy Democratic vote by blacks and women in the 1982 elections,
the Republicans have undertaken what one party official called ''a rifle shot
effort'' to identify two to three million likely Reagan supporters through
sophisticated computer surveys of unregistered voters in heavily Republican
precincts.

Frank J. Fahrenkopf Jr., chairman of the Republican National Committee, said the
party had already registered 750,000 of the two to three milllion new voters it
was seeking in such swing states as California, Florida, Texas, Pennsylvania,
Illinois and Ohio.

So far this year, Republicans have registered 146,000 new voters in California
and 158,000 in Texas. The cost of the program, estimated at $8 million to $10
million, will be split between the Republican National Committee and the Reagan
re-election committee.

The Democratic National Committee has budgeted only $3 million for voter
registation programs, but such groups as the American Federation of Labor and
Congress of Industrial Organizations will do a lot of the party's registration
work. Ann F. Lewis, political director of the Democratic National Committee,
predicted that the Democrats would get two-thirds of the 12 million to 14
million new voters expected in the 1984 election.

For months, Democrats have assumed that their nominee would be assisted by a
tidal wave of anti-Reagan votes from union members, women and especially blacks.
In both North Carolina and Texas, for example, black voter registration has
increased by about 30 percent, according to the Voter Education Project.



Support From 'Baby Boomers'


But Mr. Reagan's re-election strategists say their private polls indicate
countervailing strength among nonunion blue-collar workers, among middle and
upper-middle-income suburban residents who did not support him in 1980, and
among the 18- to 39-year-old ''baby boomers.''

The New York Times/CBS News Poll for April and a more recent survey by The Los
Angeles Times confirmed Mr. Reagan's high standing among the young. According to
the Times/CBS Poll, the President led Mr. Mondale by 51 percent to 37 percent
among voters in the 18-to-39 age group. Mr. Reagan led Senator Hart 49 percent
to 43 percent in this group.

In the Los Angeles Times poll, the President led Mr. Mondale by 58 percent to 37
percent among the young. He was ahead of Mr. Hart by 55 percent to 39 percent.
In both cases, Mr. Reagan's lead among the young was more than double his
advantage among older voters.

''He's even stronger with those around 18 to 24 years old than those around
30,'' said Mr. Teeter. ''They like Reagan personally. They like Reagan
economically. They do not have that softer, don't-get-involved foreign policy
and defense attitude that the Vietnam-era 'baby boomers' have.''

The advantage for Mr. Reagan is offset somewhat by the fact that young Americans
are less dependable voters than those over 40.

Some Reagan strategists say Mr. Mondale, as a known quantity, would be easier to
run against than Mr. Hart, who would inject an element of uncertainty into the
general election contest.

Other re-election committee officials maintain that if the Colorado Senator
should wrest the nomination from Mr. Mondale, he would be unable to fire up
labor groups and others that form the core of the Democratic strength. Even a
wounded Mondale would make a tougher battle, these officials argue.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HART OPENS COAST DRIVE WITH ATTACK ON REAGAN

BYLINE: By FAY S. JOYCE

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 26, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 494 words

DATELINE: SAN DIEGO, May 19


Gary Hart opened a campaign swing through California today with a sharply worded
attack on President Reagan's nuclear arms policies and a pledge to try to
eliminate the risk of nuclear war with the Soviet Union.

Speaking in Santa Barbara, the candidate for the Democratic Presidential
nomination accused Mr. Reagan of helping to lead the world on a ''steep slide
towards nuclear war.''

He said Mr. Reagan was ''uninformed'' and ''inattentive'' to his job and called
the President ''plastic.''

With one poll showing Mr. Hart in a tight race in this state with Walter F.
Mondale, the Senator outlined six steps he said he would propose to the Soviet
Union to reduce the risk of nuclear war.

Among them was an immediate, mutually verifiable six-month freeze on the testing
and deployment of new strategic missiles while negotiations for a longer freeze
and reductions of weapons took place.

Mr. Hart said he would also seek agreement to improve communications with
Moscow.

Other parts of the six-point program, he said, would be to negotiate with the
Soviet Union a mutual halt on the development and testing of space weapons and
to work toward getting both countries to start the ''rapid and continuing
destruction'' of nuclear warheads.

'Dangerous Technology'


In his attack on the President, Mr. Hart also said Mr. Reagan had ''pushed on
the Chinese weapons that they do not seem to even want'' and had agreed to give
them ''potentially dangerous nuclear technology without any real safeguard that
it will not be used to build the bomb.''

All Mr. Reagan got in return, the Democrat said derisively, ''was a dinner
toast'' saying the Chinese did not currently proliferate.

The White House said it would not comment on Mr. Hart's assertions.

Beginning months ago, Mr. Hart found himself on the defensive on the arms
control issue, as Mr. Mondale repeatedly accused him of inconsistency and said
Mr. Hart's position was ''as hard to follow as a black bird on a dark night.''
Today Mr. Hart expressed irritation when he was asked about his backing of a
nuclear ''build-down.'' ''I've responded to it at almost intolerable length, and
I don't intend to do it anymore,'' he said. ''Mr. Mondale's aware of that, and
all he's engaging in now is just the same old politics as usual. When he gets
behind he starts attacking.''

The former Vice President has continued to press that attack strongly in
California, where the peace issue is an important one.

Later, in San Diego, Mr. Hart told a group of 100 Vietnam veterans that the
United States had neglected then and that he would remedy this. He expanded on
this at his next stop, Sacramento, where he said Vietnam veterans should be
named to key positions in the Veterans Administration.

Meanwhile, Mr. Mondale met at his campaign headquarters in Washington with
reporters from New Jersey. Mr. Mondale said his campaign was doing ''quite
well.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Gary Hart

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. FINDS 14 NATIONS NOW HAVE CHEMICAL ARMS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


Fourteen to 16 countries, or about 10 more than had been estimated, have
acquired chemical weapons in recent years, Defense Department officials say.

In view of this, the officials said this week, United States military forces
have begun to emphasize training in protective clothing and developing new
equipment so that troops could survive and fight in any contaminated atmosphere.

The officials, who spoke in response to questions about an increase in such
training, said United States forces could be forced to cope with chemical
attacks in Europe, the Middle East, Southeast Asia and Northeast Asia. They said
such a threat had not yet spread to the Western Hemisphere.

Soviet Allies Included


The officials declined to disclose details, saying they had to protect sources
and methods of intelligence. But they said recent analyses showed 14 to 16
countries had chemical arms, including the Soviet Union and several of its
Eastern European allies.

They said there were six or seven countries in the Middle East and Asia with
chemical weapons, including Egypt, Iraq, Vietnam and North Korea. In addition,
they said, countries that accept arms from the Soviet Union are likely
candidates to have the weapons.

To prepare to meet any chemical attack, the officials said, the Defense
Department has asked for $664 million in the 1985 military budget now before
Congress. This money would be for protective equipment, research and development
of new equipment, operations, training and maintenance.

In previous years Congress has voted most of the funds requested for defensive
gear but has rejected requests for funds to produce new chemical weapons. On
Thursday the House of Representatives voted overwhelmingly to reject a $95
million proposal for production of a form of nerve gas in which two inert gases
combine in the attacking shell to form a lethal gas.

U.S. Keeps a Supply


The United States has a stockpile of chemical arms but does not currently
produce such weapons. Specialists said the United States, which may be the only
Western country to stock the weapons, was among the few that admitted to having
them on hand. President Reagan has proposed a treaty banning chemical arms, but
no negotiations are under way now.

Experts on chemical warfare said any country with a chemical industry could make
mustard gas, as, they added, Iraq has evidently done. These experts said such
gas would be enough to give most countries an advantage without their having to
produce more advanced chemical weapons, such as nerve gas.

Strategies Reviewed


Defense department officials said that, after concluding that the Soviet Union
had used chemical weapons in Afghanistan and that Vietnam had used them in
Cambodia and Laos, they had began to collect information about the capacity of
other countries to acquire chemical weapons.

That led, they said, to a review of United States doctrines for fighting in any
area contaminated with chemicals, to assigning newly formed chemical units to
combat forces, to equipping troops with protective gear and to starting new
training programs.

Until recently, chemical training consisted of a few lectures a year and a
session in which soldiers put on gas masks and were exposed to tear-gas chambers
that simulated a gas attack. Today soldiers wear protective uniforms and carry
gas masks for everyday training.

At Fort Stewart, Ga., for instance, soldiers taking annual tests on basic
military skills recently wore protective gear while reading maps and using
compasses. An artillery battalion on the range for gunnery practice did the
same.

The purpose, officials said, was to enable troops not only to survive a chemical
attack but also to fight on.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NON-AMERICAN VICTIMS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 81 words


To the Editor:


Nowhere in the comments regarding the recent settlement of the Agent Orange suit
brought by Vietnam veterans have I seen or heard any mention of the effect the
defoliant has had on the Vietnamese. Our cavalier use of this carcinogenic
substance constitutes a heinous crime against a people, and its effects will be
felt by untold generations. Was not this action on our part as morally abhorrent
as germ warfare?

SYLVIA DIAMOND New York, May 14, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DUARTE SEEMS TO HAVE BREATHING ROOM

BYLINE: By LYDIA CHAVEZ

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


As Jose Napoleon Duarte prepared last week to return to the presidency of El
Salvador, he faced familar challenges from leftist rebels fighting in the
countryside and far- right forces in the capital. Mr. Duarte, who is to meet
President Reagan in Washington tomorrow, is still a contentious populist. But
this time, in contrast to his term as head of the junta in the early 1980's, he
began in a conciliatory vein.

Between dances at a campesino union party last week, he told supporters, ''We
have to be cautious, we have to be careful, because if we go too fast, we'll
destroy the whole thing.'' At accreditation ceremonies, Mr. Duarte said he
wanted to be President of all Salvadorans ''from the extreme right to the
extreme left.''

Attacks from right and left could again cripple his administration. But noting
changes since the chaotic days of the junta, a usually skeptical American
official saw some room for optimisim. An important factor is that the armed
forces evidently have bridged deep divisions between liberal and far-right
elements to become more stable and professional. The army had been plagued by
in-fighting between progressive officers who led the 1979 coup, and
traditionalists tied to the oligarchy. The rightists prevailed, but in the last
two years, many extremist officers have been pushed aside by a new conservative
professional group that seems willing to give Mr. Duarte the opportunity to
prove himself. ''There are still officers who work with certain political
groups,'' a senior officer said, ''but it used to be 70 percent of the army that
was political and 30 percent that wanted to stay apolitical. Now that has been
reversed.''

The army's new direction was prompted by financial ties with Washington and
preoccupation with expanded fighting, Gen. Eugenio Vides Casanova, the Defense
Minister, says. The Army's professionalism will be tested when it decides
whether to retire or transfer well-known rightists. If they stay, an army
official said, Mr. Duarte may be unable to forge the alliance with the army he
needs to obtain room to maneuver. The rightists include Col. Nicolas Carranza,
head of the Treasury Police, Col. Francisco Moran, former head of the security
force who now runs the electric company, and Lieut. Col. Denis Moran, the
commander in the southern province of La Paz, who is suspected by American
officials of involvement in the deaths of two American labor advisers. (In
another controversial case, a criminal judge said five former national guardsmen
accused of murdering four American churchwomen would go on trial this week.)

Even with rightists out of the way, Mr. Duarte must act cautiously to keep the
support of army conservatives. Many of them favored him over the rightist
candidate, Roberto d'Aubuisson, because of Mr. Duarte's ability to get American
aid. But they are skeptical of his intention to bring the left into the
political process and of his reputed advocacy of civilian government at the
military's expense. Accordingly, Mr. Duarte has asked General Vides Casanova and
Col. Adolfo O. Blandon, the Chief of Staff, to stay on through his first year,
military and political sources said.

Threats from Cotton GrowersMr. Duarte will need the army's help in placating the
far-right business and political community. For the most part, businessmen have
taken a wait-and-see attitude, but some have been excited by Mr. d'Aubuisson's
charges that the election was stolen by the Central Intelligence Agency. Cotton
growers have already challenged Mr. Duarte, threatening a producer's strike
unless prices are raised. The far-right fringe will probably never accept Mr.
Duarte, but its ability to carry on subversion against him would be weakened if
the private sector was neutralized, an American official said.

Finally, Mr. Duarte has to cope with leftist insurgents who now dominate the
fighting in much of eastern and northern El Salvador. Overtures to the left
could upset the army and touch off right-wing violence as happened last summer
when the Government's conservative Peace Commission held talks with leftists.
The army's attitude toward dialogue, some Salvadoran military officers say, may
turn on whether it feels confident at the time that it has the upper hand
against the guerrillas.

Guerrilla activity has slackened in recent months. As in past years, a strong
autumn offensive seems likely, although no one in El Salvador expects anything
on the scale of the Tet offensive in Vietnam, as some Washington officials have
suggested. But the fall fighting could be dangerous. If the army again is unable
to hold off the guerrillas, American and Salvadoran officials warn, the far
right could argue that Mr. Duarte had undermined the country's resolve and was
moving toward negotiating from weakness. A demoralized army might once again
turn to the far right, an alliance that could prove fatal to Mr. Duarte's
presidency.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of U.S. military adviser carrying soldier

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Meanwhile, Back in the G.O.P.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 524 words


Delegates, delegates: That's all the Democratic candidates can talk about.
Unfairly denied delegates, tainted delegates, super delegates. The emphasis is
understandable; there's a contest for the Democratic nomination whereas a
Republican President is unopposed. What's not understandable is the lack of
interest in the way the Republicans choose their delegates.

Put the Grand Old Party under the same kind of scrutiny and the Democratic
procedure looks marvelously democratic. The Republican system, which originated
60 years ago in a Nordic, nativist climate, is deeply infected by unfairness.


The Rev. Jesse Jackson complains that he's winning 17 percent of the Democratic
vote but under rules that award him only 9 percent of the delegates. Those rules
were not designed to discriminate but to lessen the chances of a deadlocked
convention. Still, there's much to be said for Mr. Jackson's argument that he
has brought out masses of people unaccustomed to voting and that it's poor
politics, and poor policy, to turn them off by undervaluing their vote.

Senator Gary Hart also complains, about ''tainted'' delegates won by Walter
Mondale with funds Mr. Mondale now deems wrongly raised. But there's a big
difference between these storms and the defect in the Republican process: It
discriminates against large states and large ethnic groups.

The unfairness lies in the uniform bonus rule, awarding extra delegates to
states that voted Republican in the last Presidential election. The rule was
created in 1924, a time of fear of the immigrants from southern Europe, a time
in which Calvin Coolidge could say, ''Biological laws show . . . that Nordics
deteriorate when mixed with other races.'' To see how the bonus rule penalizes
the large melting-pot states, consider New York. It will send 136 delegates to
the 1984 convention - one for every 129,000 people. Delaware, by comparison, has
19 delegates - one for every 31,000 people.  Some say in the rule's defense that
it parallels the pattern of two senators from every state. But where in
Republican councils is the equivalent of the popularly elected House? Another
defense is that the bonus accounts for only about 12 percent of the convention
delegates. But it's conceivable that without bonus delegates, Richard Nixon
might not have won on the first ballot in 1968.  Republicans occasionally face
the issue, gingerly. Under threat of a lawsuit in 1972, they made some changes.
Under pressure from moderates like Josiah Lee Auspitz and the Ripon Society in
1980, the rules committee promised a year's study. Neither promise nor study
have been heard from again.  The Republican problem is not elitism. The present
system produces results the party likes, as exemplified by the words
''President'' and ''Reagan.'' And regardless of what was in people's minds in
1924, the system persists not because of bigotry. The villain, as Mr. Auspitz
says, is inertia.  But it remains a villain. The Democrats were shaken out of
their inertia, starting in 1964, by the civil rights movement and Vietnam. What
will shake the Republicans out of theirs?


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JAMES BAKER: CALLING REAGAN'S RE-ELECTION MOVES

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines

SECTION: Section 6; Page 52, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4604 words


Francis X. Clines is a correspondent in The Times's Washington bureau who covers
the White House.










I REMEMBER WALK

ing up the driveway and

looking inside, and I

remember seeing the

President-elect in there

with all the powers that

be and being reluctant to

go in or knock on the door,'' James Addison Baker 3d recalled recently as he
relaxed in his White House garden hideaway. ''I remember looking through the
window and seeing Casey and Meese and Deaver. And I just sort of waited out
there. And President Reagan got up and came to the door and said, 'Come on in.
What are you doing out there?' ''

The man invited inside like a Dickensian waif now reigns alone atop the Reagan
hierarchy after more than three years of bruising infighting during which he
edged out most of the longtime confidantes at that postelection gathering.

It is a strange fact that Jim Baker, a smart and cautious Texas lawyer, came to
his place of power at President Reagan's side by having first been a renegade,
the political general who twice tried to foil the California Governor's long
quest to be President. When he opted for talent over ideology in selecting Baker
as his chief of staff, Ronald Reagan shocked politicians and dismayed many of
his supporters.

Baker now runs the White House, while simultaneously controlling the Reagan re-
election campaign, overseeing everything from tailoring the President's all-
important peacemaker image right down to monitoring how each Reagan punch line
plays with campaign audiences.

And as the Democratic contenders move laboriously toward their convention
showdown, Baker clocks them with an instinctive talent for politics on the hoof.
Even when Gary Hart burst ahead of the rest of the field in the early primary
races, Baker anticipated Walter F. Mondale as the challenger. This would fulfill
his dream of rerunning Reagan's 1980 attack plan against Mondale. Baker jokes
with friends about possible bumper stickers: ''Mondale - What If He's Worse Than
Carter?''

Baker's metamorphosis from Reagan's enemy to Reagan's master strategist began
when he was invited to that crucial meeting after the election. Only six months
earlier, as manager of George Bush's tenacious primary campaign challenge to the
Californian's juggernaut, Baker had been fighting to defeat Reagan. And as
President Gerald Ford's campaign manager in 1976, he had thwarted a powerful
insurgent Reagan challenge. He was, therefore, a suspect convert as he hesitated
outside the door behind which the happy few who had been Reaganites for years
prepared to take over the running of the Government.

Now, while Baker remains mistrusted by the self-defined ''movement
conservatives,'' doubts about his fealty have blurred. ''He's got to be rated
the most effective chief of staff of the postwar years,'' says David R. Gergen,
until last January President Reagan's director of communications, ''and under
tougher circumstances,'' a reference to chronic White House staff infighting.
''But he's running his biggest risk now: If Reagan gets elected, as expected,
Baker will get very little credit; if he happens to lose, Baker will get the
blame.''







 JIM BAKER MAY BE the oddest of all counterpoints to Ronald Reagan. A sagebrush
patrician from a long line of lawyers that goes back to Civil War Texas, his
native milieu is a world apart from the Babbittry of Ronald Reagan's Hollywood.
He is a workaholic and compulsive manager who is totally at the service of
America's genial, unapologetic 9-to-5 Chief Executive. A friendly man whose
Southern gentleness can disarm his enemies, Baker is the artful pragmatist
regularly charged with rescuing the nation's leading ideologue from his own
rhetoric.

Baker's daily 8:15 A.M. strategy meetings with his staff have not, of late,
included open tactical discussion of the anguish of Edwin Meese 3d, the
embattled nominee for Attorney General and erstwhile Baker rival who has
remained as Presidential counselor while awaiting the outcome of investigations
into his financial dealings. Far from relishing the situation, Baker has sternly
cautioned his aides not to gloat over or gossip about a problem that he
undoubtedly will have to deal with as the President's campaign manager.

Baker and his staff of loyalists have become President Reagan's basic political
tool at the White House. Heady as the experience is, some Baker aides, when
asked, confess that they sometimes wonder what lies beyond ''the wall'' of their
54-year-old boss, a man who is part Princeton, part Houston, a Spartan
millionaire, a man who instinctively seems to dodge the petty traps of politics.

''My job is not to go into the Oval Office and advocate a view because I happen
to believe it strongly,'' Baker said. ''My job is to let the President know what
I think is best politically.''

''You can make a case that Baker is successful up on Capitol Hill because no one
really knows what he believes,'' says a White House colleague of Baker's. ''He
fights to win the game, not because he strongly believes in something.''
According to Dave Gergen, now a resident fellow at Harvard University's
Institute of Politics, Baker ''loves the intrigue.''

Some of his friends fear that Baker has so mastered the political machinery of
Washington that he has become an alloyed part of it. ''You can be too much the
technician and lose yourself,'' says a White House associate.

Baker's style in politics includes some of the rote skills worthy of a highly
successful thoroughbred horse trainer. He has a knack for stopwatch mathematics
at such tasks as computing campaign budgets or gauging an issue's constituency.
Baker also has a backstretch sense of when it's time for a well-paced compromise
or a fresh initiative, and an all-out commitment to being the first across the
finish line. Beyond that, he has a boyish joy for competition that makes him
good company during a race.

Baker's career in politics began when his country-club friend George Bush
persuaded him - to help in getting over his grief at the death of his first wife
- to play a role in Bush's 1970 Senate campaign. Baker was quickly intoxicated
by politics' strange marshaling of people, money and ideas. With Bush's help,
Baker reached the level of national politics at virtuoso speed by 1976.

A little more than four years later, he was in the White House, moving about the
West Wing with supreme confidence. He enters the Oval Office, just down the
corridor from his own, at will while ''movement conservatives'' seethe at the
fading of such favorites as Presidential counselor Ed Meese and William P.
Clark, now Secretary of the Interior, who retreated from the job of national
security adviser at the White House after some hard bouts with Baker.

As he simultaneously tends White House hearth and campaign hustings, Baker has
the gray look and cautious smile these days of a deeply committed gambler who
can't wait to handicap the next race.

''He's uncanny about early signals, and was the first one here to spot that
little two-paragraph 'Briefingate' story last summer and tell us that it would
become a big thing,'' says one White House West Wing worker who recalls hearing
the first warnings about the importance of the purloined Carter campaign papers
at one of Baker's daily strategy gathering.

The Briefingate episode now shadows both the Reagan re-election drive and Baker,
who used some of the material in preparing for the Carter-Reagan debate. The
debate was his big opportunity to impress the Reagan team, which he had joined
with Bush right after the nominating convention. Congress and the Justice
Department have thus far found nothing criminal in the affair, but enmity
festers within the Reagan camp. For while William J. Casey, then Reagan's
campaign manager and now Director of Central Intelligence, has said he has no
recollection of such papers, Jim Baker has stated his clear recollection of
having received them from Casey.  Baker can become hard-eyed as a gunslinger
when Briefingate is brought up. One associate has heard him quietly say Casey
would ''rue the day'' if the contradictions in their stories were ever pressed
in a legal forum. And now Ed Meese, in the stumbling way that often exasperates
the Baker team, may force another resurrection of Briefingate during the long,
politically traumatic investigation into his financial transactions.

Briefingate left Baker emotionally drained from the dual tasks of protecting the
President and defending his own integrity. He still treats the subject as
something erratic and overblown, but, nevertheless, threatening.


Baker's self-confidence in executive situations predates his involvement in
politics. His family's fortune and social standing began in the 1860's with the
family law firm Baker & Botts, now one of the largest in the nation. His
forebears were avowedly apolitical and undeniably conservative while serving
such capitalists and corporate buccaneers as E. H. Harriman and Jay Gould.

The Baker gumption is legend in Texas. Baker's grandfather, James Addison Baker
Jr., is still celebrated as the protector of Rice University, the lawyer who
rode the family railroad parlor car north to New York in 1900 on learning of the
sudden death of his client, William Marsh Rice, the merchant tycoon. There, his
grandfather unearthed the fact that Rice had been murdered as part of a swindle
involving a bogus will; and he saw to the jailing of the suspects and defended
the original Rice will, which he had drafted, thereby insuring the establishment
of the university that bears the Rice name.  Leaning back in a chair in his
White House garden retreat, Baker, a former smoker, arcs a line of Red Man
tobacco juice into the paper cup that he carries almost everywhere except into
the Oval Office, and recalls his grandfather's dictum: ''To be a successful
lawyer you should work hard, study hard and stay out of politics.'' He smiles.
''I take the position that I haven't violated that, because I did my law
first,'' he says, referring to the two decades spent toiling for the powerful
Houston firm of Andrews, Kurth, Campbell & Jones, which he joined because of
nepotism restrictions imposed by his family firm. His organizational talents
soon won Baker the post of managing partner and a reputation for obsessive
detail work.

This obsession, which can sometimes be the despair of his White House staff, is
a key to Baker's success in Washington. He may appear to be winging it when he
appears on television news shows, but, in truth, Baker prepares diligently for
each show, blocking out up to two days of office time. As staff experts brief
and quiz him, Baker takes careful notes, often borrowing whole phrases word for
word, repeating the process time and again, and then carefully studying all his
notes on the eve of an appearance.

''Baker doesn't want to be surprised by anything, ever,'' says one associate,
who likens this extraordinary level of effort to the strenuous spadework that
went into Baker's handling of such Congressional victories as the Reagan tax
cuts, the MX missile development and the Awacs plane sale to the Saudi Arabians.

Baker seems singularly suited to what has come to be the basic dynamic of the
Reagan Administration, which is to make any accommodations on a pressing issue
while the President accepts them privately and continues a tougher grade of
public rhetoric.

This was the case in the withdrawal of the marines from Lebanon. The President
denounced the Democrats' calls to withdraw as ''surrender'' talk, even as he
privately assented to getting the leathernecks out. Baker, the campaign manager,
concedes

 that if Reagan were not President he would be hammering away at any incumbent
about the marine barracks' massacre in Beirut. But he contends the issue is, in
truth, quite defensible for the President. In attempting action in Lebanon,
Baker argues, President Reagan avoided another ''impotent'' episode, such as the
taking of American hostages in Iran, and in withdrawing the marines, the
President avoided another ''Vietnam.''

Baker's lawyerly knack for covering all bases is clear as he rounds off the
edges of this issue. ''Pulling the marines out put the lie to the argument that
the President's trigger- happy,'' he says. On the other hand, Baker argues that
given the President's ''leadership role,'' he must ''responsibly project power''
at times.

''And the necessity of projecting that power responsibly is, of necessity,
occasionally going to cost American lives,'' Baker says, as flatly as any of his
conservative critics. ''I don't think there's any other way to look at it.'' It
is in such a statement, quietly put, that Baker comes closest to answering the
nagging questions of where he stands and what he is. However much Reaganites
complain about his pragmatism, Baker would appear, at heart, to be a
conservative.


Baker's best talent in negotiating may be his ability to put people at ease by
displaying a detailed knowledge of their concerns and where their interests lie.
Friction is not his strong suit and he says, in politics, only fools turn
adversaries into enemies.

Representative Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee
and a Democratic antagonist in some marathon budget negotiations, credits Baker
with never misrepresenting himself. ''For purposes of advantage, he might
confuse an issue on a given day, but he never allows the door to shut on the
possibility of further negotiation,'' says Rostenkowski. More important, he
adds, is Baker's personal credibility. ''You actually can feel comfortable
saying something in confidence to him and know it's not going to get all over
town. In other words, he doesn't go for the jugular.''

Conservative critics contend that the problem is not Baker the man, but what he
represents as the compromiser of Reagan's announced principles. ''He may not
lie,'' says one Administration conservative, ''but he is living a lie,
pretending to support the President's budget and having his guys leak weaker
positions on defense and other things up on the Hill.''

Baker's best reply is to point to the President's own diminished zeal about
defense dollars and other risky issues in this election year. The chief of staff
says that he himself is ''very much a hawk'' on defense spending, the
conservatives' sacred cow. ''But I think the foundation of this Presidency - I
know what the result of the November election will be - is all going to depend
on the economy staying strong.'' Baker has his own conservative friends. In the
one election in which he allowed himself to be a candidate - for Texas Attorney
General in 1978 - Baker campaigned as a ''law-and-order'' man, with
cell-clanging commercials against the coddling of criminals. He lost when the
Democratic primary produced a conservative victor, Mark White, the present
Governor, rather than a more liberal opponent Baker was hoping to run against.

Back home, Baker was considered enough of a conservative to have Ronald Reagan
campaign for him, and to have his race run by Frank J. Donatelli, a former
director of the Young Americans for Freedom, the conservatives' campus cadre.


''There's this whole group of purists who would not define anyone as a
conservative unless he was present at the creation, when Ronald Reagan first ran
for the presidency of the Screen Actors Guild,'' says Donatelli, who now works
in the White House public-liaison office that attends to major ethnic and
political blocs. ''The business of politics is building coalitions, and Jim is
good at it because he recognizes the first rule, that accommodations are
necessary to get what you want.''


For this task, Baker has built considerable staff loyalty in the last three
years by protecting his closest colleagues from conservative demands that they
be purged for ''compromising'' the President. Richard G. Darman, an Assistant to
the President, who devises strategies for the more high- risk issues, is rated
by Baker as ''the most substantive person in the White House.'' He also can be
the most uninhibited in sassing people, but Baker likes and respects Darman for
fashioning believable bipartisan initiatives when they are needed. In
particular, there was the one Darman worked up and Baker successfully carried
off in coming to terms with Congressional Democrats over Social Security
solvency, thereby defusing an issue that could have been the largest monkey on
the President's back in this election year.

Besides Darman, Baker relies heavily on his executive assistant, Margaret D.
Tutwiler, whose political skills have resulted in her becoming the White House
liaison to the re-election campaign. The campaign is run day to day by Edward J.
Rollins, a California Reaganite who has become one of Baker's close associates.
Thus far, months from the postconvention finale, little friction has been
reported between the Baker operation and the more traditional Reagan political
cadre led by Senator Paul Laxalt.

At the White House, Michael K. Deaver, who is the deputy chief of staff, and a
Baker ally and veteran Reagan factotum, occasionally hears Baker wonder what, if
anything, could he ever do that might quiet the conservatives. Deaver invariably
tells him: ''Ronald Reagan is the only conservative you have got to worry
about.''

The idea of a President being served respectfully by an old campaign nemesis may
strike a layman as odd. But seasoned politicians know their game can have such a
turning. Baker insists that there was nothing cynical in his conversion to the
Reagan team after the Californian became the Republican candidate.

''Once I went to work for the President,'' says Baker, ''I obviously learned the
degree of self-assurance, the guilelessness of the man. But I don't recall
thinking to myself after I had been here two or three months: 'Gosh, this is a
different person than the person I campaigned against''.

While more fervid Reaganites have faded, shredded by the tides of Washington,
Baker has fed on the ebb and flow, improvising and sensing conditions that lie
ahead with his better-than-average gift for deciphering politics' unpredictable
weather cycles.

''I remember the time we were fighting out the War Powers Act when Reagan wanted
troops in Lebanon and Congress was reluctant,'' one Senate Republican says in
describing Baker's need to be on the alert for both trouble and opportunity.
''Reagan got our O.K. with some restraints, with Baker negotiating it, but Jim
made a point of saying that a year from then - the election year - the President
might be glad for the restraints and the need to get those boys out.''

It is, of course, precisely this talent of Baker's that aggravates the
conservative movement - his inbred sense of the larger pragmatic context in
which any ideological ''victory'' must nestle in American politics.

''I think Jim Baker's certainly the best manager who's ever run the White
House,'' says John T. Dolan, the chairman of the National Conservative Political
Action Committee, ''and I've told him he's the worst politician ever in that
job.'' Dolan, like other conservative activists, fears Baker is mapping a
''defensive campaign'' for the President. ''Reagan doesn't need an adviser
telling him to say things like, 'We really don't want to blow up the world.' And
telling women, 'We really don't hate you as much as you think.' That sort of
thing could be a big problem.''

The larger point for the Reagan political cadre is that Baker led the Ford
primary campaign, hobbled though it was by Watergate, to victory over Reagan in
1976 and to near-victory over Jimmy Carter. Baker also startled the early 1980
Reagan campaign by expertly mapping George Bush's Iowa primary victory over
Reagan. In addition, as a master of budget and delegate counting, Baker knew
precisely when to fold the Bush challenge before the California primary - a
steel- willed decision that salvaged Bush's chance for second spot on the
ticket, not to mention Baker's own future at the White House.

In running President Reagan's re-election campaign, Baker has his Ford
experience to rely on in using incumbency to exploit the ''nonpolitical''
imagery of the White House. Baker set a priority on using Mr. Ford in the Oval
Office to personally telephone, and thereby charm, marginal convention
delegates. He has carefully kept Ronald Reagan in the same incumbency mode, in
the face of increasing pressures to put the President actively on the campaign
trail.


When asked, Baker says he has a full range of principles that he holds but he
seems reluctant to discuss them and he stresses that his job is to sublimate his
personal beliefs. A more graphic answer about bedrock beliefs was given last
autumn: Baker suddenly discovered that his then rival in the Reagan inner
sanctum, William Clark, had succeeded in getting the President's signature on an
order that would have subjected the President's closest advisers to lie detector
tests and possible criminal charges for leaking classified information to the
press. ''I'll be goddamned!'' Baker said, according to an associate riding with
him in his limousine. He immediately ordered his driver to turn back for a
showdown in the Oval Office.

''Bill shouldn't have done that,'' the President is reported to have said,
according to one White House staff member, when told of the implications of the
order, which would have undermined him as much as his staff. The President
reversed the order, and some Baker loyalists feel it was in that clash that
their man ultimately prevailed over his conservative rivals.

A comparable clash, in which Baker may have shown a rare inclination to hubris,
occurred last October. Restive after three years of service, he made a move for
the foreign policy experience he wants in his career dossier, and he convinced
the President to agree to let him succeed William Clark as national security
adviser. President Reagan soon was confronted by angry objections from his own
California loyalists, led by Clark and Meese and abetted by Casey. Informing
Baker partisans of his second thoughts about the appointment, the President
reportedly explained, ''Fellows, I got a revolt on my hands.'' When Baker heard
those words, he promptly withdrew the job request. ''Baker knows how to take his
beatings,'' one of his critics later conceded. ''There aren't many, but he shuts
up and hides his bitterness.''

Friends say that Baker was listless for months after being bruised by
Briefingate and became genuinely interested when he was offered the job of
commissioner of baseball this past winter. He ended up rejecting it because of
his commitment to the President's re-election campaign.

If the President wins re- election, those close to Baker expect that he would
hope again for a Cabinet post - if not as national security adviser, perhaps as
Secretary of Defense, or Commerce, or even State - that would give him the
foreign experience he lacks. In any case, he has said he will definitely leave
the chief of staff job, looking grayer and more aged by the four years than his
boss.


Baker's resilience seems to lie in his ability to recognize politics' basic
transiency. His warmest friend in Washington may be Robert S. Strauss, the
Democrat tactician who knows Baker as a fellow Texas plutocrat and political
gamesplayer. Strauss feels Baker's stamina for politics was somehow forged in
his weathering of the death in 1970 of his first wife, Mary Stuart Baker, the
mother of their four sons.

Three years later, he married the former Susan Garrett, who had been a close
friend of his first wife. To a combined family of seven children, they have
added a daughter of their own, Mary Bonner. Now 6 years old, she is Baker's
private joy at the end of his 14-hour work days. She is also a favorite of Nancy
Reagan.

Bolstering Baker is the continuing support he receives from Nancy Reagan, who
plays an often decisive role in measuring how well her husband is served by his
staff. Baker protects her husband. She likes that. And he has a touch of class.
She admires that.

Reagan's longtime image master and confidante, Mike Deaver, has also grown very
close to Baker. They frequently play tennis together and, just as regularly,
play practical jokes on each other. Deaver usually leads the way - for example,
renting a gorilla suit to cavort outside the windows of the Oval Office while
Baker was meeting with the President, who was unaware of the clowning going on
behind him.

When asked whether, in truth, politicians like Strauss and himself do not
withhold their souls from the game, and exchange elitist winks across the poker
table of partisanship, Baker replies: ''Not at all. You play it like hell.
Strauss would do in my candidate any way he could, whether it was President Ford
or President Reagan. And I'd do the same to him. There's no lack of dedication
just because you don't become enemies.''

In conversation, Jim Baker seems always to crave new information and is visibly
impatient at hearing familiar ideas rehashed. His desktop in the southwest
corner office of the White House - a prime perch carefully secured in a written
agreement with Ed Meese - is immaculate, and he works from small notecards
tucked away in his somber business suits. By lunchtime - he likes the Mexican
special on Thursdays in the executive mess but otherwise prefers tunafish on
toast and a glass of butttermilk - Baker is into his fifth working meeting on a
typical day that is anchored by his 9 A.M. session with the President. Baker
shadows the President's schedule. As much as he sees anyone on his staff outside
of working hours, the President sees Baker, who follows him everywhere,
including to those relatively few functions the Reagans attend in Washington.

When President Reagan rests, Baker occasionally darts off to the gym in the old
Executive Office Building to spend time on a simpler kind of treadmill. His
ability to catnap on Air Force One is the envy of some colleagues.


Some friends speculate that, like many who waft through the White House inner
sanctum of a spring morning, Baker may privately figure that, someday, somehow,
he could be President. After 120 years of Texas lawyering, the Baker dynasty's
ties to politics already are doubling, with Jim Baker's son Jamie serving as a
deputy counsel to Senate Majority Leader Howard H. Baker Jr.

If in a second Reagan Administration Jim Baker cannot get a Cabinet post that
will offer him experience in foreign affairs, he is not likely simply to go back
to Texas. Friends guess that he will probably look for some sort of high-powered
action in a corporate or political endeavor. Privately, he remains indebted to
his patron, George Bush, the man who first eased him into politics. Some
Bakerites feel it would be hard for him not to be the principal behind any
future Bush Presidential run.

Baker insists he knows his snug power niche is a transient one. ''In this
place,'' he says, gesturing beyond his garden hideaway toward his office in the
White House, ''you have to remember that the people who wouldn't return your
phone calls before you got here won't return them when you're gone. You forget
that and you'll have trouble going home.''

His friend Robert Strauss, who still gets his calls returned, cackles at that
notion. ''He's hooked bad as I am,'' says Strauss. ''There's no road home.''



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of James Baker

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS May 20, 1984Fiction1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 42, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 744 words


GENTLE FEUDING, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $3.95.) True love overcomes a bloody
feud between two Scottish clans.  2

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL, by John le Carre.  (Bantam, $3.95.) A young
Englishwoman caught between Israeli and P.L.O. agents.  3

SEEDS OF YESTERDAY, by V. C. Andrews.  (Pocket, $3.95.) Concluding volume of a
horror series about the Dollanganger family.  4

ANCIENT EVENINGS, by Norman Mailer.  (Warner, $4.95.) Ten centuries of rites and
orgies in long-ago Egypt.  5

BLACK HEART, by Eric Van Lustbader. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) Tracking the
murderer of a Presidential candidate into the jungles of Cambodia.  6

CROSSINGS , by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) A clandestine trans-Atlantic
romance survives the stresses of World War II.  6

SON OF A WANTED MAN, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $2.95.) A young man inherits
his father's place as head of a gang of Western outlaws.  8

ICEBREAKER, by John Gardner. (Berkley, $3.50.) James Bond's mission is to break
a neo-Nazi group somewhere in the Arctic.  9

V, by A. C. Crispin. (Pinnacle, $2.95.) Novelization of a TV miniseries about an
invasion from outer space.  10

LEGION, by William Peter Blatty. (Pocket, $3.95.) Investigating the crucifixion
murder of a 12-year- old boy.  11

LIGHT A PENNY CANDLE, by Maeve Binchy.  (Dell, $3.95.) A crisis threatens the
lifelong friendship of two women.  12

BALEFIRE, by Kenneth Goddard. (Bantam, $3.95.) Pursuing a ruthless cop-killer.
13

POSSESSION, by Ann Rule. (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) A psychopathic killer terrorizes
innocent women.  14

HEARTBURN, by Nora Ephron. (Pocket, $3.50.) A roman a clef about a marriage
breaking up.  15

CASTLE OF WIZARDRY, by David Eddings. (Del Rey/Ballantine, $3.50.) An adventurer
matches wits with some masters of black magic.





































 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.



 Nonfiction

General 1

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
autobiography.  2

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  3

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.  4

CHARLIE COMPANY, by Peter Goldman and Tony Fuller. (Ballantine, $3.95.) What
their experience in Vietnam did to some 50 infantrymen.  5

THE SHOEMAKER, by Flora Rheta Schreiber.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) The true story of
a psychotic killer and his son.  6

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon.  (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) A trip
through the back roads of America.  7

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.


















Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  1

'TOONS FOR OUR TIMES, by Berke Breathed.  (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoons from
the comic strip ''Bloom County.'' 3

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
The 1984 edition.  4

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson.  (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.  4

JANE FONDA'S WORKOUT BOOK, by Jane Fonda. (Simon & Schuster, $9.95.) An exercise
book for women.  6

GARFIELD TIPS THE SCALE, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon humor.  7

THE BILL JAMES BASEBALL ABSTRACTS 1984, by Bill James. (Ballantine, $6.95.)
Statistics and analysis.  7

BREAKDANCING, by Mr. Fresh and the Supreme Rockers. (Avon, $2.95.) How to do the
new dance, with many illustrations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS May 20, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 40, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1384 words


Fiction1

111

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  2

26

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land. 3

310

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  4

4

7

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  5

5

8

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  6

15

3

DESCENT FROM XANADU, by Harold Robbins.  (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A man who
has everything - power, money, women - seeks to obtain immortality. 6

13

4

WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W.  Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What follows
the first nuclear war in 1988.  8

6

15

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  9

10

15

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  9

9

8

ONE MORE SUNDAY, by John D. MacDonald.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Behind the scenes with
a charismatic television preacher.  11

7

11

LORD OF THE DANCE, by Andrew M. Greeley.  (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) In
seeking her long-lost cousin, a teen-ager probes the mysteries of life and
death.  11

7

29

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  13



1

DEMOCRACY, by Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Love, ambition and murder
in Honolulu. 14



1

VALEDICTION, by Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte, $12.95.) Spenser, the Boston
private eye, loses in love but cracks a religious cult.  15

11

38

POLAND, by James A. Michener. (Random House, $17.95.) Seven centuries of history
in fictional form.



























  Nonfiction1

135

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2

64

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' TV series.  3

9

2

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  4

4

10

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  5

7

3

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  5

2

11

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  7

9

3

CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Secretary of State gives his views on foreign policy.  7

2

14

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.  9



3

KNOCK WOOD, by Candice Bergen. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the actress, daughter of Edgar Bergen.  9

5

29

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH

PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H. Schuller. (Thomas Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a
California preacher.  11

8

8

MAFIA PRINCESS, by Antoinette Giancana and Thomas C. Renner. (Morrow, $15.95.)
Growing up in the family of the mobster Sam Giancana.  12



1

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery. 13

11

6

FURTHER UP THE ORGANIZATION, by Robert Townsend. (Knopf, $15.95.) Business
strategies for the 1980's.  14

11

86

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  15



12

LINES AND SHADOWS, by Joseph Wambaugh.  (Perigord/Morrow, $15.95.) Adventures of
the San Diego police force that stalks bandits along the Mexican border.  15

15

15

PEOPLE OF THE LIE, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A
psychiatrist's prescription for ''healing human evil.'' 15

14

14

TOUGH-MINDED FAITH FOR

TENDERHEARTED PEOPLE, by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas Nelson, $14.95.) More
inspiration from a California preacher.














 And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)


AN AMERICAN PROCESSION, by Alfred Kazin. (Alfred A. Knopf,

$18.95.) An analysis, in the manner of Van Wyck Brooks, of the

great figures in American letters from Emerson to Hemingway -

a time when the country's writers sought and found a voice.

DAWN TO THE WEST: Japanese Literature in the Modern Era, by

Donald Keene. (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, $100.) A two-volume,

2,000-page study of Japan's fiction, poetry, drama and criticism -

a brilliant, monumental achievement.

H.

G. WELLS: Aspects of a Life, by Anthony West. (Random House,

$22.95.) The illegitimate son of two famous writers, Wells and

Rebecca West, writes a warm memoir of his father and a bitter

diatribe against his mother.

THE LEDGE BETWEEN THE STREAMS, by Ved Mehta. (W. W.

Norton & Co. $17.50.) The Indian writer recalls his childhood

during the bloody partition of his country, his blindness and the

turn of fortune that brought him to America.

WALT WHITMAN: The Making of a Poet, by Paul Zweig. (Basic

Books, $18.95.) The first study that takes imaginative possession of

all of Whitman's work, prose and poetry, and shows its connection

with the man and his times.

WHAT MEN DON'T TELL WOMEN, by Roy Blount Jr. (Atlantic/

Little, Brown & Co., $14.95.) A collection of funny pieces about men

and women, Elvis, Southern hospitality, hats, opera, television,

sweating, salaries, what authors do and much, much more.

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike. (Alfred A. Knopf,

$15.95.)A very entertaining novel about three real witches who can

fly through the air, levitate, make love charms and cause all sorts

of trouble for their neighbors in a small Rhode Island town.

Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

18

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

275

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  3

48

WEBSTER'S NINTH COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard
work updated in 1983.  45

5

THE LIFE EXTENSION COMPANION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $17.50.)
Advice about improving your health and lengthening your life.  43

9 PUTTING THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER TO

WORK, by Kenneth Blanchard and Robert Lorber.  (Morrow, $15.) Increasing your
productivity and that of those with whom you work.  The listings above are based
on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the
United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In
Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in
this category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PUBLIC TV'S WGBH TAKES RISKS IN PURSUIT OF PROVOCATIVE FARE

BYLINE: By GLENN RIFKIN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 29, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1871 words


Glenn Rifkin is a Boston-based freelance writer.


BOSTON The Boston public-television outlet, WGBH, has a rewarding penchant for
taking chances. Even before the recent telecasts of ''Concealed Enemies,'' the
critically acclaimed dramatization of the Alger Hiss-Whittaker Chambers case,
and earlier this season the similarly lauded 13-part ''Vietnam: A Television
History,'' the station had already begun work on two more massive and
potentially controversial projects: a 13-part series on the global nuclear-arms
build-up, called ''The Nuclear Age,'' and a four-part look at the political
turmoil and struggle in Central America and the Caribbean. Although neither
production has yet to be fully funded, WGBH is proceeding anyway.

Viewers across the country continue to see the station's call-letter logo shine
from nearly a third of all programs sent out nationally on the Public
Broadcasting Service. A partial listing of WGBH-originated productions now on
public-TV schedules each week includes ''Frontline,'' the documentary series
that examines current political and social issues; ''Enterprise,'' the
award-winning series that focuses on notable companies and individuals in the
business world; ''Mystery!'' the ''whodunit'' dramatic series; ''This Old
House,'' the ''how to'' series on home restoration, and ''Dinner With Julia,''
the latest cooking series from Julia Child.

Furthermore, WGBH has more than 50 new projects in various stages of
development, ranging from ''Explorers Club'' (a science series for younger
viewers) to ''Money Reports,'' a co-production with Money magazine about
personal finances and investment.

What explains this profusion and variety of programming?

''We have to take risks,'' explains Henry Becton, the station's 40-year- old new
president. ''One of the main reasons we exist is that you've got to have large
stations in the system willing to take risks, or everyone will be at the mercy
of the funding organizations.''



Although he has just taken over as president, Mr. Becton had been essentially
overseeing the station's day- to-day activities for the past five years as its
general manager. David O. Ives, who stepped down this past February after 13
years as head of WGBH, will remain as vice chairman of the station's board of
trustees and an enthusiastic on-camera figure in its fund-raising efforts.

The 65-year-old Mr. Ives has left his mark as well. It was during his tenure
that the station established a national reputation by producing such popular
series as ''Nova,'' ''Julia Child's French Chef,'' ''The Victory Garden,''
''Masterpiece Theater'' and ''Evening at Pops.'' It is Mr. Becton, however, who
is generally credited with having steered the station through troubled waters.
According to several staff members, Mr. Becton, a graduate of Yale University
and Harvard Law Wchool, has been able to create a cost-conscious, conservative
fiscal- management structure without infringing on the creative freedom of the
station's producers.

''Tight financial control is often death to producers,'' says Russell Morash,
executive producer of the ''Dinner With Julia'' and ''This Old House'' series.
''Miraculously, Becton has been able to do it.''

In the past, explains another staff member, programs were often funded on
''hunches or emotions, and that doesn't happen any more.'' Because public
television had enjoyed such remarkable growth during the 1970's, financial
control at WGBH, as well as at other major PBS stations, was often lax. Fiscal
weaknesses routinely went unnoticed. Every project at WGBH is now continuously
monitored by unit managers who report regularly to Mr. Becton and other top-
level executives. ''There's plenty of running room to do projects,'' says David
Liroff, WGBH's station manager, ''but we stay on top of them.''

''The major advantage here is that people are left alone to make their
programs,'' adds Linda Harrar, a producer for the ''Nova'' series. ''There is an
air of creative freedom that encourages the best from people. The managers here
have made films themselves, and they realize that you have to work out the
problems yourself.''



The genesis of WGBH's programming can be traced to both in-house and outside
sources. The driving force behind such major ventures as the ''Vietnam,''
Central America and ''Nuclear Age'' projects, for example, has been Peter
McGhee, program manager for national productions. The station also draws heavily
on the Boston area's rich academic community to help create the format, content
and structure of much of its programming. According to Mr. Becton, the acclaimed
science series ''Nova'' originated because of strong ties to the neighboring
scientific community; an advisory board made up of many local academics still
provides input for the series. The ''Nuclear Age'' project was an outgrowth of
discussions between Mr. McGhee and Carl Kaysen, a professor of political
economics at M.I.T., and several of his colleagues.

On WBGH's board of directors sit the presidents of every neighboring major
university and many of the area's top cultural organizations, such as the Museum
of Fine Arts and the New England Conservatory of Music. The ties to these
institutions help ''set a strong mission,'' says Mr. Becton.



Yet, despite its achievements, WGBH has not been without its troubles. During
the late 1970's and into the 80's, the station, like PBS's other 300-odd member
stations, suffered a turbulent period of financial instability and the threat of
cable television's cultural programming siphoning off viewers. Indeed, the
''midlife crisis,'' as Mr. Ives has dubbed this period in the station's history,
has not disappeared entirely. But while other public-TV outlets such as WNET in
New York and KCET in Los Angeles have only recently begun to regain financial
stability - often by curtailing work on major national productions - WGBH
continues in its ambitious ways.

In 1978, the station's attempt to duplicate at home the success of imported
British drama with a multi- million-dollar dramatization of Nathaniel
Hawthorne's ''Scarlet Letter'' was a financial disaster. The production went
more than $300,000 over budget, and WGBH was forced to make up the deficit from
its discretionary funds. Following that, the cancellation of ''Zoom,'' a
children's series, touched off a sharp decrease in WGBH's volume of national
production, and the station, hesitant to take immediate action, faced a $1
million deficit within the year. According to Mr. Liroff, WGBH had three full
studio crews on the payroll and was reluctant to begin layoffs despite the
falloff in revenues. ''You don't want to let good people go,'' he explains,
adding, ''there was always the hope that new business would come along. That
delay in making adjustments caused the deficit.''

By 1980, with an uncertain economy slowing viewer and corporate contributions
and an economy-minded Reagan Administration entering the White House, WGBH,
along with the rest of public television, faced a serious financial crisis.
Compounding the situation was the entry of cable television into the cultural
programming arena via such services as CBS Cable and The Entertainment Channel.

At WGBH, with many projects ending and few new ones on the drawing board,
numerous layoffs were eventually made. The total staff, which had grown to a
high of more than 500, was cut back to about 350, and morale was at an all-time
low.

''There had been a feeling of being infallible,'' says Mr. Liroff. ''The
organization had always been successful, and then 'The Scarlet Letter' proved to
be a bigger mistake than had been made in many years. It really shook people's
confidence.''

By cutting down on the station's excesses and creating a more efficient
financial-management policy, Mr. Becton, along with Mr. Ives and Mr. McGhee,
helped WGBH ride out the crisis. But even in the bleakest moments, their
commitment to programming remained intact; it was during this period that the ''
Vietnam'' project got started.



Today, a number of factors account for WGBH's being able to focus its undivded
attention on programming once again: The station, with partial grants from the
Corporation for Public Broadcasting and the National Endowment for the
Humanities to begin projects, has had enormous incentive to seek out the
remainder of the money from corporations. As Mr. Liroff points out, corporations
are targeted for specific projects but are not asked to totally fund any single
venture. As production has increased, so has corporate underwriting; corporate
sponsorship rose from $5 million in 1980 to $10 million in 1983. In the process,
corporations have become more aware of the marketing opportunities that quality
programming on public television offers.

In addition, local fund-raising has reached record levels, due in no small
measure to innovative approaches. For instance, last year, rather than resorting
to its usual on-air pledge sessions, WGBH offered its viewers an alternative: If
pledges were sent in early, the station would refrain from on-air soliciting
throughout August, its most important fiscal month.  The experiment proved a
resounding success and will be repeated this summer.



Mr. Becton points to another key reason that he believes also makes WGBH
distinctive. The station has established a broad base of varied programming; it
has been a leader in drama, public affairs, ''how to,'' music and sports
programming. ''We've never specialized in any one thing. We probably have the
broadest base in all of public television,'' Mr. Becton says. ''That has made it
easier to take advantage of a variety of opportunities that have come along.''

Nonetheless, WGBH has been accused of being elitist; accordingly, the station
has turned more attention to local programming than ever before. Insiders at
work on local programming still complain about funding discrepancies between
local and national projects but admit that morale on these projects is higher
than four or five years ago. With its 10 P.M. news show, WGBH is the only major
PBS outlet to broadcast a local nightly news program.



Though at present WGBH is financially sound - with a $50 million budget in 1984
(up by $15 million over its '82 budget) - cutbacks in Federal funding, according
to Mr. Ives, force the station's management to take risks. Indeed, like all PBS
stations, funding for projects has been and remains the single most distressing
aspect for WGBH managers and producers. ''It wears you down,'' says Mr. Becton.
''So much energy is used for raising money rather than making programs. You need
a real belief in the mission.''

''Cutbacks in Federal funding definitely hurt, but it makes up only 25 percent
of our budget,'' adds Mr. Ives. ''And we still have strong support in Congress.
What it comes down to is that if we don't have the discretionary money on
certain projects, we can't do them. In commercial television, a big hit pays for
other things. But in our system, the return can't be measured in dollars.
There's a considerable amount of idealism in it - the thought that television is
not used for its best purposes but ought to be.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 20, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER REVIEW;
VIETNAM RELIVED IN 'A WAYNE HERO'

BYLINE: By LEAH D. FRANK

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 19, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 589 words


THE Arena Players in East Farmingdale recently opened another, smaller theater,
the Second Stage, to serve as a showcase for original plays and children's
theater and for the continued run of popular successes from the Main Stage. Now,
at the Second Stage, they have given the world premiere of ''A John Wayne Kind
of Hero'' by Joseph Lizardi, Arena's playwright in residence. The play's topic
is the still sensitive issue of the war in Vietnam.

By examining the experience of one soldier, Mr. Lizardi tries to relate the
events of the war at home and abroad. But his characters sound more like a
series of newspaper ''special reports'' than like motivations for the actions of
real people.

That some wives became prostitutes while their husbands were in Vietnam is
undoubtedly true. That many American soldiers got involved with drugs while in
Vietnam is a fact that has been reported on extensively. That unspeakable
atrocities were committed on both sides has also been well documented. That
Vietnam happened is a painfully real part of American history. What makes it
interesting drama is not the facts, but how and why individual men and women
responded as they did to the pressures of the time. And that is exactly what Mr.
Lizardi's play does not do.

He gives a surplus of facts about a soldier, Ken Hargrave, but he ignores the
reasons why this one man acted and reacted exactly the way he did. Without an
understanding of the character's motivation, the play never springs to life, and
the author's message remains as a telegram never sent.

''A John Wayne Kind of Hero'' is told in a series of flashbacks in which we see
Ken Hargrave marry his sweetheart, Karen, and almost immediately ship off to
Vietnam. He has decided to postpone going to law school to enlist in the Marines
and help stop the spread of Communism in Southeast Asia.

Ken finds that World War II movies have not prepared him for the reality of
Vietnam. In order to forget his responsibility for the death of his squad, he
starts smoking opium. Meanwhile, back home, Karen has started having affairs and
using cocaine. Ken takes part in an atrocity and suffers a breakdown. Karen
becomes a $100- an-hour woman. Ken's buddy gets him hooked on heroin, returns to
the States and has an affair with Ken's wife.

Mr. Lizardi would have us believe that were it not for the war in Vietnam, Ken
and Karen would have been the all-American couple. But the problems these two
people have in dealing with life are so severe that they would have manifested
themselves, war or no war. And it's what makes Ken and Karen who they are that
Mr. Lizardi simply ignores.

The actors, Allen McRae as the veteran, Christina Christopher as Karen and John
DeVito as the false friend, are required not only to change costumes for each of
the myriad scenes, and to remember their lines, but also to change the scenery
and set the props. It is too much to expect them also to create characters and
make intelligent acting choices. With good reason, they tend to look rushed and
nervous during much of the play.

The director, Frederic De Feis, has filled the scenes with jungle sounds and
drum music, which he also used in last season's production, ''Othello, the Black
of Angola.'' In both cases the music was loud and distracting. The overburdening
of the actors is also his responsibility.

''A John Wayne Kind of Hero,'' which runs through May, is a play that has all
the background information in place. It has the theme music, but not the theme.



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Allen McRae and John DeVito in 'A John Wayne Kind of Hero'

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

UNSPENT FUNDS FOR ARMS CREATE BUDGET PROBLEM

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 945 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


Because of the Reagan Administration's vast military buildup, the Defense
Department has accumulated the largest backlog of unspent funds since the
Vietnam War era, creating management and budget problems for the Pentagon and
Congress.

According to official Government figures for 1981 through 1983, the backlog of
money approved by Congress and signed into contracts, yet not paid out by the
Pentagon, increased by 89 percent, to more than $128 billion from $68 billion.
Over the same period, the backlog of unspent funds awaiting selection of a
contractor rose by 79 percent, to $43 billion from $24 billion.

Measured in 1984 dollars, total unspent military funding has increased 102
percent since 1974, and 67 percent since 1980. For all other Federal agencies,
unspent funding has decreased by 22 percent since 1980.



Unspent Funds for Missiles


In a recent example of backlogs in military spending, Congress authorized $2.1
billion last year to begin building 21 MX missiles in the current fiscal year,
but the Pentagon has obligated only $450 million so far.

The main reason for the Pentagon backlogs is that major weapons systems can take
a number of years to build after funds are approved. Congress might appropriate
funds for a multibillion-dollar project in one fiscal year, but the funds are
disbursed in future years as the work proceeds.

Until they are paid out, the funds exist only in a bookkeeping sense, adding to
the Government's projections of how much money it must acquire through taxes or
borrowing.



Backlogs May Undermine Control


A Congressional source said that because unspent funds did not actually exist
''like money in a pot,'' but must nonetheless be paid out at some future time,
they contributed to tightness in the credit market and to the Federal deficit.

The backlogs, largely unnoticed in public debate about President Reagan's
buildup, could undermine Congress's ability to control military spending for the
rest of the decade, experts say. Some analysts say, moreover, that the rapid
accumulation is making it difficult for Pentagon managers to scrutinize how the
money is paid out.

''Even if Congress held the defense budget to zero real growth from now on,
there would still be sizable growth in outlays,'' said Richard A. Stubbing,
assistant provost of Duke University, who, until 1981, was deputy chief for
national security in the Office of Management and Budget.

In a report released recently by the Brookings Institution, a Democratic-
oriented research organization in Washington, William Kaufmann, a professor of
political science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, said, ''These
backlogs will create major wedges of expenditure in the future and will make
substantially more difficult any future effort to control the growth of the
defense budget in an orderly way.''

He said that even if Congress held the 1985 military budget to about $290
billion, versus the President's request of $305 billion, expenditures from the
backlog would amount to more than $110 billion by 1986.

''As such it will mean that at least 36 percent of defense outlays will be
committed and uncontrollable even before Congress takes action on the budget for
that year,'' said Mr. Kaufmann, who was an adviser to Secretaries of Defense in
Republican and Democratic Administrations in the 1970's.

Asked about the effect of the unspent money on Pentagon budget management, a
senior military official said there had been concern over whether enough
qualified people were available in military procurement departments to
''guarantee the best deal for the taxpayer.'' But he said he did not believe
this ''constituted a situation ripe for mismanagement.''

Backlog for Weapons


Analysts inside and outside the Government agree that the growth in unspent
money has been fueled by the President's rapid buildup in weapon buying. The
weapon backlog rose from about $94 billion in 1982 to an estimated $140 billion
this year.

Defense Department figures show that the largest segments in the backlog are for
Navy ship construction and for aircraft building by the Navy and Air Force.

The backlog for Navy shipbuilding next year is estimated at nearly $25 billion.
The Pentagon estimates the backlog for Air Force money already committed to
building planes will grow to $33 billion for the fiscal year 1985 from $24
billion for the fiscal year 1984, which ends Sept. 30. For the fiscal year 1985,
the Navy backlog for aircraft would increase to about $14 billion from an
estimated $12.5 billion this year.

In an interview, Mr. Kaufmann said that of all military budget categories,
procurement funds are the slowest to be disbursed. Only about 14 percent of the
weapon-building allocation will be spent after one year, he said, as against 80
percent of operations and maintenance money, for example, or nearly 100 percent
of money approved for retirement pay.

'Less Flexibility' for Congress


In a recent report on reducing the Federal deficit, the Congressional Budget
Office, which advises Congress on fiscal matters, said: ''Eliminating a $1.2
billion naval cruiser, for example, would save only $72 million in outlays in
the first year, since only limited work can be accomplished in the first year of
funding and it takes from four to six years to build a major vessel.''

''Having endorsed many major new modernization programs,'' the report added,
''the Congress has progressively less flexibility to make annual adjustments in
procurement categories, without leading to inefficient production rates or
politically difficult program terminations.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Day of Hate Marks Pol Pot's Victims

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 20


The Cambodian Government declared today a National Day of Hatred to commemorate
the more than 2.7 million people who it says died during the reign of terror by
the Pol Pot regime from 1975 to 1979.

The Cambodian press agency reported that a mass meeting was held in Phnom Penh.
It said the Day of Hatred was called to allow people to vent their anger against
Mr. Pol Pot and other enemies of the nation, including the ''American
imperialists'' and the ''Chinese expansionists.''

Vietnam invaded Cambodia on Dec. 25, 1978, and installed the current Government,
which is headed by Heng Samrin, on Jan. 10, 1979.

In a dispatch monitored in Bangkok, the Cambodian press agency said May 20,
1975, ''was the day the Pol Pot gang began to implement its systematic, overt
and savage genocidal policy against the Kampuchean people throughout the
country.'' The agency cited a Government study that says 2,746,105 people were
killed or died from hunger or exhaustion in the Pol Pot years. Western experts
place the death toll closer to 1.5 million.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDE DISCLOSES RADIO LEAKS TIPPED HANOI TO AIR ACTION

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 317 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 20


The United States Air Force declined to change tactics for fighter-bomber
strikes against North Vietnam even after learning that radio leaks were giving
Hanoi advance warning of the missions, a senior intelligence official has
written in the communications journal Signal.

Walter G. Deeley, the National Security Agency's deputy director for
communications security, made the disclosure in an unusually detailed account of
a once-classified program - code- named Purple Dragon - to deal with security
problems affecting military operations in both North and South Vietnam.

This effort, he wrote, helped to improve the effectiveness of B-52 bomber raids,
reduce losses of reconnaissance drone aircraft over North Vietnam and plug
communications leaks that were tipping off enemy forces to impending Marine
Corps amphibious landings.

Mr. Deeley said Purple Dragon analysts determined that the North Vietnamese were
gaining advance word of the fighter-bomber strikes - including approximate
target locations and numbers of planes - by monitoring uncoded radio traffic
from KC-135 tanker aircraft.

A Disastrous Downturn

Despite that finding, no communications-security improvements were undertaken,
partly because of ''reluctance to employing changing call signs'' for the
midair-refueling flights, Mr. Deeley said.

The armed services' abilities in operations security suffered a disastrous
downturn after the Vietnam War, Mr. Deeley said, and he pointed to the Purple
Dragon effort as an example of what should be done to bolster future military
missions.

''Whether in the chilling aftermath of the Beirut truck-bombing or during the
stiletto operation in Grenada, 'intelligence failures' often have been cited as
the principal reasons why things went wrong,'' he wrote.

''Frequently, it is unrecognized that a more insidious cause may lie in lapses
in our own security.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr. Lessons Unlearned

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 684 words


Early last month, Representative Jim Courter, House chairman of the Military
Reform Caucus, made public a report called ''Lessons Learned in Grenada,'' which
explored the military efficiency of the 1983 American-led invasion, not always
favorably. The New Jersey Republican said he felt that hearings of the House
Armed Services Committee, of which he is a member, had been inadequate and that
the public was entitled to know more about the invasion, which he had supported
in principle if not entirely in execution.

Mr. Courter sent the Grenada report to the Armed Services panel chairman,
Representative Melvin Price, Democrat of Illinois, with a request to reopen the
hearings. Instead, Mr. Price forwarded it to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, Gen. John W. Vessey Jr., for a response. The other day, General Vessey
sent his reply to Capitol Hill, but it only further frustrated Mr. Courter's
attempt to give the public more insight into Grenada: The general's 25-page
memorandum was all classified Top Secret, available to the members and staff of
the Armed Services Committee but no one else on the Hill.

Mr. Courter has countered by asking General Vessey to reclassify his memorandum,
paragraph by paragraph, so some part of the Pentagon position might be made
public, but he has not received an answer.

The Doctor Is Leaving

President Reagan's physical

examination on Friday, his

first in two years, might be the last one that Dr. Daniel A. Ruge participates
in. Dr. Ruge, who has been the President's personal physician, is reportedly
planning to return to the Veterans Administration spinal cord injury program
later this year. The word is that Col. John Hutton, an Army surgeon who will
soon join the White House medical staff, is being groomed to succeed Dr. Ruge.
The White House physician, who is always at the side of the President, even for
the briefest trip outside the White House, has customarily been a doctor from
one of the uniformed services, and the military medical establishment is said to
be eager to reclaim it from a V.A. physician.

Sculpture Today

John McManus, a 40-year-old Vietnam veteran from California who

has been a sculptor for only four

years, will open a one-man show in the rotunda of the Cannon House Office
Building today. Under the sponsorship of Representative Tom Lantos of
California, Mr. McManus will show 14 pieces, including several that feature a
dramatic treatment he has developed that combines bronze castings and carved
alabaster.

One of these, ''Abandoned,'' shows the head and hand of an emaciated child
within a cowllike garment caught up with a rope. The president of Santa Monica
College ordered the sculpture removed from a McManus show in the campus library
on the ground that it was ''too distressing.'' Mr. McManus, formerly a
cabinetmaker, turned to sculpture after receiving treatment for delayed stress
syndrome in a veterans hospital.

Play Ball!

Now that spring has arrived, Congress and selected segments of the Federal
establishment are settling down to some really serious activity: the political
softball season. A well-placed source provided the highly classified schedule of
the Federal Reserve Board team, and it discloses a good deal about the
atmosphere that permeates the Congressional B League.

Names are big in this league. The Fed players are called the People's
Revolutionary Federal Reserve Board, and their rivals include the Monetary Base
(Treasury Department), the Steel-Belted Radicals (Representative John F.
Seiberling of Ohio and the tire family), the Prime Lenders (World Bank), the
Capitol Gainers (House Ways and Means Committee), Tequila Mockingbirds
(Representative Richard H. Lehman of California) and Dawson's Tax Dodgers
(United States Tax Court).

The season, which opened last week, runs to the Congressional summer recess in
early August. The Congressional A League involves less beer and more high
sliding into second; in the B League, 3 of the 10 positions on each team must be
played by women, and the scores tend to be high. Competitive, but high.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BODIES OF SEVEN SOUGHT AFTER SHOOTOUT IN ALASKA

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1158 words

DATELINE: JUNEAU, Alaska, May 20


Alaska state troopers searched the icy Tanana River today for seven people
believed to have been killed by a drifter who shot a trooper to death Saturday
and was killed in a shootout.

All seven disappeared within a two- hour period Thursday from the vicinity of
the tiny mining town of Manley Hot Springs, west of Fairbanks and deep in the
interior of Alaska.

The trooper, 34-year-old Troy L. Duncan of Fairbanks, and his killer, Michael
Charles Silka, 25, a newcomer to Alaska from Illinois, died during a fierce
exchange of gunshots between Mr. Silka in a boat and troopers in an airborne
police helicopter. The battle took place on an unnamed tributary of the Zitziana
River. The Zitziana flows into the Tanana River, on which Manley Hot Springs is
situated.

Six of the victims were residents of Manley Hot Springs, a community of less
than 100 people. The seventh lived nearby with his wife on their homestead on
the Kantishna River.

State troopers and local residents began dragging the Tanana river about a mile
from the heart of town after a memorial service today.

Bodies May Not Be Found


Residents say, however, that the victims' bodies may never be found. It is
believed that Mr. Silka threw them into the swift, heavily silted river, a cold
glacial stream still rimmed with winter ice.

The seven victims were these: FRED BURKE, a homesteader, trapper and

fisherman in whose boat Mr. Silka's body

was found after the shootout.  ALBERT HAGEN Jr., about 23, who had

just returned to

visit his parents after a 10-year absence.  JOYCE KLEIN, about 30, who was four

months pregnant and had gone to

the river for an outing with her husband

and son. LYMEN KLEIN, about 30, husband of Joyce

Klein.  MARSHALL KLEIN, 2, son of Joyce and

Lymen Klein.  JOSEPH McVEY, 37, a trapper and disabled

Vietnam veteran. DALE MEDAESKI, about 23, a carpenter. ''Anyone who happened to
be on the riverbank at the time became a victim,'' said a longtime Manley Hot
Springs resident, Cy Hetherington.

Robert Lee, owner and operator of Manley Lodge, the community's unofficial
social center, said Mr. Silka appeared last Monday in Manley Hot Springs, at the
end of a 150- mile dirt road from Fairbanks. He was driving a battered
automobile loaded with camping gear and with an aluminum canoe mounted on the
roof, Mr. Lee said.

Planned to Stake Claim


Mr. Lee said Mr. Silka told townsfolk that he planned to stake a claim to some
land nearby and settle on it.

Mr. Lee said Mr. Silka ''hung around'' a boat landing on the Tanana River. He
said Mr. Silka was ''a little weird, but, it seemed, nothing to be concerned
about.''

Because of its isolation, Manley Hot Springs is a place where, according to Mr.
Hetherington, ''lots of kooks show up.'' Mr. Hetherington owned and operated the
Manley Lodge for years before selling it to Mr. Lee.

Six Went to Landing


In a telephone interview today, Mr. Lee said that last Thursday between 2 and 4
P.M. six residents strolled down to the boat landing and simply vanished.

Their disappearances were not immediately noted, Mr. Lee said. It was only in
the next day that townspeople realized that the six had not been seen for a
while.

About the same time it was also noted that Mr. Silka was no longer at the boat
landing. Alarmed, local residents notified state troopers in Fairbanks, who
dispatched two helicopters and a special emergency response team to Manley Hot
Springs. At the town's boat landing, the troopers found blood, believed to be
human, and spent cartridge casings.

State troopers said they were already ''interested'' in Mr. Silka because one of
his neighbors in the Chena Ridge section of Fairbanks, Roger Culp, had been
missing since April 28.

The troopers said witnesses told them they saw Mr. Silka and Mr. Culp go into
Mr. Silka's cabin that day and later heard gunshots. Mr. Culp's body has not
been found, and the police said they did not know where Mr. Silka had gone until
they learned of his presence in Manley Hot Springs.

The troopers said it was believed that Mr. Silka had been in Alaska about a
month.

Helicopters Find Boat


After a wide search Friday and Saturday, the police helicopters found Mr. Silka
in a boat belonging to the seventh victim, Mr. Burke. It is believed that Mr.
Silka killed Mr. Burke and took his boat, which had a motor.

A shootout between the airborne troopers and Mr. Silka, firing from Mr. Burke's
beached boat, ended in the deaths of both Trooper Duncan and Mr. Silka, whose
body was returned to Manley Hot Springs.

The state troopers in Fairbanks said Mr. Silka had been arrested on weapons
charges last July in South Barrington, Ill. From 1975 to 1983, the state
troopers said, he had been arrested six times in his hometown, Hoffman Estates,
Ill., on misdemeanor charges involving weapons and shoplifting. The Hoffman
Estates police said they had provided the record to the Alaska authorities but
would not confirm the arrests last night.

Memorial Service for Trooper


A memorial service was to be held Monday in Fairbanks for the dead trooper. Mr.
Duncan, a 10-year veteran of the Marine Corps, joined the Alaska state troopers
in August 1981.

Mr. Lee, a 15-year resident of Manley Hot Springs, said the killings had had a
''devastating'' effect on the community. He said there was at best a 50-50
chance that the bodies of any of the victims would ever be found due to the
characteristics of the Tanana River. A meandering stream extensively braided
with sand and gravel bars, it is as much as a mile wide and 70 or 80 feet deep.

Because the water temperature remains near freezing, even during the summer, and
because the glacier-fed water is heavily silted, Mr. Lee said, the bodies are
likely to remain below the surface.

Miles of Wilderness

The Tanana River and the Yukon into which it empties flow through hundreds of
miles of uninhabited wilderness where the bodies, even if they should surface,
might never be spotted.  Manley Hot Springs, in the lush black-spruce forests of
central Alaska, is a cluster of about 30 buildings, mostly of logs. It often
attracts visitors seeking a wilderness experience.

Most visitors come in the brief but intense summer and leave before Labor Day
when winter, with its temperatures of 60 to 70 degrees below zero, usually
begins.

Manley's mineral hot springs, reeking of sulfur, feed the rustic baths owned and
operated by another longtime resident, Charles Dart.

Mr. Dart said the town, in which everyone knows everyone else, is ''stunned'' by
the deaths. He said he was close to all the victims, two of whom, Mr. Burke and
Mr. Hagen, had once been his wife's students in the town's tiny schoolhouse.

Although rural Alaskans are typically forthcoming and hospitable toward
newcomers, Mr. Hetherington said, ''From now on we'll all be very wary of
strangers.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Lillier Burke; map of Alaska

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

COMMENCEMENT DAY: A TIME OF GOODBYES AND ANTICIPATION;
AN EXHORTAION TO TAKE RISKS

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 515 words

DATELINE: POUGHKEEPSIE, N.Y., May 20


The television journalist Jim Lehrer, speaking at Vassar College's 120th
commencement, urged graduates today ''to take risks, to be willing to put your
mind and your spirit, your time and your energy, your stomach and your emotions
on the line.''

''The search for a safe place, to search for an end to a rainbow, is to search
for a place that you will hate once you find it,'' Mr. Lehrer, associate editor
and Washington anchorman of the ''The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour,'' told an
audience of 3,500, including 575 graduates, in an outdoor ceremony at the
college's amphitheater.

''The soul must be nourished along with the bank account and the resume. The
best nourishment for any soul is in the words of a man on our program last week:
'To create your own risks.'

''He had been a naval officer in the Vietnam War and was in an area where there
was heavy spraying of defoliant Agent Orange. Now, years later, he has lymphoma.


'Powerful Words'


''A reporter asked him if he was bitter about it all,'' Mr. Lehrer continued. ''
'No,' he said, 'I created my own risks.' ''

''Those are very powerful words,'' said Mr. Lehrer. ''Be not afraid to risk.''

Mr. Lehrer, a 1956 graduate of the University of Missouri, is also the father of
a graduating senior, Jamie Lehrer. ''I've been a dad a lot longer than I've been
a commencement speaker,'' Mr. Lehrer said.

He noted that he had altered his plans for the commencement speech after he had
a heart attack last December.

''Those early thoughts were all of a hard-nosed, practical variety,'' Mr. Lehrer
said. After the heart attack, he said, ''all that practical stuff sounded a bit
strange - maybe it was important.''

''So I think what we all really need help on, based on my most recent
experience, at least, is in appreciating the less practical matters and
achievements in life,'' he continued. ''I'm talking about the thrill of smelling
a carnation in a garden or on a table or in a corsage, of seeing a small child
swinging in a neighborhood park, or feeling the warmth of a new sun on a new May
morning.''

Vassar College conferred 574 Bachelor of Arts degrees and 1 Master of Arts
degree. Traditionally, the college does not confer honorary degrees.

Noting that the seniors were at ''the crossroads,'' Fredrika A. Horstman of New
York, president of the class of 1984, said: ''We have changed our direction. No
longer are we trying to get out. Now we're trying to get in.''

The school's president, Virginia B. Smith, said that the graduates must find
their own answers, but that ''if we have done our work properly, the effect of
these four years have to be measured over a lifetime.''

''This is not a short-time investment,'' she said. ''It is not always possible
to know what one has learned, or when the dawning will arrive.''

''You will continue to shift, sift, to shake out and to double back. The
synthesis that finally occurs can be in the most unexpected place and the most
unexpected time,'' she said.

''My charge to the class of 1984 is to be alert to the dawnings,'' Miss Smith
concluded.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Vassar College graduates

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 21, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MONDAY, MAY 21, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


Iran was accused of aggression in the Persian Gulf war by the Foreign Ministers
of the 21-member Arab League. The ministers accused Iran of aggression against
Iraq and specifically in connection with attacks against Arab shipping in the
Persian Gulf. In a rare departure from its usual public unanimity, the group
overruled objections from Syria and Libya, the only Arab League supporters of
Iran. (Page A1, Column 6.)

Soviet submarines off the U.S.  have been increased by Moscow, and their nuclear
missiles are within 10 minutes of American targets, the Soviet Defense Minister,
Dmitri F. Ustinov, said. Marshal Ustinov also said the number of SS-20 medium-
range missiles in the European part of the Soviet Union would be increased
''accordingly'' if the United States proceeds with its plan to deploy additional
Pershing 2 and cruise missiles in Western Europe. (A1:5.)

A bitter attack on Yelena G. Bonner, Andrei D. Sakharov's wife, published in
Moscow by the Government newspaper Izvestia, indicated that criminal charges
were being prepared against her. Izvestia said that she had ''gone too far in
her anti-Soviet actitivies'' and that law-enforcement agencies were taking
measures against her. (A1:3.)

Jose Napoleon Duarte, President- elect of El Salvador, said on a visit to
Washington that he was confident that the Salvadoran Army would support his
efforts to introduce democracy and abolish right-wing death squads. He said that
after discussions with the military leadership he had decided to ask Gen. Carlos
Eugenio Vides Casanova to remain as Defense Minister because the general had
accepted his program and had agreed to make ''a declaration of loyalty and
support for democracy.'' (A1:5.)

Israel attacked bases in Lebanon belonging to pro-Iranian Shiite guerrillas. It
was first attack by Israeli planes in Lebanon since early April and appeared to
be a response to an increasing number of guerrilla attacks against Israel troops
in southern Lebanon by Lebanese Shiite groups. (A3:1.)

Bombay police opened fire on warring Hindu and Moslem factions. The death toll
in three days of fighting between the factions in the cities of Bombay, Bhiwandi
and Thanae has risen to 75, with 13 more death reported Sunday. Prime Minister
Indira Gandhi announced that she would travel Monday to the troubled sections of
western India in an effort to calm the factions. (A4:3.)

Helmut Kohl was turned down when he sought, through intermediaries, an
invitation to the D-Day commemorative ceremonies June 6 that will be attended by
Allied chiefs of state in Normandy. The Allied officials reportedly reacted with
a mixture of surprise and discomfort at the West German interest in being
invited, but were said to show some sympathy for Chancellor Kohl. (A9:1.)
National

Unspent funds at the Pentagon are at the highest level since the Vietnam War
era. The backlog reflects the Reagan Administration's vast military buildup, and
it has created management and budget problems for the Pentagon and Congress.
(A1:2.)

Alaska state troopers were searching for seven people believed killed by a
gunman who shot and killed a trooper Saturday and was killed in the exchange of
fire with the trooper. The other people believed to have been killed by the
gunman, Charles Silka, a newcomer to Alaska from Illinois, all disappeared
within a two-hour period Thurday from the vicinity of Manley Hot Springs, about
150 miles north of Fairbanks. (A12:2.)

Walter F. Mondale predicted victory in the Democratic Presidential primaries in
New Jersey and California on June 5 and said he would gain enough delegates to
insure his nomination. (B11:1.) Metropolitan

Ties between blacks and Jews should be strengthened and their historic alliance
preserved, leaders of Reform Judaism said, despite the ''traumas of the moment''
attributed to the Presidential campaign of the Rev. Jesse Jackson. At the
conclusion of their semi-annual meeting in Secaucus, N.J., trustees of the Union
of American Hebrew Congregations, representing nearly half the Jews in the
United States, urged measures to strengthen ties between blacks and Jews and
called on candidates for the Presidency, leaders of public opinion and other
responsible groups to ''repudiate all threats of violence and appeals to
prejudice.'' (A1:1.)

The hierarchies of drug rings have rarely been penetrated deeply by Federal and
police undercover agents and informers in the New York area, law enforcement
officials say. But through two separate criminal cases - one involving a man
said to be a courier for an international rings known as the ''Sicilian
Connection,'' the other involving a man said to be a middle-level drug
wholesaler in New York City - investigators say they have got unusual inside
views of the drug pipeline from Europe to New York City. (A1:2.)

The biggest sale of Herefords in the country this year was held at Overlook Farm
in Millbrook, N.Y. It was attended by 350 breeders, from 35 states, four
Canadian provinces and Denmark. They paid $1,296,900 for 180 lots of cattle.
(B3:1.) Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GRIEF AND WARINESS GRIP TOWN AT END OF THE ROAD

BYLINE: By ROBERT LINDSEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: MANLEY HOT SPRINGS, Alaska, May 21


It was 10 A.M. and already Mac Burke, a trapper and fisherman, had had three
beers at the Manley Roadhouse. A friend urged him to go easy, but, in tears, Mr.
Burke said, ''We all grieve in our own way, we all grieve in our own way.''

Beside him, Johnny Andrew Jackson also ordered another beer. Mr. Jackson had
lost a half-brother to the stranger who came to this remote hamlet last week
and, according to the police, killed seven of its 75 or so residents.

''He was running from something,'' Mr. Jackson said, ''and then the road ended,
and he couldn't run anymore, and then he took my brother's life, the brother
whose diapers I used to change. This town will never get over what he did.''

''It'll start all over again when they find the bodies,'' said DeAnna Crespin,
the waitress at the Roadhouse, a rustic place paneled with cedar siding cut from
the wilderness that stretches in all directions beyond it.

They Began to Vanish


The trauma of Manley Hot Springs began last Thursday when, one by one,
townspeople began to vanish. Alice McVey became worried when she went down to
the nearby Tanana River and saw that her husband, Joe, had left a six-pack of
beer in his car. She also saw a boat that he had said he was going to launch.

When she told her friends that night that her husband was missing, she said,
they reported that members of their families also were missing. By Friday, the
full dimensions of the town's horror were becoming apparent. Mrs. McVey called
the Alaska State Police in Fairbanks, 90 miles to the southeast by air.

State troopers checked the license plate of a newcomer to town, Michael Silka,
25 years old, and learned he was wanted for investigation of a murder in
Fairbanks. Then, in a bloody denouement, state troopers in helicopters tracked
down the fugitive in a river several miles from here and engaged in a gunfight
that they later said was similar to combat in Vietnam. They said Mr. Silka fired
from a boat at one of the helicopters, killing a trooper, and was shot to death
when the police returned the fire.

Today, while search crews plumbed the Tanana River in search of the seven
missing residents, Manley mourned its missing, wondered why the tragedy
occurred, and once again began to look with wariness on strangers from beyond
their wilderness enclave.

End of the Line


Grief overtook the village in a season when life here is normally at its best:
The river is blue and flowing again after the spring thaw; temperatures are in
the 60's; the earth, still mushy from the winter freeze, is beginning to sprout
wildflowers and grass; in the forests all around bears, like people, have ended
a winter hibernation and the woods are full of wildlife.

If there's an end of the line in America, perhaps this is it. Many newcomers,
older residents say, are people who had moved west to California, then on to
Washington or Idaho and finally to Alaska; often they moved not only to escape
urbanization but also to resolve personal problems.

Manley Hot Springs is a place where land can be homesteaded and acquired for
nothing, where a log cabin can be built with materials at hand for a few
thousand dollars, where all the energy for heating can be cut in the surrounding
forest. It is this isolation and atmosphere for independent living, Mr. Burke
said, that attracts many people. ''A man can be his own man,'' he said.

If there is a villain in the apparent killings here, many residents say, it is
''the road'' - the 150-mile road to Fairbanks that, when it was carved out of
the wilderness a few years ago, was hailed here as a wonderful new link to the
outside world. The road ends here. A few scattered settlements are farther
north, but the only way to reach most of them is by boat or plane.

Yearly Flow of 'Losers'


John Burr, 19, who lost two friends to the apparent killings, said the road in
some ways had made it too easy for misfits, drifters and losers to get here -
''end of the roaders,'' the people here say with disdain.

''We get two or three of 'em every summer,'' said Miles Martin, a 32- year-old
trapper who lives in a homesteaded cabin 80 miles up the Tanana River. ''These
dingbats don't have enough money to fly anyplace so they get in an old car and
go until the road ends. They're losers. Some of them want to go on still, but
they don't have the slightest idea of what they're doing.''

''Last year,'' Mr. Martin went on, ''we had a guy who said he wanted to walk to
Siberia; we had another who brought a kayak and said he wanted to go on to Nome,
which is about the stupidest thing you could imagine.''

''Pretty sick, huh?'' Mr. Burke said over his beer. ''That's society now. We're
in a sick society. You can't get away from it, even here.''

But Joy Roberts said: ''We'll go on. Everybody will help everybody else.''

At a memorial service Sunday for the missing and presumed dead people of Manley
Hot Springs, the Rev. Les Zerbe, an itinerant Baptist preacher, said:

''Even though there are many, many things we will never understand about what
has taken place in your community over the last few days, we need to go on from
here.'' For a moment he said nothing. Then he added: ''There won't be any
answers, perhaps, this side of heaven.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of police officers at Manley Hot Springs, Alaska

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 22, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Soviet and Poland in Economic Pact

BYLINE: By THEODORE SHABAD

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 837 words


The Soviet Union and Poland have signed a 15-year accord calling for greater
economic independence from the West, but at the same time calling for broader
trade with Western countries that will ''not try to use economic relations for
political pressure.''

The pact, which also provides for unusual ''direct links'' between Soviet and
Polish factories and for broader coordination of five-year plans, is an apparent
effort to integrate the two economies.

These and other details emerge from the text of the agreement, which was signed
on May 4 in Moscow by Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, the visiting Polish leader, and
by Konstantin U. Chernenko, the Soviet leader. The text was made public three
days later.

The accord, effective through the year 2000, is expected to restore Poland's
position as one of the Soviet Union's leading trade partners. Poland once ranked
second, behind East Germany, in the volume of trade with Moscow. But in the
economic disruption associated with the rise of the independent Solidarity union
in 1980-81, Poland dropped to fourth place, behind Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria,
as well.

The agreement seems intended, in part, to reduce the West's 30 percent share of
Poland's foreign trade. In stressing the need for economic independence, the
accord evidently alludes to efforts by the United States and its allies to
impose economic sanctions after Poland, with evident Soviet support, moved to
suppress Solidarity in 1982.



Tighter Link Seen

Joint planning and economic coordination have long been practiced among the 10
nations of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, the Soviet bloc's trade
alliance. But the new Soviet-Polish accord seems to aim at tighter integration
than binds other members of the alliance - Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East
Germany, Hungary and Rumania in Eastern Europe as well as Cuba, Mongolia and
Vietnam.

The Soviet-Polish agreement calls for ''new forms and methods'' to put economic
and technical cooperation between the two countries on a long- term, planned
basis.

''The proper economic and organizational conditions are to be created,'' the
accord says, ''to deepen industrial specialization and subcontracting, combine
efforts in science and technology, and develop direct links between government
corporations, enterprises and other economic organizations of the U.S.S.R. and
Poland.

''Particular importance is to be given to close coordination in economic and in
technological and science policy, in working out joint decisions on major
economic problems of mutual interest, and in strengthening direct links between
economic and planning agencies.''

The agreement details a wide range of integrating measures in a variety of
economic activities, from chemicals to consumer goods.



Machinery Output

In machinery production, an area in which Soviet and Polish industry have
traditionally complemented each other, priority is to be given to joint
development of such modern industrial devices as microelectronics, robotics and
automated production systems.

In the energy field, Poland is to help lay natural gas pipelines from Siberian
fields, which are becoming an increasingly important source of energy for the
Soviet Union and its Eastern European allies. In return, the Soviet Union is to
help increase coal output in Poland's Silesian basin, one of the world's largest
producers, with some 190 million tons of high- grade bituminous coal mined a
year.

The two countries are also to combine efforts to expand nuclear power and to
increase research and development aimed at obtaining synthetic fuels from
low-grade coal. The Soviet Union has huge lignite deposits in the Kansk-Achinsk
area of southern Siberia that appear to have promise as a source of synthetic
oil and gas, if the technology can be worked out.



Closer Steel Integration

The agreement also calls for closer integration in the iron and steel industry
with a view to reducing Soviet imports of certain alloy steels and advanced
steel products from the West. Poland, with some 20 million tons, has the
second-largest steelmaking capacity in the Soviet bloc, after the Soviet Union
itself, which produces 148 million tons.

The Soviet Union has traditionally been the source of iron ore, and Poland, with
its high-grade coal resources, has been contributing coke, the other key
ingredient, which is in tight supply in the Soviet Union. Under the pact, Poland
is expected to produce even more coke for delivery to the Soviet Union.

In consumer goods, the Soviet Union is to provide Poland with such durable goods
as automobiles and household appliances, while the Poles will be delivering
apparel, shoes and other soft goods. These goods are to be exchanged not only
through the usual foreign trade channels, but also between national wholesale
organizations and directly in local border trade.

The accord also provides for modernization and expansion of transportation to
handle the expected increase of traffic between the two countries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE VOTES GUIDES ON COMPENSATION FOR AGENT ORANGE ILLNESSES

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 736 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 22


The Senate unanimously approved a bill today that would require the Federal
Government to establish guidelines for compensation of veterans whose illnesses
were traced to Agent Orange, the toxic defoliant used in the Vietnam War.

The bill, approved by a vote of 95 to 0, would also aid veterans whose illnesses
were traced to radiation from the detonation of a nuclear device.

The bill is supported by the Administration, which opposed a House-passed bill
that found a connection between the defoliant and three diseases thought to be
caused by Agent Orange and authorized disability benefits for those who suffered
from three.

The three illnesses named in the House bill were chloracne, a skin condition;
porphyria cutanea tarda, a liver condition, and a cancer known as soft tissue
sarcoma. A House-Senate conference will seek to resolve differences in the two
measures.

Speakers Note the Delay


The Senate passed its bill after a debate in which most participants lamented
that Vietnam veterans had been neglected by the nation they had served. Speaker
after speaker noted that a decade had passed before the Government began to
address the problems of Agent Orange, which Vietnam veterans have blamed for a
variety of diseases including cancer, skin and liver disorders and birth defects
in their children.

''The time is overdue for proper adjudication for injuries sustained by these
men,'' said Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the minority leader.
''American servicemen should not have to wait so long for their claims to be
properly addressed.''

The bill's sponsors said that, at present, there was ''no sound medical and
scientific evidence'' linking Agent Orange to a variety of diseases, including
chloracne, prophyria cutanea tarda and soft-tissue sarcoma. They noted, however,
that the Government had spent $130 million on 66 current research projects
intended to investigate whether there was a connection between the defoliant and
the diseases.

Senator Alan K. Simpson, Wyoming Republican, chairman of the Veterans Affairs
Committee and sponsor of the bill, said, ''There will be compensation when we do
establish sound medical and scientific evidence that some connection exists.''

The Senate bill would require the Veterans Administration to establish
guidelines and, where appropriate, standards and criteria for the resolution of
claims for benefits to veterans exposed to Agent Orange in Vietnam, and to
ionizing radiation in atmospheric nuclear tests or in the United States
occupation of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, both struck by atomic bombs in World War
II.

The bill also would require guidelines to be establshed to govern the evaluation
of the findings of scientific studies relating to the possible increased risk of
adverse health effects of exposure to herbicides containing dioxin or to
ionizing radiation. Veterans who served in Vietnam would be presumed to be
exposed to Agent Orange, and any reasonable doubts concerning the causality of
an illness would have to be resolved in the veterans' favor.

'Government Will Not Shrink'


Senator Alan Cranston of California, ranking Democrat on the Veterans Affairs
Committee and co-sponsor of the bill, said the legislation served notice that
''the Federal Government will not shrink from its responsibilities toward these
veterans and survivors.''

Senator Arlen Specter, Pennsylvania Republican, who sponsored a successful
amendment that relieved veterans of the duty to demonstrate exposure to the
defoliant, said, ''It is difficult to understand why these veterans, to whom we
owe such a great debt, should have to overcome such great obstacles to receive
their just compensation.''

Earlier this month in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, seven makers of Agent
Orange agreed to create a $180 million fund for thousands of Vietnam veterans
and their families who said the herbicide had harmed them.

The agreement resulted in the veterans' dropping a damage suit against the
companies that mounted into the billions of dollars. The companies had
manufactured and sold to the military about 12 million gallons of Agent Orange
and other color-coded mixtures of the herbicides that were used to defoliate
roadside and jungle areas in Vietnam that were considered helpful to the enemy.

However, many difficult questions regarding distribution of the money remain to
be resolved.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SOVIET BLOC PLANS MEETS IN SUMMER

BYLINE: Frank Litsky on the Olympics

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 5; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 844 words


The sports ministers of Soviet-bloc nations will meet tomorrow in Prague to
arrange multination competition for their athletes this summer. But though these
nations have decided not to compete in the Los Angeles Olympics, it seems
certain they will not stage a counter Olympics.

F. Don Miller, the executive director of the United States Olympic Committee,
said yesterday he was confident about that, having accepted the word of Marat
Gramov, the chairman of the Soviet Olympic Committee. They conferred last Friday
before and after an emergency meeting of the International Olympic Committee in
Lausanne, Switzerland.

''We have been told very clearly by Gramov,'' said Miller, ''that they would not
conduct a Red Olympics, per se. If they did, it would be a blatant violation of
the Olympic Charter.''

In 1980, after Soviet troops had occupied Afghanistan, the Carter Administration
persuaded the United States Olympic Committee to boycott that summer's Moscow
Olympics. It also wanted the United States to arrange a counter Olympics. The
U.S.O.C. rejected that proposal, though it did arrange international
competitions in several sports before and after the Olympics.

The Soviet-bloc nations apparently are doing the same this time. Reports from
Europe say they are planning a track meet Aug. 15 to 20 in Prague; a swimming
meet in the Soviet Union; fencing, modern pentathlon and boxing competitions in
Poland, and an upgrading of July track meets in East Berlin and Potsdam, East
Germany. None of these competitions would be held during the Olympic period of
July 28 to Aug. 12.

The Soviet Union announced May 8 that it would not participate in the Los
Angeles Olympics. It said the United States had frequently violated the Olympic
Charter, and that security for its athletes and staff was inadequate. Washington
and the Los Angeles Olympic Organizing Committee vehemently denied the charges.

In the 10 days following the Soviet announcement, nine Soviet allies said they,
too, would not compete in Los Angeles. They were Bulgaria, East Germany,
Vietnam, Mongolia, Czechoslovakia, Laos, Afghanistan, Hungary and Poland.

Rumania, the only Warsaw Pact nation that has not declared itself out of the
Olympics, has made no decision. One was expected yesterday, but Lia Manoliu, a
vice president of the Rumanian National Sports Council and the Rumanian Olympic
Committee, said no date for a decision had been set. Mrs. Manoliu, a member of
the I.O.C., was the 1968 Olympic champion in the women's discus throw.

Reports in Bucharest say Soviet officials are bringing pressure on Rumania to
stay away from the Olympics. China and Yugoslavia are the only Communist nations
that have said they will compete. Cuba has not announced its position.

Soviet-bloc officials have invited Juan Antonio Samaranch of Spain, the I.O.C.
president, to the Prague meeting, and he plans to fly there today. Samaranch has
said he will work until the June 2 entry deadline to attempt to persuade the
Soviet Union and its allies to change their minds.

Miller said he was convinced they would not change their minds. At the same
time, he said that the Los Angeles Olympics ''will be a complete success.'' He
spoke at a Manhattan luncheon following a symposium on the role of the United
States Olympic Training Centers.



Whether or not the Russians take part in the Olympics, trophies await Sergei
Bubka and Tamara Bykova, their potential gold medalists. The New York Track
Writers Association announced yesterday that those two had been voted the
outstanding athletes of the indoor track season.

In a four-week span in January and February, Bubka raised the world indoor best
in the pole vault three times - to 19 feet 3/4 inch, 19-1 and 19-1 1/2. He won
three of his four United States competitions. Miss Bykova won in both her meets
here and made the best high jump ever in an American indoor meet, 6-6 3/4.

She is the first foreign woman to receive this award since it was created in
1977. In the almost 50 years of the men's award, the only nonresident foreign
winners were Gaston Reiff, a Belgian distance runner, in 1949 and Valery Brumel,
the Soviet high jumper, in 1961.



The Olympic checkoff proposal, which would allow taxpayers to designate money
from their tax returns to go to the United States Olympic Committee, is headed
for a Congressional conference committee, probably next month.

The proposal was part of the tax bill passed by the Senate. It was not in the
bill passed by the House.

If the proposal becomes law, taxpayers will be allowed to designate $1 from a
Federal tax refund (or $2 from a joint return) as a contribution to the Olympic
Committee. If the taxpayers owed money, they could add $1 or $2 for it.

Administrative costs would come out of the money collected. In addition, the
Federal Government would turn over money to the Olympic Committee only once
every 90 days, so it could use the money until then.

''We're guardedly optimistic,'' said an Olympic Committee official. ''I think we
have a 50-50 chance for passage.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 23, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BUSINESS PEOPLE;
;
 Altos Computer Chief Resigns After 4 Months

BYLINE: By Kenneth N. Gilpin

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 338 words


After just four months on the job, David Hanna, president and chief executive
officer of Altos Computer Systems has resigned, effective immediately.

The company said that no replacement for Mr. Hanna, who is 45, was being sought.
David Jackson, 46, the chairman and founder of the San Jose, Calif.,
microcomputer systems manufacturer, will assume the additional posts.

Mr. Hanna leaves Altos at a time when the company's financial fortunes are on
the rise. In its third quarter ended March 31, Altos reported net income of $3.0
million, up 30.4 percent from the same period a year ago.

In a telephone interview, Mr. Hanna cited ''philosophical differences'' between
himself and Mr. Jackson as the reason for his quick departure.

''Dave Jackson and I had fundamental differences on strategy and priorities,''
he said. ''We had a very positive parting, but he is a strong guy and so am I,
and when I am running a company I run it.''

A glance at Mr. Hanna's background and interests seems to underscore that
evaluation of his character. He was a nuclear weapons guided missile officer in
the Navy from 1961 through 1965, including a seven- month tour of duty in
Vietnam. And among his favorite sports are trout fishing and bear hunting.

For a year and a half before joining Altos, Mr. Hanna served as president and
chief executive officer of the Grid Systems Corporation, a privately held maker
of portable microcomputers in Mount View, Calif. From 1968 through the fall of
1982, he was with the International Business Machines Corporation, and served as
vice president for general and office systems in I.B.M.'s national accounts
division from 1976 until his departure.

Before joining I.B.M., Mr. Hanna was a sales and marketing manager for Honeywell
Information Systems. He is a graduate of the University of Arizona.

Mr. Hanna said that for the immediate future he planned to go fishing in
northern California, spend August on the beach in Laguna and hunt grizzly bears
in British Columbia during September.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 24, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
WIN OR SEEK PEACE?

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 23


President Reagan said the ''U.S. must support the Salvadoran Government and the
Nicaraguan people.''

The apparent contradiction is more than superficial. Polls show that many
Americans are unclear about which side the Administration is putting its money
on. It's against rebels in Salvador, for rebels whom Mr. Reagan calls ''freedom
fighters'' in Nicaragua. The answer is that we aren't against guerrillas, but
against Marxists.

The question remains the goal of U.S. strategy. Is it to bring an end to
militarization and fighting in Central America, or to produce military
victories?

The more the issue is aired, the more confused it becomes. Salvador's
President-elect Jose Napoleon Duarte made such a good impression on Congress
Tuesday that he is bound to get the next installment of $62 million in aid,
which the Administration requested. But Mr. Duarte deliberately did not say that
he expected to ''win'' the civil war.

On the contrary, he said that he would seek to control his own military and the
right-wing death squads in order to produce enough security in his country for
all but extremist rebels to be willing to shift from armed to political
confrontation.

That will be hard, but it may not be impossible if both the right-wingers and
left-wingers are convinced the U.S. wants negotiations that would leave the
Central Americans to sort out their reforms.

The trouble is that U.S. action in the rest of the area leaves this quite
uncertain. When Mexico's President, Miguel de la Madrid, was here last week, Mr.
Reagan said: ''The conflagration in Central America appears too close to ignore.
Like a fire in one's neighborhood, this threat should be of concern to every
nation in the hemisphere.''

But Mr. de la Madrid, whose country's security President Reagan said was his
major concern, urged rejection of ''interventionist solutions of any kind.'' He
warned that the ''risk of a generalized war, the scope and duration of which no
one can foresee'' was growing in Central America.

Shortly before he left home, he said the U.S. has ''signaled that there are not
the conditions to negotiate'' with Nicaragua, whom Mr. Reagan blames for
supporting the Salvadoran rebels. Nicaragua does want to negotiate, the Mexican
President said.

Gen. Paul F. Gorman, who commands the U.S. military in the region from
headquarters in Panama, said that within 10 years Mexico would be ''the number
one security problem for the U.S. unless there is some dramatic change.'' He
called Mexico a ''center for subversion,'' which pursues ''a policy of
accommodation, not only with their own leftist elements but with international
leftist influences.'' Is U.S. policy then one of accommodation for peaceful
development in the region or one of confrontation? Is the U.S. purpose to help
Mexico protect its independence and its form of democracy, or to bring some
''dramatic change'' in its position?  A year ago, an argument on these very
questions was raging inside the Administration. Thomas Enders, then Assistant
Secretary of State for Latin American Affairs, was urging an increased use of
force in order to bring general negotiations that would wind up excluding both
U.S. and Cuban and Soviet-backed military activity.  Nobody ever accused Mr.
Enders of being a dove. He didn't oppose active intervention. But he was pushed
out of his job because he didn't believe a military victory was possible and
sought conditions for a compromise.  Since then, the C.I.A.-supported ''contra''
guerrillas in Nicaragua have become a force of 15,000. On the pretext of five
yearlong rotating ''maneuvers,'' the U.S. is establishing a large-scale system
of bases and military facilities in Honduras that cannot strengthen that
country's fragile civilian Government. Now it is pressing Costa Rica, which has
a longstanding policy of neutrality and no army, to build up its forces.  The
military side of Mr. Enders's recommendations has been put into effect, and then
some. But there is still no sign of a political plan, short of ousting the
Nicaraguan Government and establishing the U.S. as permanent guarantor against
left-wing revolutionaries.  Neither President-elect Duarte nor President de la
Madrid believes this kind of victory to be possible, at least not without a
full-scale war, which would be a tragedy for everybody, including the U.S. The
situation is coming to have a smell of Cambodia, where Mr. Enders helped run the
war, which was supposed to ''shorten'' the war in Vietnam. Instead it ended
Cambodia's chance of escaping the regional conflict and brought total disaster.
Mr. Duarte needs aid to establish his authority. But he also needs some solid
signs that the U.S. is more concerned with keeping the East-West conflict out of
Central America and curtailing the slaughter, than with establishing client
regimes.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 24, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Use of Deadly Air BombsReported in Afghanistan

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 160 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 23


Jane's Defense Weekly reported today that Soviet planes are dropping ''liquid
fire'' bombs on Moslem guerrillas in Afghanistan and fuel-air explosives that
set off shock waves that kill anyone within a quarter-mile.

The magazine, issued by the authoritative Jane's Publications, said the Soviet
forces had been using the weapons since last summer in eastern Afghanistan in a
major program to test them on the battlefield.

The report was written by Yossef Bodansky, identified by Jane's as a consultant
to the United States Defense and State Departments.

The fuel-air explosive bombs detonate in the air, releasing a volatile chemical
cloud about 15 yards in diameter. That, in turn, is detonated by a second
charge, causing lethal shock waves. Similar weapons have been in United States
stockpiles for years.

Fuel-air explosive bombs were used to a limited extent by the United States Navy
in Vietnam, mostly for defoliation and mine clearance.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 24, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Killer Who Cited Vietnam Trauma Convicted

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 640 words

DATELINE: CONCORD, N.H., May 23


A Vietnam veteran who contended that delayed stress from his war experiences had
caused him to murder his fiancee was convicted today of first-degree murder.

A jury in Merrimack County Superior Court rejected Gary Place's contention that
war trauma was responsible for the strangulation and stabbing death last summer
of Wanda Olsen.

After hearing the verdict, Mr. Place asked Judge William Cann to waive the
mandatory life prison sentence and order him executed.

Judge Cann refused, explaining that the law gave him no choice but to impose a
sentence of life without parole.

"All right," Mr. Place said.

The jury foreman, John Cutting, read the verdict shortly before 10 A.M. The jury
reached its decision a half hour earlier, ending nine and a half hours of
deliberations over three days.

Expert Testimony Differed

The seven men and five women had heard three weeks of testimony, which included
defense experts who said post-traumatic stress disorder had caused the murder
and a prosecution expert who said the disorder was not involved in the killing.

Mr. Place, 35 years old, did not deny killing Miss Olsen, 32 but his defense
tried to show that circumstances on the night of the murder had caused him to
flash back to Vietnam.

The prosectuion argued that while Mr. Place was trouble, he knew what he was
doing last July when he strangled the woman by hand, then used an extension
cord, and later stabbed her seven times in the heart.

"While he was holding onto her, he started seeing images of people in black
pajamas," the defense lawyer, Glenn Geiger, said in the closing arguments. "She
pushes on him and all of a sudden he is back in time. She becomes the enemy. He
wasn't in control of that situation."

Defense witnesses said the weather, the smell of rice cooking, and a challenge
by Miss Olsen had triggered a response that caused Mr. Place to see her as the
enemy.

Assistant Attorney General John Malmberg rejected the flashback theory and
relied on a psychiatric expert who said that Mr. Place suffered from a paranoid
personality disorder, which was not responsible for the attack.

"I think the defendant's own tesimony showed that this crime was not related to
his experiences in Vietnam," Mr. Malmberg said after the verdict.

But Mr. Geiger said he was shocked by the first-degree conviction.

"We felt from the beginning that there wasn't any premeditation or
deliberation," Mr. Geiger said, adding that the defense would study the
possibility of an appeal.

Mr. Place testified that he had strangled the woman when she cursed him and
refused to return his engagement ring. He said he remembered grabbing an
extension cord, but not wrapping it around her neck six times. He sai d he also
remembered getting a knife from the kitchen and stabbing her.

After the killing, he turned himself in at the police station and demanded an
execution date.

Defense witnesses testified that Mr. Place had suffered major setbacks in the
year before the murder, including the death of his parents and his
roller-coaster relationship with Miss Olsen.

"He was so brittle and fragile that all he needed was the stimulus of the
environment, the smells," said Dr. Sheldon Zigelbaum, one defense witness. "I
believe that if it was not for the posttraumatic stress disorder, this would not
have happened."

Defense witnesses said the smell of rice from a nearby Chinese restaurant might
have reminded Mr. Place of being at Khe Sanh in Vietnam. Another veteran of the
battle testified that the smell of rice cooking wafted into the camp just before
enemy attacks.

The defense said Mr. Place was a "normal teen-age kid with a normal upbringing,
strong religious ties and strong family ties" who joined the Marines and was
taught a "survival instinct and skills to do what he had always been taught not
to do: to kill."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 24, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Cuba Withdraws From Olympic

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 1; Forelgn Desk

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, May 23


Cuba withdrew today from the Olympic Games, the Cuban Government press agency
Prensa Latina reported from Havana.

Following the lead of the Soviet Union and nine other Communist nations, Cuba
claimed that the event's organizers had violated "Olympic regulations." The
Prensa Latina report, monitored here, said the action was taken by the Cuban
Olympic Committee in a special meeting today in Hayana.

The report quoted a committee statement as saying the "committee has proof that
it is absolutely true that in organizing the Los Angeles Games, a series of
irregularities and violations of Olympic regulations were committed."

"This caused deep worry, protests and denunciations by various national Olympic
committees," the report quoted the statement as saying.  It cited, among other
failures, "provocations" against Communist countries and "lack of security."

The wave of Olympic withdrawals began May 8 when the Soviet Union charged that
the United States was not providing adequate security and that anti-Soviet
groups had made it unsafe for Soviet and allied athletes to compete at the XXIII
Olympiad, scheduled to be held in Los Angeles this summer.  The Russians pulled
out, followed by East Germany, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Poland, Hungary,
Vietnam, Mongolia, Laos and Afghanistan.

All the countries that have announced they will not attend have until June 2 to
reconsider.  By that date they must make a final decision.

The Cuban pullout will deprive the Games of several top athletes, including the
heavyweight boxer Teofilo Stevenson, who was going to try for his fourth Olympic
gold medal.  In the women's javelin, Maria Colon, the witner of the gold medal
in 1980, and Marya Vila were considered medal contenders.  Cuba's women's
volleyball team also is highly rated.

Cuba won six gold medals in boxing at the Olympics in Moscow in 1980, and had
again been expected to do well.  The Cuban baseball team was considered the best
in the Games, which was to offer baseball as an exhibition.

Cuba's announcement came on the day that leaders of the international Olympic
movement were arriving in Prague seeking talks with Communist sports leaders to
stop the withdrawals.

In Los Angeles, Peter Ueberroth, president of Los Angeles Olympic Organizing
Committee, called the Cuban pullout "a Soviet blockade of Cuban athletes who
wanted more than anything to compete and excel in the 1984 Games."

He said it was further evidence of the "Soviets' unconscionable campaign to
strong-arm other nations."

Mr. Ueberroth said the Soviets had pledged last week not to press other
countries to pull out of the Olympics.  He said that in light of the Cuban
announcement the noninterference pledge the Soviet Union made "is as hollow as
its excuses for boycotting the 1984 Olympic Games."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 24, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AFTER NIGHTMARE OF VIETNAM, VALEDICTORIAN AT CITY COLLEGE

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1047 words


Nearly five years ago, after a six-day journey from Vietnam as one of the ''boat
people'' and five months in a refugee camp, Chi Luu arrived in Elmhurst, Queens.
He was not sure what to expect, but he did know what he wanted - an education.

''But I have no idea how well I can do,'' Mr. Luu, who is ethnic Chinese,
recalled recently. ''I was concerned about the English language, whether I can
compete with the high school students.''

He need not have worried. His English may not be flawless, but today the
25-year-old will graduate from City College as valedictorian of his class. In
English, he will talk about the opportunities the United States has provided
him. In Chinese, he will address his parents.

Mr. Luu, who prefers to be known by the American name he has chosen -
Christopher - has a 4.0 average, straight A's, in his major of electrical
engineering, and a 3.98 average overall. He got a B in a freshman English
course.

In less than four years, he completed a course that usually takes four and a
half to five years, and did it while working part time. Those who know
Christopher Luu are delighted for him. But they are not surprised. Such
accomplishments have become almost routine for the Luus.

A Close-Knit Family

It is a family that lives, its members say, for one another. The children - five
sons - work to make their parents proud of them.

Last spring, one of Christopher's brothers, 19- year-old Neil, won a scholarship
from the United Federation of Teachers for an essay he wrote about his escape
from Vietnam. He has just completed his freshman year at Colgate University.

Christopher, who knew some English when he arrived in the United States, has won
a roster of honors at City College - all framed and displayed on the Luu
apartment walls, along with landscapes painted by Christopher's father.

Joel, 21, has just completed his first year at City College and is doing well.
Steven, 23, works with computers on Long Island to support his own family, and
attends Hunter College at night. Even the youngest, Andrew, 11, is making his
mark. He is president of his class at Public School 89.

''These kids are incredible - all super- achievers,'' said the Luus' closest
American friend, Peter Sheridan, a lawyer who lives in Greenwich, Conn. Mr.
Sheridan, who was a battalion commander in Saigon in 1970 and 1971. met the Luus
through another Vietnamese refugee who had been his interpreter in Vietnam.

He credits the parents as much as the children. The sons agree.

Family Was Prosperous

''Our parents care about us,'' Christopher said the other night, sitting with
his family at their dining room table. ''There's a relationship between sons and
parents - we always want to make them proud.''

His mother, Phuong, then spoke in Chinese. ''My mother said that she and our
father try to teach us the morality,'' Christopher said, ''to teach us to move
on the right path.''

His father, Khanh Luu, was principal of the largest high school in Saigon, and
then founded an import-export company and became president of a
steel-manufacturing company. His wife ran her own fabric shop in Saigon and once
taught elementary school.

The family lived in a two-story house in Saigon. They had three maids, a
housekeeper, a garden and cars.

Now they live in a one-bedroom apartment a block from the elevated IRT No. 7
line, which dominates the view from the living room. The apartment is home to
six of the Luus. Steven lives down the block with his wife and child.  Life
changed quickly for the Luus with the fall of Saigon.

Christopher's father was imprisoned for 13 months. Most of the family
possessions were confiscated and everyone was sent to work in factories. That
meant an end to the family's most prized possession - education. That they could
not tolerate.

The Luus decided to get out. The Government told them they might be able to fly
to Taiwan if they relinquished everything they still owned. But the four older
brothers were dubious, they said. Even if such permission were granted, they
believed that going to Taiwan endangered their chances of coming to America.

''Once you are in another free country, the U.S. won't accept you,'' Christopher
said. ''We knew our parents could not afford college for us in Taiwan, but there
is help for students in America.''

In 1978, all but the youngest brother tried to escape on a fishing boat.

''We knew we could die - 50 percent died - but we had no future in Vietnam,''
Christopher said. The boat became stuck on a sandbar and the brothers were
imprisoned for several months. They tried again - in separate boats at different
times - and despite difficult voyages, landed in Malaysia. Each spent five
months in refugee camps, then came to New York in November 1979 with the help of
the friend who had been Mr. Sheridan's translator.

Christopher and his brothers lived with their friend in Elmhurst for a few
months, then rented the $278- a-month apartment they live in today, he said.
Christopher got a job at a can factory in Queens, watched television to improve
his English and planned his college career.

Family Is Reunited

His parents and Andrew flew to Taiwan, and in July 1980 the family was reunited.
Welfare payments keep the family going. The senior Luus do not speak English and
cannot find jobs - at least none that their children will allow them to accept.
Christopher's father was offered a job washing dishes, but his sons would not
let him take it.

Public assistance, along with financial aid and part-time work, allowed
Christopher to go to college. City College rejected him at first because of his
limited English, so in September 1980 he started at La Guardia Community
College. By the spring semester, however, he was at City. He had appealed to an
official there, who persuaded the admissions office to take a chance.

''Call it intuition,'' said the official, John Stark, assistant to the dean for
academic advising.

In September, two months short of the anniversary of his fifth year in America,
Christopher Luu will begin a fellowship in electrical engineering at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

His goal? To get his parents a better apartment, he said. Or maybe even a house.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Luu family

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 24, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

JACKSON TO GO TO MEXICO TO DISCUSS PEACE PLAN

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 485 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 23


The Rev. Jesse Jackson will make a one-day trip to Mexico City to learn more
about a four-nation group's peace plan for Central America, a spokesman said
today.

The visit next Monday, his second to Mexico and the third one out of the country
in his campaign for the Democratic Presidential nomination, is a scaled-down
version of a planned trip to Central America that Mr. Jackson announced last
month.

Armando Gutierrez, press spokesman for the civil rights leader's campaign, said
the pressures of campaigning had prevented Mr. Jackson from making that planned
five-day visit to a number of Central American countries, and the Mexico trip
would be a ''preliminary'' and not a substitute for a later, longer visit
planned after the final round of primaries on June 5.

Mr. Jackson will leave from Albuquerque, N.M., and fly to Mexico City, where he
is scheduled to address a joint meeting of the Mexican Parliament's House and
Senate committees on foreign relations. A hoped-for meeting with President
Miguel de la Madrid Hurtado or state dinner has not been confirmed, the
spokesman said.

Meetings on Contadora Plan


Mr. Gutierrez said Mr. Jackson would have a round of meetings with
representatives of the so-called Contadora Group of nations to learn more about
their peace plan. Last year the group, which also includes Venezuela, Panama and
Colombia, proposed a number of actions as a prelude to establishing stronger
peace treaties among nations in the region.

Their proposals included the removal of all foreign military advisers, curbs on
arms aid to countries in the region, and cooperation in preventing guerrilla
forces from using one nation's territory as a base for attacking another.

Mr. Jackson, Walter F. Mondale and Senator Gary Hart have all expressed support
for the Contadora ''process'' without taking positions on its specific
proposals. All three candidates have criticized the Reagan Administration's
unconditional support of the Salvadoran Government and Nicaraguan rebels, as
well as the conduct of military exercises in Honduras.

Jackson Wants Withdrawal


Mr. Jackson has called for the immediate withdrawal of United States troops from
the region, asserting that poverty, undemocratic governments and lack of
nonmilitary aid - not communism - is the cause of the fighting.

Mr. Mondale and Mr. Hart for some time seemed to differ on the continued use of
military advisers in the region, with the former Vice President saying he would
leave some there and Mr. Hart calling that position a failure to learn the
''lessons of Vietnam.'' A spokesman for the Hart campaign, however, said today
that he would also leave some advisers in the region.

Last week Mr. Jackson visited Mexico briefly after campaigning in San Diego.
Last December he visited Syria, where he negotiated the release of Lieut. Robert
O. Goodman Jr., a Navy flier.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 24, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CBS MOVES TO HALT WESTMORELAND SUIT

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1054 words


CBS Inc. said yesterday that it could prove that military intelligence officers
in Vietnam had conspired to falsify data on the size of enemy forces, and it
asked a Federal court judge to dismiss Gen. William C. Westmoreland's $120
million libel suit challenging a broadcast that alleged the conspiracy.

''The statements in the program about which plaintiff complains are true beyond
any genuine dispute of material fact,'' CBS said in the introductory paragraphs
of a 378-page brief. The brief draws on the sworn statements of two dozen
intelligence officers who charge that before and after the 1968 Tet offensive
the general and his commanders deliberately manipulated intelligence reports to
conceal from the White House, Congress and the American public the fact that
North Vietnam and Vietcong forces were growing rapidly.

The general's lawyer, Dan M. Burt of the Capital Legal Foundation in Washington,
said he would not comment on the brief until he had read it. In the past, he has
said that the evidence he has assembled undercuts the network's contentions
about both the truth and the fairness of the documentary.

Judge Pierre N. Leval, who is presiding over the case in Federal District Court
in Manhattan, has given Mr. Burt 55 days to file a response brief, and CBS will
have 22 days to respond to that filing. The judge thus will not rule on the CBS
request until August. The trial is scheduled to begin in September.



Depositions for the Press

The suit has raised a host of political, legal and journalistic issues, ranging
from the conduct of the Vietnam War to standards of reportorial and editorial
fairness. Unlike most civil suits in which pretrial maneuvering proceeds
quietly, both sides in the Westmoreland case have courted press attention to
depositions and other materials that they believe support their point of view.

The case centers on a January 1982 documentary, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam
Deception,'' that said that the military leaders in Saigon had deliberately
distorted a crucial document, the ''Order of Battle,'' to understate the number
of enemy soldiers in Vietnam. The documentary said that General Westmoreland,
the commander from 1964 to 1968, feared reporting the figures accurately because
they would have shown that the ''war of attrition'' was not being won, which
might have created new and demoralizing domestic protests against the heavy
American involvement.

The charges had been made before, but the documentary marked the first time that
Central Intelligence Agency aides and military intelligence officers who served
in General Westmoreland's command in 1967 and 1968 said on the record that the
allegations were correct. Yesterday's brief recites at length those interviews
and subsequent depositions about the activity in the military headquarters in
Saigon.

After an unusual internal investigation last summer, prompted by a TV Guide
magazine article criticizing some of the producer's journalistic practices, CBS
said it no longer considered the word ''conspiracy'' appropriate. But David
Boies, of the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine & Moore, which is
representing CBS, said that new evidence obtained since that internal inquiry
had convinced the network anew that the word was an accurate description.



Unusual Defense Argument

A request for a summary judgment is routine in libel cases, but most such
motions have relied, usually successfully, on procedural rules and precedents
that protect even erroneous speech about controversial issues. By contrast, the
network chose to argue as its first line of legal defense an assertion that is
normally tested in the trial itself, that the program's charges were accurate.

According to a recent study by the Libel Resource Defense Center, a
media-financed research operation in New York, ''truth'' was cited as the
primary defense in only 3 of 110 recent cases. In suits by public figures, such
as General Westmoreland, defendants usually seek dismissal under a 1964 Supreme
Court decision, The New York Times vs. Sullivan, which said that public figures
must prove not only that the article or broadcast was false but also that the
news organization had acted with ''actual malice.'' The Court defined ''actual
malice'' as the organization's knowing that the story was false or recklessly
disregarding whether it was true or false.

Some journalists and lawyers who represent them contend that the reliance on
that procedural safeguard for free speech has increased public skepticism about
whether the press cares if what it reports is true.

The brief said that even if the judge did not accept the ''truth'' defense he
could dismiss the case by relying on the Sullivan decision and a number of
subsequent cases in which the Court said that public figures had to be ready to
endure even unpleasantly sharp criticism about their actions.



Role of the Government

It also said that General Westmoreland could not sue because as the commander in
Vietnam he represented the Government. ''Any attack upon plaintiff's conduct in
his official capacity is indistinguishable from an attack on the Government's
military conduct of the war,'' an area of speech totally protected from libel
suits, the brief said.

''As the citizens of this country consider the prospects of war in the Middle
East or in Central America, the lessons of our failure in Vietnam are no less
vital, no less disputed, no less controversial today than a decade ago,'' it
said. But, it continued, the discussion will be inhibited if journalists have to
worry about libel suits for reporting the discussion.

''Free discussion of such issues requires the 'breathing space' of absolute
protection against the extraordinary expense of defending a suit brought by the
man who commanded our war effort and financed by those who share his political
point of view.'' Cravath, Swaine & Moore has already billed CBS for more than $1
million. Mr. Burt's Capital Legal Foundation estimates spending $900,000 on the
case so far. The sides have taken depositions from 50 witnesses and reviewed
200,000 pages of Government documents.

The consistent theme of the brief was that the program was true and that,
despite the General's extensive seach into the network's records, he had found
nothing to upset that view.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COMMENCEMENTS '84: GRADUATES TOLD TO BUILD A BETTER FUTURE;
CITY COLLEGE;
SCIENTIFIC LITERACY IS STRESSED

BYLINE: By RICHARD SEVERO

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 485 words


Graduates at City College were urged yesterday to be ''scientifically literate''
as they begin postgraduate work or enter the job market.

Dr. Jewel Plummer Cobb, the principal speaker at the 138th commencement, told
the 1,700 graduates that scores in mathematics and science in this country were
down, which she said was a problem of ''grave national concern.'' She said she
felt the United States was ''smug'' about its scientific prowess with the result
that the nation's ''educational plans are too modest.''

She warned that unless a higher priority was given to science training, other
countries might ''pass us by.''

She said there was a correlation between the well-being of a nation and the
scientific literacy of its people - their skills and knowledge. Dr. Cobb, a
biologist and cancer researcher who is president of California State University
at Fullerton, was awarded an honorary Doctor of Science degree by City College
yesterday.

Four Qualities


In his remarks, the City College president, Dr. Bernard Warren Harleston, urged
the graduates to be guided by four qualities: compassion, courage, civility and
integrity.

''For me,'' Dr. Harleston said, ''compassion means supportive understanding and
advocacy of those less fortunate, of those with more limited resources, and
those less privileged than yourself.''

He defined courage as ''the courage to risk; to disagree - even with those whom
you love and respect.''

Dr. Harleston described civility as ''the willingness to undertake and
understand and be committed to the distinction between disagreeing and being
disagreeable; to recognize that violence and aggression demean the victim and
perpetrator alike.''

He defined integrity in Shakespeare's words: ''To thine own self be true.''

A Message to His Parents


The valedictory was given by Christopher Luu, who left Vietnam five years ago as
one of the ''boat people.''

At one point in his address, he delivered a message to his parents, who speak
little English.

''Mom and Dad,'' he said, ''I love you and I thank you very much for your
support. You have sacrificed much in order that I might finish my college
education.'' He then repeated the message in Chinese.

These were the other recipients of honorary degrees: LAWRENCE ARTHUR CREMIN,
president of Teachers College, Columbia University, and a 1981 winner of the
Pulitzer Prize in history for his book, ''American Education: The National
Experience, 1783-1876''; Doctor of Humane Letters, for having ''contributed
greatly to our understanding of educational theory and practice.'' ABDUS SALAM,
winner of the Nobel Prize for physics in 1979, who has served since 1964 as
director of the International Center for Theoretical Physics in Trieste; Doctor
of Science, for his efforts to reduce the ''economic and intellectual disparity
between different parts of the world.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of graduates of City College at commencement ceremonies

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
;
 Accord Defended On Agent Orange

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 160 words


Lawyers who negotiated a $180 million settlement on behalf of Vietnam War
veterans in the Agent Orange case defended the May 7 agreement against charges
of a ''sellout'' by some veterans and their wives yesterday in Federal District
Court in Brooklyn.

The veterans, joining a briefing of about 100 lawyers from around the country,
challenged the adequacy of the fund put up by seven manufacturers of Agent
Orange to compensate veterans, their wives and children for injuries
attributable to dioxin contamination of the herbicide. The number of potential
claimants remains unknown.

Prof. Aaron Twersky of Hofstra University, a legal adviser to the veterans,
described the suit as beset by legal and factual problems that would have put
off any result for at least four years and might have required a retrial.

Stephen Schlegel of Chicago, a chief counsel to the veterans, said they could
voice any objections at fairness hearings planned for August.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ADVERTISING;
A BONUS FOR BURGER EFFORTS

BYLINE: By Philip H. Dougherty

SECTION: Section D; Page 14, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 725 words


IN the advertising agency business,

where there is much fretting about

client unwillingness to pay the standard 15 percent media commission, it
certainly comes as a surprise to hear about a client giving its agency a bonus.

That's what happened a year ago between Burger King and J. Walter Thompson, and
the bonus was more than a stuffed turkey: It was $250,000, some of which was
divided among the Thompson people who worked on the account.

Word of this beneficence came from Stephen G. Bowen Jr. and James B. Patterson,
who disclosed the reward during a joint interview the other morning.

The account is particularly important to these two. They rode it into the
business-and-creative leadership of the New York office, the largest unit in the
JWT Group, where Burger King is the biggest client.

Both are executive vice presidents and Steve Bowen, 40 years old, is general
manager here, while Jim Patterson, 37, is creative director. Neither has worked
at any other agency.

Recently they presided over the birth of the latest Burger King campaign. It is
Phase IV and still highly competitive. Size of burger was the subject for the
first. Then came taste superiority, followed by the meaningful ''have it your
way'' theme. Now it's the cooking method, and the Pillsbury subsidiary is
proudly promoting its flame-broiling method over the frying of mighty McDonald's
and beef-seeking Wendy's.

But instead of using the cookie-cutter approach, as with ''Fill it to the rim
with Brim'' or ''Please don't squeeze the Charmin,'' each of the new spots is
quite different from the others.

''The only similarity is in tone,'' Mr. Patterson said. ''They're a little
irreverent.''

He will get no argument on that point from Fred Rogers, the long- time Mr.
Rogers kiddy-show star on public television. One of the J.W.T. burger spots - a
delicious spoof of that show - was too irreverent for Mr. Rogers and his fans,
and at his request has been withdrawn.

''Fast-food advertising has become theater,'' Mr. Bowen said. ''Everyone is
waiting to see what we're going to do.''

And he and his associate, now that they are in a position to do so, would like
to see this excitement catch on in other client areas.



''We don't want to create Burger King advertising for all of them,'' Mr. Bowen
said, ''but we do want to open all of our people's eyes and our client's eyes,
and we are adopting unique mind-opening attitudes.''

''We tried breaking all the rules of the genre, and that's what we're asking all
of our clients to consider, be they makers of coffee or cameras,'' Mr. Patterson
said. ''We are telling advertisers, 'Open your mind completely; the rules are
all breaking down.' Even the Procter & Gambles and Levers of this world are
changing.'' The ultimate aim, of course, is the growth of the New York office.
Billing some $400 million now, the goal is $600 million by 1986.

''For a long time this J. Walter Thompson has been a gray old lady,'' Jim
Patterson said. ''No more. For a while I think it took its eyes off the ball and
got involved in other things besides advertising.''

''New York has been a flagship that has not been able to keep up with the
fleet,'' Steve Bowen added. ''The thrust now is to restore it.''

Like his father before him, Mr. Bowen came to the ad game after graduating from
Holy Cross College and doing a stint in the service. For Bowen the younger,
however, the service meant Vietnam as a Marine Corps captain, an experience, he
said, that gave him a perspective for his later agency leadership role. His dad,
by the way, worked at J.W.T. pre-World War II. And his mother was a Dougherty,
which is considered an asset in some circles.

Jim Patterson, whose father is in insurance and whose mother is a schoolteacher,
has a bachelor's from Manhattan and a master's in English from Vanderbilt
University.

Basically, he is a writer, and he thought he was going to write novels,
especially after all the time he spent listening, as an attendant at McLean
Hospital, a mental institution in Belmont, Mass., to readings by the late Robert
Lowell, the poet who was also a patient. Jim would work double shifts just to
listen to the great man.

''Then,'' he said, ''I came to New York and a girl who wrote Listerine
advertising convinced me it was an interesting way to make a living.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of James B. Patterson; photo of Stephen G. Bowen Jr.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A Salute In Stone

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 72 words


Frederick Hart, left, the sculptor, showing his statue of three U.S. soldiers in
Vietnam that will be placed at the Vietnam memorial. With him are James Webb,
center, to right of Marine Guard, the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Reserve
Affairs, and members of mr. Webb's rifle platoon in Vietnam in 1969.  They are
Mike McGarvey, second from left, Tom Gillespie, and Dale Wilson, fourth from the
left. Paul Hosefros

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: DESERT 'FLESHBURN'

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 306 words


''Fleshburn,'' which opened yesterday at the Warner Twin and other theaters, is
an inert action movie about a crazed Vietnam veteran, who's also an American
Indian, who kidnaps the four psychiatrists - three men and a woman - who had him
committed. He takes them to the middle of the Arizona desert, where he leaves
them to perish, with the help of the sun and his own spells.

What should be a cat-and-mouse game, turns into a mouse-and-mouse game. The
movie is more barren than the desert in which it's set. It's so boring that
one's heart leaps up when a cliche looms on the horizon, but that usually turns
out to be a mirage. There aren't even any psychiatrist jokes.

The film, which is based on a novel by Brian Garfield, who also wrote the novel
''Death Wish,'' was directed by George Gage and written by him and Beth Gage,
his wife. The cast includes Steve Kanaly, best known for ''Dallas,'' Karen
Carlson, Macon McCalman, Robert Chimento and Sonny Landham. Actually, they are
virtually the entire cast, if you don't count the occasional animal, bird,
insect or cloud.

The Cast

FLESHBURN, directed by George Gage; screenplay by Beth and George Gage, based on
the book ''Fear in a Handful of Dust'' by Brian Garfield; director of
photography, Bill Pecchi; edited by Sonya Sones; music by Arthur Kempel;
produced by Beth Gage; released by Crown International Pictures. At the Warner,
Broadway and 47th Street; Olympia Quad, Broadway and 107th Street and other
theaters. Running time: 90 minutes. This film is rated R. Sam MacKenzieSteve
Kanaly Shirley PinterKaren Carlson Earl DanaMacon McCalman Jay PinterRobert
Chimento Calvin DuggaiSonny Landham Jim BrodyRobert Alan Browne SmyleyDuke
Stroud Marine SergeantLarry Vigus ChrisNewton John Skinner Stunts Jack Dunlap,
Ed Adams, Will Morton, John Pearce


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MOSCOW TALKS END FOR NORTH KOREAN

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 25


President Kim Il Sung of North Korea today ended his first visit to the Soviet
Union in 20 years amid indications that he might have succeeded in obtaining
enhanced Soviet military assistance.

Before leaving for Poland and other East European countries, Mr. Kim held a
third round of talks with the Soviet leader, Konstantin U. Chernenko, during
which the state of the Korean forces appeared to have been a leading topic.

A report by Tass, the Soviet press agency, said that ''special emphasis was made
on issues of strengthening security in the Far East and in the Pacific Ocean
zone.''

Diplomatic reports before Mr. Kim's arrival said one of his priorities would be
to win Soviet agreement to provide North Korea with new fighters to replace its
aging Soviet-built MIG's, confronted by advanced planes of the United States and
South Korean forces.

An Opportunity for Moscow

The North Korean leader's visit, his first here since a Communist gathering in
1964, offered the Russians an opportunity to recover some of the influence lost
to China in the last decade. Mr. Kim visited Peking in 1975, and recent years
have seen a stream of China's leaders to North Korea.  By traveling to Moscow
Mr. Kim was thought to be signaling his anxieties over Far East developments
that weaken North Korea's strategic position. Among these have been the
bolstering of American forces in South Korea, growing military cooperation
between the United States and Japan and the improvement in Washington-Pekin
relations marked by President Reagan's trip to China last month.

Moscow Uneasy Over Far East

Mr. Kim's concerns on these issues parallel Moscow's growing unease. At a
banquet two days ago, Mr. Chernenko attacked the United States sharply for
activities in Asia, which, he said, has become ''another, Eastern front of
struggle'' against the Soviet Union and its allies.

''They are trying again to forge militarist axes and triangles like the
Washington-Tokyo-Seoul bloc,'' he said.

The visit also provided fresh hints of Soviet pique at China over its recent
border clashes with Vietnam, the Reagan visit and Peking's continued insistence
at Soviet-Chinese talks on linking political progress to the issues of
Afghanistan, Cambodia and Vietnam.

Mr. Chernenko spoke of the Soviet Union's continued desire for improved ties but
he also referred to China's ''hegemonism'' in Asia, a term not been used for
some time.

Mr. Kim avoided mention of China in his address, and Western diplomats said it
appeared he regarded the fact of his visit as sufficient notice to Peking that
he intended to return to something closer to the equal-distance policy he
pursued towards his two Communist neighbors before 1975.

A Limit to Better Relations

Although the two sides made it clear that there is to be an expansion of trade
and other economic links, the diplomatic consensus was that there were tight
limits as to what could be accomplished. One diplomat said the North Korean had
long been viewed as ''independent, radical and unpredictable, a sort of Marxist
Muammar el- Qaddafi,'' among Moscow's allies.

A hint of Soviet weariness was provided by references to the atmosphere at the
talks as ''warm and friendly.'' This is a more cautious characterization than is
commonly used to describe talks with Communist allies. Mr. Kim gave no
indication whether he would accede to urging to join the Soviet Union in not
going to the Olympics in Los Angeles.

Diplomats believe Soviet wariness toward Pyongyang increased after a bomb
explosion in Burma last year killed several South Korean officials. Burmese
authorities blamed North Korea for the bomb.

In his banquet speech, Mr. Chernenko alluded to Soviet determination to do
nothing to encourage hostilities between the two Koreas, calling the situation
there ''sufficiently complicated.'' He stressed reunification ''by peaceful
means.''

Mr. Kim was installed as Communist leader in Pyongyang after spending much of
World War II in the Soviet Union. His sensitivity about personal security,
including a distaste for air travel, was reflected in his decision to travel the
4,500 miles to Moscow by train, breaking the six-day journey with a stopoff in
Krasnoyarsk, the Siberian city where Mr. Chernenko was born and began his party
career.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Konstantin U. Chernenko and Kim Il Sung

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN HONORS UNKNOWN AMERICAN KILLED IN VIETNAM WAR

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 827 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 25


A coffin bearing the remains of an unidentified American military casualty of
the Vietnam War was placed in state at the Capitol Rotunda today as President
Reagan prayed that ''this hero be America's last unknown.''

The serviceman, said to be the only one among more than 58,000 American war dead
who will elude identification by military pathologists, is to be buried Monday
in the Tomb of the Unknowns at Arlington National Cemetery.

The city's early traffic exodus of the long Memorial Day weekend was interrupted
near the Capitol as the unknown soldier's gray metal coffin was transported to
the ceremony that served as a 15-minute aftermath to the war that concluded 11
years ago.

With the Stars and Stripes lashed on the top, the coffin was carried by eight
servicemen and placed directly under the great dome of the Capitol. Sunlight
streamed down and ''The Battle Hymn of the Republic'' was played as a dirge.

Many Officials at Ceremony


An array of Cabinet, Congressional and military officials watched as the coffin
was placed atop the black catafalque first used for Lincoln and later used for
the nation's three other entombed Unknown Soldiers who died in the two World
Wars and in the Korean War.

''Our path must be worthy of his trust,'' the President declared. ''We must not
betray his love of country.''

Mr. Reagan, dressed in a black suit, placed a wreath of red and white carnations
before the coffin.

''We may not know his name,'' the President said, ''but we know his courage. He
is the heart, the spirit and the soul of America.''

In the journey to his place of national honor, this unknown serviceman traversed
some sensitive national political ground and withstood the most sophisiticated
attempts of forensic pathologists to identify him.

Fourth Unknown Serviceman


The entombing of a fourth Unknown for the Arlington shrine was authorized by
Congress a decade ago. In the inter im, the ceremony became the concern of
organized groups of survivors of the 2,489 servicemen still listed as missing in
action. Government officials, including the President, have sought to reassure
them that this event of special mourning will not close the book on their
continuing hope to get the Government to retrieve or more fully account for
their missing loved ones.

For the service pathologists, whose skills were greatly sharpened in the Vietnam
War, finding an unknown casualty became near impossible, according to military
officials. More than 2.6 million Americans served in Vietnam, and aside from
those still listed as missing, the death toll was 58,012. With the technical
advances in casualty retrieval and medical evacuation, there were no great
fields of anonymous American dead.

Two years ago, officers at the Armed Services Identification Laboratory in
Hawaii, after a search of records, reported they had the remains of only four
possible candidates for the Arlington tomb. By law, the one so honored must be
beyond doubt an American serviceman.

Two of those four bodies were later identified, and investigators reported
promise of eventually identifying the third. The process thus left only the one
body, which was shipped to California Thursday on the USS Brewton, then flown by
C-141 transport to Washington.

''Now that he is known only to Your grace,'' Rear Admiral Neil Stevenson, the
chief Navy chaplain prayed, ''He will forever be an influence to all the people
of this beloved country.''

The coffin will remain in state and the Capitol will be open around the clock
this weekend to allow the public to pay their respects. On Monday afternoon, the
unknown serviceman will be transported west from the Capitol, honored on the way
at the Vietnam Memorial, then placed in the Arlington tomb at a Memorial Day
ceremony attended by Mr. Reagan.

189,000 Others in Cemetery


More than 189,000 other service veterans and members of their families are
interred in the cemetery, which overlooks Washington from the west bank of the
Potomac River.

''This young American understood that freedom is never more than one generation
away from extinction,'' said the President, who throughout his political career
has insisted that the Vietnam War was a ''noble cause,'' badly served in the
political debate that proved so divisive in turning out the Administration of
President Johnson 16 years ago.

One of the few figures from that period recognizable in the Rotunda gathering
was William C. Westmoreland, the retired general who was in charge of United
States troops at the height of the American campaign in Vietnam.

Mr. Reagan, stressing the need to honor the unknown soldier by living in peace,
quoted Longfellow: ''So when a great man dies, ''For years beyond our ken, ''The
light he leaves behind him lies ''Upon the paths of men.''

''We pray for the wisdom that this hero be America's last unknown,'' Mr. Reagan
declared, looking at the coffin.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan and coffin of Unknown Soldier

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

UNKNOWN AMERICAN KILLED IN VIETNAM IS SALUTED

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: The coffin of an unknown American casualty is taken into the Capitol
for tribute.  President Reagan called him ''the spirit and the soul of
America.'' Page 9. The New York Times/Paul Hosefros

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON ADVISES CAUTION ON GULF

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 18, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 876 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 26


Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and the Joint Chiefs of Staff have
advised President Reagan to avoid, if at all possible, the use of American
forces in the Persian Gulf region, according to Pentagon officials.

They said the Defense Department favored a diplomatic solution to the
hostilities between Iran and Iraq that threaten to disrupt oil supplies.

''The word is, 'Let the nations over there work it out for themselves,' '' one
officer said,

On Tuesday President Reagan said the United States was consulting with its
allies about the possibility of military aid to the Persian Gulf, but he
dismissed the chances of direct American intervention as ''very slight.''

''So far it seems as if the Gulf states want to take care of this themselves,''
he said at a news conference.

The Pentagon officials said a possible confrontation between the United States
and the Soviet Union should be avoided. They are also wary of an American
commitment that lacks clear objectives, sufficient forces and public support.

Distance From U.S. a Factor

On a practical level, the 7,000-mile distance from the East Coast to the Strait
of Hormuz at the mouth of the Persian Gulf would present logistic problems in
transporting and sustaining a military force of any significant size.

The reluctance of Pentagon leaders is in contrast to the pledge, first
enunciated by President Jimmy Carter and later affirmed by President Reagan,
that the United States would use military force, if necessary, to protect vital
interests, namely oil, in that region.

A civilian official said Mr. Weinberger and the Joint Chiefs had told Mr. Reagan
that the Saudi Arabians and their Gulf allies should employ their forces before
Americans are involved.

''The feeling here is that they should get bloodied first,'' the official said.

The officials said the West had sold billions of dollars worth of arms to Saudi
Arabia and that this was adequate to deal with a threat from either Iran or
Iraq.

Moreover, the officials said, the Pentagon leaders have told Mr. Reagan not to
deploy forces without a clear understanding with the Western European allies.

European Commitment Sought

That understanding, the officials said, must include a commitment of military
forces. Western Europe, along with Japan, is far more dependent on oil from the
Persian Gulf than is the United States, which gets only 3 to 4 percent of its
oil from that region.

Britain has had an historical involvement in the region, with military advisers
still in Oman, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait while France
has military forces in Djibouti on the Red Sea.

The Pentagon officials said the Joint Chiefs had recommended that the United
States discuss with the allies possible plans for meeting contingencies,
disposition of forces and methods of communications but only as a precaution.

Japan, as a matter of national policy, does not deploy military forces abroad.
But officials said Japanese diplomats were working behind the scenes to seek a
political settlement. Japan depends heavily on oil from the Persian Gulf.

Aid Request Should Be Overt

Should the Saudis and their allies become involved in hostilities and need help,
the officials said, the Pentagon leaders had advised responding only if American
help is requested publicly.

They said the Pentagon had advised against deploying forces, such as fighter
squadrons, to the Gulf without their presence being acknowledged by governments
in the region.

''There should be an overt declaration,'' said an official.

Even if forces were deployed, the officials said, they would be held in reserve
behind those of Saudi Arabia and its Gulf allies.

The officials said the United States had offered to send spare parts and other
materiel to Saudi Arabia if it was needed for the Saudi Air Force, which has
American-made F-15 fighters.

Besides Saudi Arabia, Kuwait has American A-4 attack aircraft and French-built
Mirage fighters, while Qatar, Oman, Bahrain, and the United Arab Emirates have a
small numbers of aircraft obtained from France, Britain or the United States.

Swift Denials of Speculation

The mood in the Pentagon in the last few days has reflected reluctance to have
the United States commit forces. Suggestions that American forces were on the
alert or had been moved were met with swift denials.  When a news report
suggested that the aircraft carrier America would be dispatched from the
Mediterranean to the Indian Ocean to reinforce the aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk,
Pentagon officials said the America would relieve the Kitty Hawk in normal
rotation.

The reluctance to have American forces engaged in the Persian Gulf, some
officers suggested, reflects Pentagon opposition to the deployment of marines
and other forces to Lebanon, where it was felt the military and political
objectives were unclear.

Further, it appeared to be another legacy of Vietnam that has made senior
military officers insist that American forces be sent to combat only when
political and military objectives have been made clear, when sufficient forces
to accomplish that mission have been made available, and when Congress and the
public have expressed support.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Islamic Revolutionary Guard unit

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REAGAN FIGHTING TO WIN AID FOR ANTI-SANDINISTAS

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1521 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 26


After more than three years of political controversy over United States policy
in Central America, President Reagan and Democratic leaders in Congress are in a
power struggle over the Administration's once-covert war against Nicaragua.

The President and Republican leaders in the Senate and House of Representatives
are battling to continue aid to Nicaraguan rebels through the Central
Intelligence Agency. But the Speaker of the House, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., and
many House Democratic liberals are intent upon ending it.

Passions have risen to the point where both sides proclaim the operation is not
only an acutely important foreign policy issue but also a test of American
character. Proponents of the program contend that it would be immoral now to
abandon the rebels, and opponents say the covert war was immoral from the
outset.

For six weeks, the C.I.A. has been warning privately that $24 million approved
last fall has virtually run out. Yet last Thursday, the House voted for the
third time in 10 months against providing more money for rebel operations.

Next week, the issue goes before the Republican-controlled Senate, which
approved $21 million for the rebels in early April. But subsequent disclosures
that American agents were personally directing sabotage raids against Nicaraguan
oil installations last fall and the mining of Nicaraguan harbors this year have
weakened Senate support.

The Background

President Reagan authorized C.I.A. operations with Nicaraguan rebels in late
1981. He sent Congressional intelligence committees a ''Presidential finding''
that called for using anti-Sandinista rebels to stop the flow of arms and
military support from Nicaragua to leftist guerrillas in El Salvador.

By late 1982, as rebel operations inside Nicaragua grew, House Democrats led by
Edward P. Boland of Massachusetts, the intelligence committee chairman, worried
that the rebels were trying to overthrow the Sandinista Government in Managua.
In December 1982, the House adopted the Boland amendment barring that objective.

Last fall President Reagan sent Congress a new finding widening the objectives
of rebel operations. This finding authorized harassment of Nicaragua's Marxist
Government and putting pressure on it to abandon support for Salvadoran leftists
and to negotiate a regional settlement.

Political controversy over American objectives mounted, fed by rebel attacks
against economic targets in Nicaragua and President Reagan's periodic
declarations about the need to restore democratic rule in Nicaragua.

It reached a climax in early April with revelations that the C.I.A. had directed
the mining of Nicaraguan ports, reinforced by a subsequent ruling of the
International Court of Justice that called for a halt in the mining and asserted
that Nicaragua's independence ''should not be jeopardized by any military or
paramilitary activities.''

For Covert Aid

Consistently, President Reagan has treated aid to what he calls Nicaraguan
''freedom fighters'' as an integral part of the battle in El Salvador and of his
regional strategy. He has demanded that Congress approve all elements of his
program.

Militarily, the Administration and its supporters contend that the Salvadoran
guerrillas receive a vital portion of their arms - 80 percent of their munitions
and up to half of their weapons as well as command and communications support -
from Nicaragua. ''There would not be a battle in El Salvador if it were not
being exported from Nicaragua,'' declared Representative Jack Kemp, a Buffalo
Republican.

Administration military strategists, harking back to Vietnam and other guerrilla
wars, argue that the guerrillas in El Salvador cannot be beaten as long as they
have a sanctuary in Nicaragua. Top Pentagon officials say the arms flow from
Nicaragua is continuing, but they contend that anti-Sandinista operations keep
pressure on Nicaragua.

Inconsistency Charged

With Jose Napoleon Duarte, a reform-minded Christian Democrat, promising new
efforts in the war and democratic measures once he is inaugurated as President
of El Salvador on June 1, Republicans contend that Democrats are being
inconsistent in backing aid to Mr. Duarte but blocking aid for the
anti-Sandinista rebels.

''What good does it do to approve $62 million to support the cause of freedom
and democracy in El Salvador on the one hand, when with the other hand we
require that they leave the back door open to those in Nicaragua seeking to
subvert freedom and democracy?'' demanded Representative William S. Broomfield,
Republican of Michigan.

Proponents of the covert war view the 15,000 C.I.A.-backed Nicaraguan rebels as
heroes of a global struggle against Soviet- and Cuban-backed subversion, as
American proxies fighting Moscow's clients.

Moreoever, they say, it would undermine the confidence of American allies to see
the United States abandon friendly forces in the field. ''We were the ones who
helped start the effort by the contras,'' Mr. Kemp reminded the House last week.
''Pulling the plug on them,'' he said, would be ''absolutely immoral.''

Against Covert Aid

Opponents of the war believe morality is on their side. They contend that it is
illegal, immoral and contrary to American values for the United States to mount
a covert war against another established government.

People such as Representative Jim Wright, a Texas Democrat and the majority
leader, draw a sharp distinction between aiding a friendly Government in El
Salvador and helping Nicaraguan rebels. They say the inconsistency is in the
President's opposing terrorism worldwide and the insurgency in El Salvador while
promoting insurgency in Nicaragua.

''Providing assistance to a duly elected government is different from providing
assistance to guerrillas who are trying to overthrow a government we don't
like,'' asserted Representative Lee H. Hamilton, an influential Indiana
Democrat. ''If we believe in the right of self-determination for El Salvador,
must we not also believe in the right of self-determination for Nicaragua?''
echoed Mr. Wright. ''Do we have any right to invade and violate the territory of
Nicaragua?''

Many House Democrats, especially liberals from the the Northeast, Midwest and
California, opposed the anti- Sandinista operations from the start or have grown
increasingly wary about the President's objectives. Rather than seeing the
Nicaraguan rebels as heroes, they regard them as mercenaries who have sometimes
pillaged and killed civilians.

O'Neill Is Caustic

Speaker O'Neill, explaining his opposition to providing $2 million to $6 million
to phase out the operation and resettle the rebels abroad, described them
caustically. ''These people have been down there as murderers, marauders and
rapists,'' he said. ''What are we going to do? Reward them? What are they? Paid
Hessions.''

Opponents also contend that even according to the Administration's military
intelligence, the Nicaraguan rebels have been unable to significantly curb the
flow of arms from Nicaragua to El Salvador. ''By any means of military measure,
this military operation has been a failure,'' Representative Wyche Fowler Jr.,
Democrat of Georgia, asserted.

Others worry that the aid has hurt the United States with its allies in Western
Europe and with friendly Latin countries that openly oppose American
intervention. They point to the 15-to-0 World Court vote as evidence.

Mr. Boland makes the case, moreever, that the Administration has known since
last July that a House majority opposed the covert war and should not have
expanded the rebel operations since then.

''What we need today is to return common sense and compassion to U.S. foreign
policy,'' Mr. Boland asserts. ''We simply must not appropriate one more penny to
wage a war that has caused our allies to wonder at our sense of proportion and
that has turned Central America into an armed camp.''

The Outlook

Twice before the House has opposed giving money to the Nicaraguan rebels, but
the Administration kept the program alive by winning Senate approval and then
arranging through a House-Senate conference committee to include the money in
military appropriations bills backed by House Democratic leaders.

This time, the Administration lacked bargaining power because the Nicaraguan
money was part of a fairly modest piece of legislation that was not of great
interest to the Democrats.

In the next few days, the White House will lobby for votes in the Senate and
House, perhaps offering to reduce the amount of money it seeks. But it faces
difficult odds because House Democratic leaders remain adamantly opposed to the
program and their 64-vote margin of victory last Thursday gives them a strong
hand.

Nonetheless, White House officials say the House vote did not specifically
require the end of the program. That leaves them the alternative of setting the
issue aside now and reviving it later in another measure more important to House
Democratic leaders. In the meantime, the Administration may try to keep the
covert war going by scaling it down to string out the money it has.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Harry Bergold Jr.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Laos Rebels Reported To Ambush 40 Troops

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 67 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 26


Anti-Communist Laotian guerrillas ambushed and killed 40 Vietnamese and
Government soldiers on May 14 in an attack on a military convoy in Saravane
Province in southern Laos, the Thai press agency reported today.

The agency did not say where it obtained its information. It said three of the
four trucks in the convoy were badly damaged and the 40 troops who were killed
included 32 Vietnamese.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFGHAN DRIVE: A COSTLY GAIN FOR RUSSIANS

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 883 words


Intelligence analysts studying the often conflicting reports from Afghanistan
have concluded that Soviet forces won a considerable but not decisive success in
their recent offensive there, but at a higher cost in casualties than they
expected.  One British source put Soviet losses in the Panjshir Valley at 500
men, plus 2,000 more throughout the country since the offensive started in
mid-April.

The analysts - in Washington, in other NATO capitals and Pakistan - said the
losses were considered serious for a force that reportedly had lost only 5,000
men since the Soviet intervention began in late 1979.

Some experts on the Soviet order of battle said they believed that, as a
consequence, Soviet forces were being strengthened by the addition of fresh
units. One estimate is that the reinforcements will push total strength to about
120,000 men.

Militarily, the most significant development of the operations has been the
extensive and successful use of the air force. According to neutral observers
citing insurgent information, Soviet pilots performed with efficiency against
insurgent strongpoints and troops caught in the open.

Firebombs Reported Used

According to Jane's Defense Weekly, the Russians also used liquid firebombs.
These burst into flame on contact with the ground. There have been reports,
never verified, that munitions of this type had been used earlier.

The bombing, both at high altitude and at low level, appears to have been
effective. Camouflaged and well protected rebel positions have been taken out by
fighter-bombers guided to their targets by forward air controllers flying in
helicopters and marking the targets by smoke. Casualties among civilians are
believed to have been high.

The Su-25, code-named Frogfoot by NATO, appears to have been the most effective
fixed-wing aircraft. Operating in pairs, the Su-25's have used their guns,
rockets and antipersonnel bombs against key targets. The tactics are to come in
at a low level after the target has been marked and the results were described
by one analyst as devastating.

Up to 100 Sorties a Day

At the height of the operations, the source said, the air force was flying at
least 100 sorties a day. A sortie is one mission by one aircraft.

Some of the planes flew from bases in the Soviet Union, a British source said.
Others were based in Afghanistan.

One result of the success of the Soviet air tactics has been the movement of
thousands of refugees into Pakistan. Common misery, a Pakistani source said, has
not brought unity among the insurgents.

He and other well-qualified sources report that rivalry among insurgent bands
continues to the detriment of the military effort. He said he knew of cases in
which one insurgent group, learning that another was about to attack the
Russians, would inform the Soviet side to insure the defeat of the rival
faction.

American military sources, reviewing the offensive, noted that the Russians
appear to have achieved a marriage between their helicopter forces and ground
troops.

Coverage of Ground Attacks

Infantry and armored fighting vehicle attacks were invariably covered by
helicopter forces that engaged hostile ground forces and prevented attacks on
the Soviet flanks. The ground attacks, allied sources report, customarily
followed bombing by fixed-wing bombers carrying out carpet bombing of the
operations area.

The Russians also used helicopters successfully to land ground forces on
mountain summits commanding the Panjshir Valley and its tributary valleys.
Ground forces were also landed when reconnaissance reported insurgent units
gathering for attack. In one such operation, south of the Salang Tunnel on the
main highway from the Soviet Union, it is estimated that an insurgent force of
1,500 men was routed by helicopter-borne infantry.

In contrast to American operations in Vietnam, helicopters with or without
infantrymen aboard are able to spot insurgents unshielded by jungle. Many
intelligence sources believe that the recent operations were evidence of a
higher sophistication in planning and maneuver than earlier operations.

No Way of Checking Rebel Claims

The quality of the rebels is difficult to assess, intelligence sources say.

By their own testimony, the guerrillas inflicted serious losses on the Soviet
forces, but there is no way of checking their claims. Their own losses,
intelligence analysts said, probably were high and they must expect to take
similar losses until they are armed with the antiaircraft and antitank weapons
they require to check Soviet attacks. Few such weapons have been reported by
neutral obseervers.

Disunity among the guerrilla bands and a low level of training remain their
weakness. One Pakistani source, familiar with the situation, said that in his
opinion the insurgents' combat efficiency was well below that of the Vietcong in
Vietnam or the Algerian insurrection against the French.

His view of the future, echoed by Western intelligence analysts, is that the
Russians have now cleared the Panjshir Valley to the extent that convoys can
move through it. The Russians, these sources agree, are unlikely ever to
completely pacify Afghanistan.

''No one ever has,'' the Pakistani said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CUOMO HONORS VIETNAM VETERANS

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 42, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: PhotoGovernor Cuomo talking with Vietnam veterans yesterday in Albany,
where he dedicated a monument to New Yorkers killed in that war. A band concert
and fireworks display were

part of the observance, which took place at the Empire State Plaza. United Press
International

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRENDS SIGNAL GREATER THREAT OF CHEMICAL WAR, EXPERTS SAY

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1524 words

DATELINE: GHENT, Belgium, May 25


Experts on chemical weapons from a wide range of countries are concerned that
the danger of chemical warfare breaking out somewhere in the world is increasing
seriously.

More than 150 scientists, analysts, and military officials from 27 countries
came to Belgium this week to attend an international conference on ''new
compounds in biological and chemical warfare,'' sponsored by the Belgian
Government and the State University of Ghent. They were joined by almost 100
Belgian experts.



Indications of Growing Threat


In interviews, speeches and corridor conversations, government and private
experts at the meetings said they were disturbed that chemical weapons appeared
to be spreading, that inhibitions against their use might be crumbling and that
military and commercial interest in chemical warfare equipment appeared to be
climbing.

The unexpectedly high attendance at a conference on such an esoteric subject was
stimulated by the recent use of chemical weapons in the war between Iraq and
Iran, said Dr. Aubin Heyndrickx, the Belgian toxicologist who organized the
conference.

''People got scared about it, and they are right,'' he said in an interview.
''It's a big problem.  ''Any developing nation can make them,'' he said. ''Any
fool can hire a few chemists and get started.''

Gary W. Crocker, a senior analyst for the United States State Department, echoed
the thought adding, ''If this conference were held five years ago, you wouldn't
have had a third as many people here.''

Trends Alarm Experts


About 20 countries either possess or are alleged to possess chemical weapons,
according to unofficial estimates cited here. Over the past several years,
belligerents in more than a dozen conflicts and skirmishes around the world have
charged that chemical weapons were used against them, according to recollections
of the assembled experts.

Although most of these allegations are unsubstantiated, experts here cite two
areas of the world with considerable alarm. They note that, in the war between
Iraq and Iran, a United Nations investigation concluded in March that both
mustard gas and a nerve agent had been dropped in aerial bombs on Iranian soil.

This was the first authoritatively confirmed use of a nerve agent in history and
the first documented, deliberate use of mustard gas since the Italian campaigns
in northern Africa in the 1930's, according to several analysts here.

Allegations of Soviet Use


Many experts also express concern over the voluminous documentation published by
the United States as evidence that the Soviet Union and its allies have been
waging chemical warfare in Laos, Cambodia, and Afghanistan. Although these
charges are not conclusively proved, they are enough to convince many experts
that some form of chemical warfare has been waged in those regions.

''You get the feeling that the chemical threshold has been lowered,'' said Johan
Santesson, head of the chemistry division of the Swedish National Defense
Research Institute.

Vendors of chemical protective gear report that sales are now surging.
Jean-Florent Marc, a sales manager for Chemviron, a Belgian firm that sells
activated carbon for filters in gas masks and shelters, estimates that his
annual sales for such purposes have at least doubled over the past five years.

And Michel Noppe, marketing manager for N. V. Seyntex, a Belgian company that
sells protective equipment against chemical and nuclear attacks, estimates that
the number of big contracts offered by governments has tripled or quintupled
over the past five years. He said that such countries as Denmark, Norway, Saudi
Arabia, Thailand, South Africa and the United States are now or will soon be
seeking equipment.

Personal Protection Kits


Although his company sells primarily to large governmental and industrial
buyers, Mr. Noppe said, it will soon market a complete protection kit for the
individual civilian, a little bag containing a protective suit, gas mask, boots,
decontamination gloves, a chemical detection device and instructions for the
neophyte.

''Attention to chemical warfare is spreading,'' says Julian Perry Robinson, a
British expert from the University of Sussex.

''Military people are talking about it,'' he said. ''Commercial activity is
rising. NATO has been re-equipping itself with chemical equipment. Washington is
desperately keen to go ahead with its binary chemical weapon modernization.

''It's a matter of military fashion,'' Mr. Robinson added. ''The subject is
coming alive again when it's been dead.''

Military and civil defense officials in several nations are increasing their
efforts to prepare for chemical warfare.

American Strategy Changing


In the United States, according to Mr. Crocker of the State Department, the
Vietnam War of the 1960's was fought virtually without gas masks, and chemical
weapons dropped from sight in the 1970's. But then intelligence analysts became
concerned about Soviet chemical weapons and reports of chemical warfare in
southeast Asia, so the Carter Administration and now the Reagan Administration
pushed hard for new chemical weapons and better protection.

The Administration is seeking weapons that would contain two potent chemicals
that are combined before impact. The binary chemical weapons are considered
safer than other types to store and handle because the chemicals are not highly
toxic until combined.

The United States also recently proposed a draft treaty banning chemical
weapons, to be enforced by stringent inspections of suspicious activity.

For the French Army, according to Col. Claude Meyer, head of a chemical and
nuclear warfare section, concern over protecting troops against chemical attacks
has been increasing over the past five years, largely because of chemical
warfare reports in southeast Asia and Afghanistan.

''We tried to explain to people that they must not remain ignorant of the
threat,'' he said. ''Now we have chemical warfare exercises in all our
maneuvers.''

Swedes: Masks for All


In Sweden, which has one of the most advanced programs to defend its population
against chemical attacks, Dr. Santesson said that Parliament, in 1982,
accelerated a national program to provide masks and shelters for all citizens,
largely because of ''growing awareness of the chemical threat.'' Sweden now has
enough gas masks to protect more than half of its eight million people, he said,
and it is producing perhaps 400,000 new gas masks each year.

Anita Meyerhoffer, head of chemical threat analysis for the Sweden's National
Defense Research Institute, said there is concern over the chemical capabilities
of the Soviet bloc and the use of chemical weapons in several developing
nations.

The most overt fears expressed at the conference were from representatives of
developing nations, which saw themselves as potential targets in chemical
warfare. Most experts interviewed said chemical weapons are of limited value
against a sophisticated army well protected with gas masks and special clothing
but can be devastating when used against ragged and unprotected fighters.

Some said reports that Iraq managed to rout a massed Iranian infantry attack
with just a few planes dropping chemical weapons would probably stimulate
interest in using such weapons, whether or not the reports are true.

Danger to the Unprotected


A Yugoslav expert, Zlatko Binenfeld said that ''between the superpowers, the
danger of chemical warfare doesn't exist.''

''They have well-equipped armies with well-protected personnel,'' he said, and
thus feel no urgency to ban chemical weapons.

The real danger, he said, is proliferation of chemical weapons to other nations
and their likely use against unprotected adversaries. With the use of such
weapons in Iran, he said, ''We can say that chemical warfare is a reality and no
longer a fiction.''

M. C. Dutt, director of scientific services for the health ministry in the
Republic of Singapore, said chemical weapons could ''wipe out'' the compact
population under his jurisdiction that might thus serve as ''guinea pigs'' in a
chemical conflict.

He called for collaboration by chemical detection laboratories and health
officials in small countries where ''the spectre of chemical and biological
warfare and their devastation is of special concern.''

Possibility of Spillover


Thailand has a different concern, according to Chana Samudavanija, a retired
major general in the Thai police. It does not fear a direct chemical attack, he
said, but it does fear that Vietnamese chemical attacks on resistance groups in
neighboring Cambodia and Laos might spill over into Thailand and harm villagers
inadvertently.

From the vantage point of Afghan refugees, however, chemical weapons appear a
secondary problem. ''It doesn't matter whether the people of Afghanistan are
killed by lethal gases or bombs or bullets or whatever they use,'' said Aziz
Naim, a resistance leader who spoke here. ''The more important thing is to get
the invading forces out. That is the heart of the matter.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Aurelia Anna Reinhardt Is Wed in Italy

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 67, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 252 words


Aurelia Anna Reinhardt, a daughter of Mrs. G. Frederick Reinhardt of Porto
Ercole, Italy, and the late Mr. Reinhardt, was married yesterday to Antonio
Gebauer, the son of Mr. and Mrs. Eugenio Gebauer of Caracas, Venezuela. The Rev.
William C. Woodhams, retired rector of St. Paul's Within the Walls Episcopal
Church in Rome, performed the ceremony at Mrs. Reinhardt's home.

The bride is a public-relations manager for Schieffelin & Company, wine and
spirit importer in New York. She attended Aiglon College in Villars,
Switzerland, and graduated from Mount Holyoke College. Her father, a career
Foreign Service officer, served as United States Ambassador to Vietnam and
Italy. Mrs. Gebauer is a granddaughter of the late Aurelia Henry Reinhardt,
president of Mills College in Oakland, Calif., from 1916 to 1943, and of the
late Harry King Tootle of Newton, Conn., who was the personnel director of The
New York Times from 1935 to 1947. She is a great-great-granddaughter of
Alexander Campbell of Bethany, W.Va., a founder of the Disciples of Christ
Church and president of Bethany College.

Mr. Gebauer is a senior vice president of the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company of
New York in charge of its Latin American investments. He graduated from the
Colegio La Salle in Caracas and received B.A. and M.B.A. degrees from Columbia
University. His previous marriage ended in divorce. His father, who is retired,
was a director of Cerveceria Caracas and Cerveceria Nacional, breweries in
Venezuela.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

TV VIEW;
JUST WHAT IS THE INFLUENCE OF AN ANCHOR'S INFLUENCE?

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 21, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1015 words


A recent survey by U. S. News & World Report finds that influential Americans
regard Dan Rather of CBS as more influential than almost anyone. In fact, other
than Government officials, Mr. Rather is at the top of the list. When the
influential Americans rated other influential Americans, the first nine people
they chose, beginning with Ronald Reagan, were elected or appointed office
holders. Mr. Rather was No. 10. This was one place in front of Walter Mondale,
seven ahead of Vice President Bush, and a full 19 in front of Henry Kissinger.
The same survey in 1982 placed Mr. Rather 19th, while the one last year put him
12th. Apparently, he is growing in influence, or at least in the perception of
having influence, and while the significance of this is uncertain, one thing is
clear: Mr. Rather is not someone who just gets up and reads the news.

U. S. News & World Report said the respondents in the survey were ''prominent
citizens'' and ''opinion molders'' - ''1,475 leaders in 29 fields.'' One
respondent, quoted in the magazine, said that Mr. Rather ''helps shape what
millions think and worry about,'' and another said that ''people are influenced
by what he says and how he says it.'' There is something to ponder here, and if
you ponder it long enough it will give you a headache. How in the world did a
television reporter get all that influence, and how does he use it, anyway?

On the other hand, we may suppose that Mr. Rather's name on the list is at least
partly symbolic. Tom Brokaw of NBC and Peter Jennings of ABC do not appear on
the list of 30 names, even though they are network anchors, too. John Chancellor
of NBC is not on the list, either, although Mr. Chancellor, as a commentator, is
presumably more in the influence business than is Mr. Rather.



Therefore, in picking Mr. Rather - who attracts larger audiences than the other
network anchors - the 1,475 leaders may have meant him to be something of a
stand-in, representing all the anchors and commentators. At the same time, being
famous is not necessarily the same as being influential, and the 1,475 leaders
may only have been as confused about this as everyone else.

Nonetheless, it is certain that Mr. Rather, in the judgment of his peers, has
influence. He and his television colleagues do not necessarily tell their
audiences how to think, although certainly they tell them what to think about.
If they say something is important, it becomes important. If they say something
is news, it becomes news. Mr. Rather helps determine the national agenda by
picking and choosing the things he will mention on the ''CBS Evening News.''

The tricky part, however, is measuring how Mr. Rather, or any of his colleagues,
go beyond that. When is objective journalism overtaken by interpretation? If
1,475 leaders insist that Mr. Rather has influence, what do they think he is
trying to influence? The Rev. Billy Graham and the Rev. Jerry Falwell are tied
for 24th on the list of the most influential Americans. Mr. Graham exhorts his
television audiences to do good; Mr. Falwell exhorts them to do good and to vote
for conservative Republicans. The point of view there is clear. We know what
they are saying.

We do not always know, however, what a television newscaster is saying, even if
we sense something about the way he is saying it. The feeling is as old as
television news. In 1969, a survey of Congressmen found they regarded David
Brinkley as the ''least fair'' television newscaster of all. Walter Cronkite was
the ''most fair.'' Yet, on the ''CBS Evening News'' the year before, Mr.
Cronkite had made journalistic history by saying that the only ''rational''
solution to Vietnam was ''to negotiate.'' In one night, he went from supposedly
objective anchorman to unofficial Secretary of State. He virtually declared
peace.



Mr. Cronkite, however, sounded sweetly reasonable, and so hardly anyone other
than President Lyndon B. Johnson, and certainly not the Congressmen in the
survey, seemed to mind. Mr. Brinkley, on the other hand, has always sounded
acerbic. His clipped rhythms practically resonate with meaning. Even when he
says something only mildly controversial, his intonations, along with what seems
now to be a growing world-weariness, can make it sound enormously controversial.
For this viewer, a high point of this season's political coverage came on the
night of the Illinois primary. As early as 7 P.M., Mr. Brinkley seemed bored
with the whole thing. ''Despite 50 years of graduate theses,'' he told Mr.
Jennings on ABC, ''a machine, an honest machine, is still the best way to run a
city.''

Mr. Jennings, who looked startled, said nothing. ''You don't agree,'' Mr.
Brinkley said. ''You don't care to agree?'' Mr. Jennings, who was off camera by
now, could be heard laughing weakly. Apparently, he still didn't know what to
say. This viewer treasures the moment, not only because he agreed with Mr.
Brinkley, but also because of Mr. Brinkley's style. You seldom get anything that
spontaneous on the 7 o'clock news shows anymore.

And perhaps there is a clue here as to why the 1,475 leaders decided that Mr.
Rather and not Mr. Brokaw and Mr. Jennings was among our most influential
Americans. In fact, there is less news on the ''CBS Evening News'' than on the
other networks. CBS feature stories have a way of dragging on. Mr. Rather,
however, has an eagerness in his presentation that the other anchors lack. More
so than Mr. Brokaw or Mr. Jennings, he gives the impression that he is on to
something big.

Moreover, when the networks do late-night wrap-ups on big events, political
primaries, say, Mr. Brokaw and Mr. Jennings sit upright in their anchor chairs.
Mr. Rather slumps. Sometimes he seems to be cogitating. He seems to have
something on his mind; he seems to know something we don't know, and we wish
he'd let us in on it. Television is in part illusion; it projects images that
don't necessarily stand up to analysis. Looking at Mr. Rather, we suspect he
must be right on top of things. He appears, at least, like one influential
fellow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
EDITORS' NOTE

Under this heading, The Times amplifies articles or rectifies what the editors
consider significant lapses of fairness, balance or perspective.  The TV View
column on page 21 of the Arts and Leisure section today, discussing the
influence of news anchors, asserts: ''In fact, there is less news on the 'CBS
Evening News' than on the other networks. CBS feature stories have a way of
dragging on.''

In fact, according to spokesmen for CBS and for the Television Information
Office, public- relations arm of the broadcasting industry, the question of news
content on television is subjective. They say it is hard to distinguish a
feature from a news report.

The column should have made clear that its statement was based on personal
observation rather than on a study or statistical evidence.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
STRINDBERG IS MADE SENTIMENTAL, OTHELLO GETS AN UPDATE

BYLINE: By Benedict Nightingale

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1516 words


Pity the writer in search of his second success, marooned as he is between
promise and accomplishment. No doubt even the founder of tragedy was given a
hard time in the Athenian papyri when he ceded the bays to Sophocles in the
Dionysian Festival of 468. ''After the raw power of his smash hit, 'The
Persians,' '' the critics must have grumbled, ''this latest effort by 'Baldy'
Aeschylus, the thrusting new talent from Eleusis, comes as a sad letdown.''
Well, Amlin Gray and Kevin Wade would not, I'm sure, yet claim to be competing
in quite the same league; yet the question that has to be asked of their new
plays isn't essentially different from the one that must have rippled through
that hillside orchestra two-and-a-half millennia ago. How does Mr. Gray's
''Zones of the Spirit'' at Theater for the New City compare with his acidulous
account of a reporter's life in Vietnam, ''How I Got That Story?'' And does
Kevin Wade's ''Mr. and Mrs.'' at WPA fulfill the expectations created by ''Key
Exchange,'' a tale of love among the bicycling classes that proved pretty
successful Off Broadway in 1981?



The subject and inspiration of ''Zones of the Spirit'' is Strindberg, as Mr.
Gray attests in the program with an image borrowed from the dramatist himself:
''His seed has fallen into my brain-pan.'' That cannot have been a very
comfortable happening. Indeed, one can imagine few more unsettling experiences
for any brain-pan than to have Strindberg sprouting in all directions somewhere
inside. The history of effective drama and interesting biography alike is a
history of ambiguity, contradiction; but never can so many opposites have been
crammed into one creative life as into that of the bug-eyed Swede.

He believed women's function was to rock the cradle and tend the hearth; and he
proceeded to marry three women with independent spirits and careers to pursue.
He hated the sex, he worshipped the sex. He wanted to be master, he wanted to be
child. He was a socialist, he was a follower of Nietzsche. He was an atheist, he
was a deist. He took up Satanism, camouflaging himself with a cloak and a
Mephistopholean beard; he went into a monastery, to discover God's plans for
him. He became a serious scientist, publishing the results of his experiments in
journals of standing; he became an alchemist, blending iron and copper to make
gold. He was awesomely perceptive, he was frighteningly paranoid. Stylistically
he was the bleakest of naturalists, and the most daring of expressionists. So
one might go on; but the profile is surely giddying enough.

It certainly creates problems for a dramatist who seeks to bring Strindberg
himself onstage, as Mr. Gray does in slightly disguised form midway through the
second and longer of the two plays that constitute ''Zones of the Spirit.'' How
to trim that human jungle so as to make it theatrically manageable yet still
authentically chaotic? Well, at Theater for the New City we're confronted with
the cluttered back room of a dive rather similar to Zum Schwarzen Ferkel, where
Strindberg reveled and held court during his Berlin days. Here Ossian Borg, as
the dramatist has been rechristened, once drank absinthe and penned an
autobiographical novel not unlike ''Son of a Servant.'' Now a young artist
brings the great man's wife, whose acquaintance he's innocently remade at an
exhibition, on a sentimental visit to her husband's old haunt. At this the
landlord, knowing his jealous temperament and hoping to exploit it,
surreptitiously sends for Borg; and in the dramatist stalks, hair flowing,
moustache quivering, eyes glaring at what seems to him a compromising situation,
in James Pickering's performance a brusquely authoritative reincarnation of
Strindberg himself.

There turn out to be similarities large and small between facsimile and
prototype. Ossian, like Strindberg, is easily disgusted by everyday animal
functions, notably eating. He, too, is sexually very envious indeed, and equally
unscrupulous with the facts when it comes to expressing that envy either in
person or on paper. The Ossian who talks of art ''scything all before it into
severed limbs and torsos'' isn't unlike the Strindberg who lovingly crucified
his first wife in ''A Fool's Defense,'' the one who admitted to using her ''as a
rabbit for vivisection'' and ''flaying my friends and offering their skins for
sale.'' But there are revealing differences, too. Though Strindberg may have
disliked his wives' independence, he did much to advance their careers, and
certainly didn't expect them to renounce their public as well as their private
lives for him, as Mr. Gray's Ossian has apparently done. And though he did
occasionally drink absinthe, he was very far from using it to lift his natural
suspicion and anger into the visionary virulence of his art. His imagination was
quite strong and poisonous enough to achieve that by itself.

Gradually, one begins to wonder if Mr. Gray is not only simplifying Strindberg,
which is probably inevitable, but cheapening him as well. Certainly, some of the
language put into the mouths of the principals doesn't inspire trust: ''I know
I've come here looking for my husband - I also suspect I'm looking for myself.''
''You've told me too much - and nothing at all.'' The playwright's wife has a
weakness for ponderous iambics, the playwright himself goes in for vaguely
braggadocio rhetoric (''I'll have your last remaining twitch of life if you
don't quit my sight''), and both seem positively to prefer lines that smack more
of the theater than of life. By the time we reach the end - with Ossian,
eyeballs now about to catapult into orbit, girding himself to lacerate his wife
with all the flamboyant shamelessness he can muster - little if anything about
the character seems real. Mr.Gray's play has become an act of callow homage to a
romantic fantasy, a fantasy he has presumptuously identified with Strindberg and
is using to give specious authority to some pretty sensational views of
creativity, art and the artist.

The first half of ''Zones of the Spirit'' is roughly derived from Strindberg's
''Scapegoat,'' a novella that took its title from its protagonist, a
well-meaning but much- misused small-town lawyer. However, Mr. Gray pushes this
character so far into the sidelines that we're bound to wonder why he bothered
to introduce him at all. Instead, he gives us a tale of angst and alchemy,
involving a megalomaniac restaurateur less important in the original but also
more like Strindberg himself. I was intrigued for a time, then irritated by the
implausibility and dramatic awkwardness, and finally, I fear, inclined to wonder
if Mr. Gray shouldn't go gardening in his brain-pan. The sooner that seed of
Strindberg's is dug up, and Mr. Gray launches into a new play all his own, the
better it may be for everyone.

Kevin Wade is a less ambitious and, let's admit, a less interesting writer than
Amlin Gray; but he seems increasingly in command of his subject, which is the
possibility of permanent love in a society dedicated to lovelessness and
impermanence, and ''Mr. and Mrs.'' is as much an advance on ''Key Exchange'' as
''Zones of the Spirit'' is a disappointment after ''How I Got That Story.'' It's
the Othello story rendered comic, or at least a lot less scathing, by being
transferred to sophisticated New York. A painter called Sam is about to marry a
TV anchorwoman called Blake. But his best man Jake secretly covets the
wife-to-be. So he gives Sam a tape, in which she's supposedly making more than
merry with a star baseball player. Like Iago, Jake claims to do what he does
''because I'm your friend,'' and, again like Iago, he needles that friend by
pretending to believe in the woman's innocence: ''I'm sure there's a large
margin here for interpretation.'' The increasingly glum looks palely exuding
from Peter Friedman's Sam shows that the venom is doing its work, or at least as
much work as such venom can be expected to do in a permissive climate, such as
our own.

Mr. Wade is hardly the pluckiest, profoundest or most Strindbergian of writers.
In fact, he could be accused of dodging the issues he raises. His Iago is safely
rumbled well before the wedding, so we never discover how much damage he might
have done, and a pat, upbeat ending takes at least temporary care of another
threat to Sam's marriage and peace of mind, the claims of Blake's career. Yet to
accuse him or his characters of superficiality may be to miss the point, which
is that he, they and we inhabit a world that encourages superficiality. What
hope for commitment, still less monogamy, when sexual predators are all around,
fidelity counts for so little that a husband-to-be isn't altogether sure he has
cause for grievance when his fiancee betrays him just before their marriage, and
a bride may be whisked from her wedding reception by the exigencies of work? Mr.
Wade's brittle, defensive, mocking, funny dialogue may not penetrate very far
into his characters' psyches, or reveal very much of their hearts. But it tells
a truth about contemporary life.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MIKE NICHOLS: THE SPECIAL RISKS AND REWARDS OF THE DIRECTOR'S ART

BYLINE: By Barbara Gelb; Barbara Gelb, co-author of ''O'Neill,'' a biography of
the playwright, is a regular contributor to this magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 20, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 8091 words


IKE NICHOLS SIT ERECT, ARMS FOLDED, at a trestle table in a large-windowed,
bare- floored rehearsal room, where he is directing a new play by David Rabe.
Rabe sits slumped in a chair nearby, ready to leap protectively to the defense
of any seeming slight to his precious words.  The actors clutch their scripts -
insecure, groping, desperate to please - watching Nichols for a sign of
approval. Nichols, who is in a position more or less to have his pick of scripts
and stars, has experienced both the joys of taking creative chances and the
pitfalls of playing safe. He has been nominated for an Antoinette Perry Award
for his direction of Tom Stoppard's ''The Real Thing;'' if he wins next Sunday,
it will be his sixth Tony. And now - as he intermittently feels compelled to do
- he has chosen to try a risky play.

While Nichols made a success of an earlier Rabe play, ''Streamers,'' in 1976, he
is scared of Rabe's new play, ''Hurlyburly.'' He knew exactly how he wanted to
stage ''Streamers'': in a quiet, unoperatic style that made its theme of cruelty
and violence doubly compelling.

But though Nichols is drawn instinctively to ''Hurlyburly,'' much as a lover
struck by passion, he finds it somewhat elusive and mysterious. And Rabe, who
writes from his unconscious, is not much help in explicating the motivations of
his own characters.


Nichols is searching, as always, for what he calls, with emphasis, the ''Event''
- the truthful moment or series of moments - that will illuminate the author's
meaning, that will reveal ''real people living their lives.''

It is a search that was inspired years ago, before Nichols had any thought of a
career in the theater, when, at the age of 16, he attended the Elia Kazan
production of Tennessee Williams's ''A Streetcar Named Desire.'' He remembers
scenes from that production, he says, as well as or better than things that
happened in his own life - ''the scene between Blanche and Mitch, where he
invited her to punch his stomach; the later scene where Mitch said, 'You're not
good enough to bring home to my mother,' and Blanche said, 'Get out of here
before I start screaming fire,' and she started to scream, and Mitch was
terrified.''

''What startled me so,'' Nichols says, ''was that these people, although they
were heightened and theatrical, were, simultaneously, in the course of real
lives. I didn't understand what it was. I was mystified and excited.

''Later, when I had begun acting with the Playwrights Theater in Chicago, I saw
other plays Kazan directed - 'Tea and Sympathy' was one - and I realized that we
were just saying lines, and rather badly, while those actors in the Kazan
productions were somehow conveying life.''

Analyzing the invisible process by which Kazan created this sense of immediacy,
Nichols realized it consisted of ''getting the actor to physically express what
the author, in his dialogue, gives only clues to.''

NICHOLS NIBBLES ON A BRAN MUFFIN, SIPS coffee, chain smokes (without inhaling)
and nods encouragingly to William Hurt and Sigourney Weaver, who are about to
rehearse a love scene. She is playing Darlene, a rootless woman, bruised by
life, who has a vague career as a photographer. He is playing Eddie, a
marginally successful Hollywood casting director with a drug
habit.''Hurlyburly,'' which is scheduled to open Off Broadway at the Promenade
Theater on June 21, is in an early phase of rehearsal and the two young actors,
though they have practiced the love scene a few times, are still feeling their
way into their roles, improvising.  ''Eddie and Darlene are talking about how
it's lucky they didn't meet a year ago,'' Nichols explains, ''Because, Darlene
says, 'A year ago I was crazy.' And Eddie says, 'Oh, a year ago I was nuts.'
Then she says they have to keep their hearts open, and he says they need time
and space and no guilts. It's sort of like incantation.''

Rabe's dialogue for the scene gives no hint of any accompanying action, and
Eddie and Darlene could be sitting across a table from each other during their
exchange. But Nichols wants to find a way to ''physicalize'' the ''underneath,''
as his observation of Kazan taught him to do, ''so that the cliches are heard in
stronger contrast.'' And he has found his clue in the last line of the scene, a
ribald - and in a family newspaper unprintable - suggestion from Eddie to
Darlene that they immediately consummate their relationship.

''I felt that what would make the Event of the scene - the joke, or the irony -
clearest, would be to have them - while they're in the midst of these cliches
about space and open hearts and no guilts - be undressing each other and
beginning to make love.''

Sigourney Weaver slithers into William Hurt's lap, straddling him. Hurt,
slouched into the sofa, begins fondling her. She pulls her sweater off.

''Once I'd decided it would be a good idea for them to partly undress each other
and themselves, Sigourney said she wanted Darlene to be quite aggressive,''
Nichols says. ''It was her idea to straddle Bill. And I said, well, if she was
going to do that - and I liked it very much - why not do it on the line, 'I'm
scared'?

''At one point, Eddie says, 'We need time.' And Darlene says, 'There's no rush'
- whipping off her belt.''

In the actor's lap, the actress unbuckles her belt and flings it away.

''We worked it out very carefully,'' Nichols says, watching approvingly.

Weaver kicks off a boot. Hurt tugs off her other boot. In one swift motion,
Weaver zips down her dress, wriggles out of it and drops it on the floor behind
her. She finally is wearing nothing but silk panties and a thin, clinging, pink
knit camisole.

Hurt hastily pulls open the buttons of his shirt and shrugs out of the sleeves,
as Weaver yanks her camisole over her head and tosses it into the air. Naked
from the waist up, the two embrace fervidly.

Nichols smiles with delight at his own handiwork and at his actors'
adventurousness.

Sigourney Weaver is getting dressed. Moved by her daring, William Hurt says
quietly, ''You're very brave.''

''You're brave, too,'' Nichols tells the actor, smiling one of his ferociously
protective smiles. He ponders. ''Leave it alone, now,'' he says, ''get used to
it, don't lose what you have. We don't need to lock it into one thing yet.''

All of Nichols's comments are made after visible deliberation and they are made
equably, even modestly. ''Here's what I think,'' he says, prefacing a piece of
direction, or ''Why don't we try this?'' And then, ''Does it seem right to you
?'' He is equally demure when describing his work.  ''It seems to me,'' he says,
and ''I guess what I was trying to do was . . . .''

AFTER A RECENT SLUMP IN HIS OTHERWISE highly successful 21-year career as a
director, Nichols has arrived at a new plateau of professional recognition, and
he is as much in his element as an acrobat on the high wire: challenged,
exhilarated, sure-footed. Last December saw the release of his movie
''Silkwood,'' for which he received his third Academy Award nomination. (He was
also nominated for his 1966 production of ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?''
and he won an Oscar for his direction of ''The Graduate'' in 1967). ''Silkwood''
was followed a month later by the hit Broadway production of ''The Real Thing,''
To watch Nichols at work is to perceive something about the making of a play
that will never be discerned by its audience. To hear him talk about his work,
as he did recently in full candor, is to perceive a good deal about the making
of a director and the sources of his creativity - in Nichols's case, a blend of
life experiences that he applies to every project, whether a genial comedy, like
''The Odd Couple,'' or a tragicomedy, like ''Hurlyburly.''

The blend consists of that early, awestruck analysis of Elia Kazan's directorial
technique; the assurance gained from years as a performer of improvisational
comedy with his partner, Elaine May (box on page 42); lessons learned from
classes with the renowned teacher Lee Strasberg; the gift, as Nichols describes
it, of ''having been lucky enough to be born with an ear for comedy''; and
finally - what is uniquely his own - an ability to draw upon his personal
suffering to flesh out (and hold up to fond ridicule) the characters of whatever
play or movie he happens to have fallen in love with.

''I have two kinds of affirmative responses,'' Nichols says. ''One is, 'Yes,
this will work,' as I felt about 'Streamers' and - more recently - 'The Real
Thing' the minute I read it, long before seeing the London production. The other
is, 'Let's give it a try' - as I felt with 'Hurlyburly.' '' Like nearly
everything Nichols has directed, ''Hurlyburly'' is about sad and frightened
people, self-pitying people unable to accomplish that most difficult of tasks,
growing up. It is about people who say one thing and mean another and - more
broadly - about comedy as an antidote to self- pity, which is at the core of
Nichols's own Weltanschauung.

The play is set in Los Angeles, where Rabe has spent several years writing
movies. While Nichols loves the play, he assumes that it will - at least to
begin with - have a special and limited audience. The Chicago production might
be considered a workshop, remote from Broadway critics.

Rabe, who is present at all rehearsals, is perfectly frank about leaving the
discoveries of his characters' motivations to Nichols and the actors.

''After a while,'' Rabe says, ''you realize they'll come up with better ways of
playing the lines than you could have thought of. Stage directions get in my
way. I see them in my mind, but I see no point in putting them into the script.
I fly very blind when I write. The less I know, the better off I am. If Mike
takes on a play, he knows how to do it. The thing about Mike is that even when
his advice to his actors turns out to be wrong, it's always clear.''

Nichols often makes things clear for his actors by illustrating bits of
motivation with incidents from his own life. ''Partly, I do this because it's
all I know, and partly because I very much want to encourage them to pour their
lives into what they're doing. I believe that the process can illuminate a scene
and it also lets us learn a little more about each other, so that we can work
together a little better.''

In a scene, for example, where Eddie manifests blind jealousy over a fancied
betrayal by Darlene, and Sigourney Weaver is at a loss how to react, Nichols
asks her, ''Have you ever been with an insanely jealous person?'' He is thinking
of a year in his own life, and just such a relationship.

''I know a great deal about that kind of jealousy,'' he says. ''If, for
instance, we were watching a movie together and there was a woman on the screen,
I had to sit very, very still, or I would be excoriated for a long time
afterward. It was a scalding experience, and I learned from it that jealousy is
entirely the problem of the person undergoing it, and it's not really attached
to you at all.''

And he gives the actress a startling image to think about: ''Being with an
insanely jealous person is like being in the room with a dead mammoth.''

There are other aspects of ''Hurlyburly'' that Nichols can readily illuminate
from his own life - aspects that spoke to him instantly when he read the script.

''The play is about men fixated at the buddy level,'' Nichols says, ''about the
early adolescent attitude toward sex and toward women as objects to be traded.''
Nichols himself has been twice divorced and frequently in and out of love
affairs. He has become expert at staging lopsided, misbegotten love scenes, and
he manages to see even the craft of directing as analogous to sex.

''You never see anybody else doing it,'' he says, meaning both directing and
sex. ''You're never sure you're doing it right.'' He chuckles. ''I mean,
everybody's always very polite about it when you ask'' - a woman about sex, an
actor about directing. Nichols speaks in the measured, somewhat nasal tones
familiar to audiences of two decades ago, who relished the comic routines he
improvised with Elaine May. And he still, quite often, lapses into mimicry.

'' 'Yes, yes, this is the way it's done,' they say. 'Don't worry.' 'Are you sure
?' you say. 'Is this the way other people do it?' ''

In fact, though, Nichols seems unconcerned whether other directors use the
personal approach he favors. He will continue to reveal himself, thereby
encouraging his actors to be revealing. ''It seems to me a very important aspect
of rehearsal,'' he says.


Nichols continued to work on the ''Hurlyburly'' love scene during the following
weeks, making minor refinements in collaboration with his actors. (Darlene would
become even more aggressive and would unbutton Eddie's shirt for him; she would,
herself, take off both of her boots.)

He keeps at it until he has exactly what he wants - just as he did in the case
of a memorable scene in Murray Schisgal's ''Luv,'' which won for Nichols the
1965 Tony award. A scene opened with the character played by Anne Jackson seated
on a park bench, complaining to her husband, played by Alan Arkin, seated by her
side, that their marriage was a failure. Arkin, with wounded but naive
disbelief, replied: ''Our marriage a failure?'' The line was meant to get a
laugh, but it didn't play funny enough to suit Nichols during rehearsals, until
he hit on the idea of opening the dialogue with Arkin sitting in Anne Jackson's
lap. At that point, it became perhaps the funniest line in the play.

Nichols has been combing scripts for Events he can ''physicalize'' ever since
1963, when he directed his first Broadway play, Neil Simon's ''Barefoot in the
Park,'' for which he won his first Tony. He is relentless in his efforts to
convey what the author - in Nichols's view - intends to be ''really going on.''
His ability to ''get the actor to physically express what the author gives only
clues to'' so endeared Nichols to Simon that Simon asked him to direct three
more of his plays - ''The Odd Couple,'' ''Plaza Suite'' and ''The Prisoner of
Second Avenue.''

''Mike takes you so into the play,'' says Simon. ''You forget you're in the
theater. He made the big fight scene in 'Barefoot' between Robert Redford and
Elizabeth Ashley so real, I said to him, 'Let's get out of here, this is too
personal.' ''

''It's funny,'' Nichols says, ''but when we were doing 'Barefoot,' I was newly
married, like the couple in the play.'' (The marriage was to his second wife.)
That was when he began to use personal revelation to enhance his actors's
consciousness. ''The play was all about my marriage and honeymoon and the fights
we had. And I told the actors about it,'' he says.

And then, he says, it was just a question of building each scene carefully, bit
by bit, as he first learned to do when he studied acting with Lee Strasberg.
Then in his early 20's, he had no thought of becoming a director, but, he says,
''in a way, it was the most important lesson I could have had.''

In class, Nichols watched two fellow students perform a love scene. Strasberg,
as Nichols recalls it, asked the young woman what she was concentrating on to
produce the required emotion. She answered, ''Oh, you know, the spring, and,
well, the longing, and loving him . . . .'' And Strasberg asked, ''Do you know
how to make fruit salad?'' She said she did. And Strasberg said, ''Tell me how
you make it.''

''You want me to tell you, here in class, how I make fruit salad?'' And
Strasberg replied, ''Yes, please.'' ''You mean it?'' she said. He assured her he
did.

''O.K.,'' she said, ''I take an apple and I peel it and I cut it into pieces.
And I take a banana and I peel it and cut it into slices. Then I peel an orange
and cut it into slices. Maybe I take a few cherries and pit them and cut them
into slices. And then I mix it all together.''

Strasberg said, ''That's right, that's how you make fruit salad. And until you
pick up each piece of fruit, one at a time, peel it, and cut it into slices, you
don't have fruit salad. You can run over the fruit with a steam roller, but you
won't have fruit salad. Or you can sit in front of the fruit all night, saying,
'O.K., fruit salad!' Nothing will happen, though, until you pick up each piece
and peel it and cut it up.''

That lesson, says Nichols, was ''the most useful metaphor I've heard, then or
since, for working on a play. You do the first job as neatly as you can: She
comes in. Then you do the next job: He sees her. And so on. It's an
extraordinarily useful lesson.''

When stage or movie characters cut up fruit salad under Nichols's direction,
someone - metaphorically speaking - usually slips on a banana peel. What's more,
if Nichols can possibly manage it, the character will end up laughing at his own
absurdity.

The mechanics of the joke, however, will remain hidden. ''You're not meant to
say, 'Oh, look what the actors are doing!' '' Nichols says. The audience is
meant to laugh, but not to see the director's efforts. Nichols is simply
describing the care every craftsman takes to prevent the seams from showing.

In movies as in plays, once Nichols finds the physical means to express
motivation, he buries them, ''either in laughter or development - so they don't
stand out as a signal from the director saying, 'Get it? Get it?' ''

He cites, as an example, the Event in ''The Graduate'' that leads to the scene
in which Dustin Hoffman, as Ben, finally capitulates to Anne Bancroft, as Mrs.
Robinson. This capitulation scene (Ben finally slipping on the banana peel) is
very calculatedly preceded by the farcical business in which Ben's parents make
him try out their gift of an underwater diving suit.

''It's such an Event,'' Nichols says, ''that not only does he have to try the
equipment on, which isolates him from everybody completely - he can't hear, he
can barely move - but then he has to get in the water. You see it all from his
point of view.

''And the parents continually push him under, and smile, and keep pushing him
under. And then he just sits at the bottom of the pool, not knowing what to do.

''And from this, directly, comes his decision to call Mrs. Robinson; it's to
free himself from his suffocating parents. While you are underwater with him, in
the diving suit, you hear Mrs. Robinson say 'Hello?' on the phone. And in the
next shot Ben is in a phone booth speaking to her, asking if she'd like to meet
him at the hotel, and she says she'll be there in 15 minutes. It's cause and
effect.'' Nichols does not try to restrain his delighted chuckle.

He laughs a lot, as befits a man who has made his reputation on comedy, and his
laughter is winning. But his smile is strange. Even when he appears to be at his
most sanguine, it stretches his face in a grimace that seems almost pained. It's
a smile that takes getting used to, but after a while nuances can be discerned:
Smiles of amusement or delight - even of near-beautitude - give way to smiles of
rue, of anxiety - even of exasperation. At 52, he has grown a trifle jowly, and
the pale, elfin good looks of the old Nichols-May days on television have been
replaced by a ruddier and more Jovian visage. Yet he affects a boyish manner of
dress, more Beverly Hills than Park Avenue; the well-cut jeans, low boots and
supple, caramel-colored suede pull-on that he wears to rehearsal suggest Rodeo
Drive.

Having worked in movies almost as long as he has been directing in the theater,
Nichols is firm about what will be effective as a film and what will not. ''It's
a very rare play that can really become a movie,'' he says. ''A movie, to a
large extent, focuses on who is experiencing any given moment, which character's
experience is it? In a movie, the camera has to choose one person. That's one of
the crucial differences.''

Jules Feiffer wrote ''Carnal Knowledge'' as a play and sent it to Nichols.
''Twenty-four hours later,'' says Feiffer, ''Mike called me and said, 'I think
it's a movie.' ''

''It seemed to me,'' Nichols says, ''it had to do with the expression in
people's eyes. I wanted to be very close to them, especially to the men, when
they did these monologues about how often they did or did not have sex. Because
it seemed to me that the despair at being trapped in this macho role could best
be expressed when you were right into those faces.''

But according to Feiffer, Nichols had a moment of panicky doubt before shooting
the bawdy and brutal bedroom scene between Jack Nicholson and Ann-Margret. ''I'm
afraid of it, audiences will hate it,'' Nichols told Feiffer.

''The behavior was so vicious on the part of the Nicholson character, I was
worried that the audience would just reject him permanently,'' Nichols says.
''And there was my fear that Ann-Margret didn't have the experience to sustain
such a long, emotional scene; she is supremely talented, but up to that point,
she hadn't done anything that demanding. It took us time to find the way for her
to approach that scene.

''We tried it first after giving her a few drinks, but that just pulled the
timing apart,'' Nichols recalls. ''So the next day she was sober, and it worked.
Jack has a great gift for going, without fear, to the middle of a role and
taking us all with him - without considering whether he'll be liked or disliked.
What he did became, finally, very touching. Because it was a scene of hatred and
rage, I shot first Ann-Margret, then Jack - individually - as a way to express
their separation.''

Such a specific focus is seldom either possible or desirable in a play, Nichols
maintains. ''In a play, each Event consists of all the characters'
participation. That's one of the problems with Chekhov on film. You're looking
at a group of people, and you know that A is in love with B, and B is in love
with C, and C is about to commit suicide.

''And the pain and fascination is that while you know all these things about all
of them, they know only a few things about the situation. A knows he loves B,
but he doesn't know that B loves C; and B, who knows she loves C, doesn't know
that C is about to commit suicide. And so there's great tension and emotion in
watching these people sitting around a samovar drinking tea. You're seeing them
all at the same time, as in life. But if you have to see them, one at a time,
through the eye of the camera, it's a different kind of experience.''

If there is a gaping difference in the way a director selects and creates a
movie and the way he chooses and brings life to a play, there is an even wider
chasm between the social roles of the film director and the stage director. For
Nichols, directing a film can be psychologically threatening, which may account
in part for the eight- year hiatus between ''Silkwood'' and his failed 1975
film, ''The Fortune.''

Buried within Nichols - by his own admission - is a demon infant, which he calls
his ''baby portion,'' and which, during much of his life, he has been trying to
exorcise. When making a movie, Nichols says, ''certain socially hierarchical
things happen'' that threaten to release the demon.

''On a movie, the director is king, there's no question about it,'' Nichols
says. ''It's one of the things that can be lots of fun. And although it's fun,
and helps sometimes with the work - you can, for instance, keep the producer off
the set - it can lead to things that are spiritually not very good for you.'' He
laughs.

''Pretty soon there are a lot of people saying'' - Nichols slips into a
mock-officious voice - '' 'He wants his banana at 4.' And, of course, you don't
want the banana at 4, somebody made that up. And then there's somebody else who
says'' - adopting a brisk, confident voice - '' 'Oh, no-no-no, he never sits on
that side of the camera, he always has his chair on the left side of the camera,
do what I'm telling you.' '' They are catering to the baby-as-king.

''This comes with the territory, unless you dismantle it. And I do have to
dismantle it completely to be able to work. I mean, it's perfectly all right to
have somebody bring me a sandwich while I'm shooting or rehearsing, as they do
the actors and the cameraman. I'm not saying that I need to live a life of great
austerity, because I don't.'' Clearly not. Nichols's material possessions are
considerable: A two-bedroom co-op tower apartment in a chic, Upper East Side
hotel; a handsomely renovated brownstone that houses his suite of offices; a
Colonial farmhouse surrounded by 60 acres in Connecticut, where he spends
weekends and summers; a 375-acre ranch in California, where he raises Arabian
horses.

''I had a long time of poverty,'' Nichols says. ''It's not that painful when
you're young, but still . . . . My mother had to take jobs in a bakery, in book
shops. And then, in college, where I went on a scholarship, I had to work my way
through in weird jobs like night janitor in a nursery, and driving a delivery
truck for the Post Office during the Christmas season. I never once delivered a
package; I could never find the address.''

Everything about Nichols today bespeaks his expensive taste and the means to
gratify it - his clothes, the Picasso and Matisse on the walls of his apartment,
the soft leather upholstery of his chauffeur-driven Mercedes. He co-produces all
of his plays and films and his earnings are legendary. He has, to date, made
over $2 million just on ''Annie'' - a musical he produced, but did not direct -
and he is currently earning $22,000 a week from ''The Real Thing.''

''Having fame is wonderful,'' Nichols says, if you can control its tendency ''to
make you feel like a baby.''

The struggle with his baby feelings was at its most pronounced during Nichols's
years as a performer, when, he says, his vanity all too often would take over
and cause him to behave petulantly. ''It's - you know - 'I don't like the way
the ads look,' or, 'One of the lights is out, I'm not being lit properly.' As a
director, those things concern me for the project, not for me. When you're
worried about it for you, that's something I'm very uncomfortable with.''

Characteristically, Nichols dealt with the discomfort by parodying it (and
himself). One of the funniest sketches in the Nichols-May repertory, originated
in 1957 for the Blue Angel nightclub in New York, was a telephone conversation
between a possessive mother and her rocket-engineer son.

The mother (Elaine May) whining to her son: ''You were supposed to call me
Friday. I sat by that phone all day Friday . . . all day Saturday . . . . Your
father said to me, 'Phyllis, eat something, you'll faint.' I said, 'No, Harry,
no, I don't want my mouth to be full when my son calls me.'

The son (Nichols) reflexively guilty: ''Mother, I was sending up Vanguard, I
didn't have a second. . . . Mother, please don't worry.''

And so on, the mother ladling out guilt and syrupy love in equal measure, until
at last she is cooing: ''You're my baby . . . and no matter how old you get . .
. even when you're 80 . . . you're gonna be my baby . . . So is it so hard to
pick up a phone and call your Mommy, pu-leese?'' By this time, the son has
reverted, all too happily, to infancy, and is answering in babytalk, practically
drooling down his chin: ''I wuv you, Mommy, goo-bye, Mommy-nonnie-noonie . . .
.''

''I learned two things from improvising that turned out to be invaluable in
directing,'' Nichols says. ''One was to be confident with an audience. Being in
front of an audience every night for three or four hours, you learned to think,
'I can take care of you guys.' '' (Part of the routine was to take requests from
the audience for a subject, around which to improvise.)

''But most of all,'' Nichols says, ''you learned to damn well pick something
that would happen in the scene - an Event. Elaine used to say, 'When in doubt,
seduce.' So that if we had to do a scene about a laundromat, for instance, one
of us would try to seduce the other. That's one possibility.

''Another was to have a fight, because, as we all know, conflict leads to a
scene. As long as something is happening, you can continue to improvise -
otherwise it's just chitchat.''

With that lesson ingrained, Nichols learned to approach each scene of a play
with the question: What's happening?  ''All this,'' he says, ''became extremely
useful in plays and movies, in terms of expressing the unstated.''

While he learned from performing, Nichols says he never took it seriously as a
career, even when he and Elaine May were making what seemed to them ''a fortune
'' at the Blue Angel. ''We thought this was a great gag and we could keep doing
this until we grew up and started our real jobs. We never took it as our actual
lives.''

It wasn't until he became a director, Nichols says, that he began to outgrow the
baby. It was the producer Saint Subber who offered Nichols ''Barefoot in the
Park.'' Nichols recalls saying to himself, '' 'Well, let's try, let's see if I
can do it.' And from the first hour of the first day I was home. Instantly, I
knew that's what I could do. And I'd never thought of it or planned it. But I
felt adult for the first time. This was a grown-up job.''

Nichols, who has been in and out of analysis, has given the subject of
maturation some serious thought. The process of directing makes him feel grown
up because, he says, ''It is in some ways like being an ideal parent.''

''Kurt Russell and Cher called me 'Dad' while we were shooting 'Silkwood,' ''
Nichols says proudly. ''And they still call me 'Dad.' Kurt gave me an award at
the end of the picture - 'to the all- around best Jewish Dad.' ''

Jeremy Irons, the star of ''The Real Thing,'' uses a different image to express
a similar sentiment. ''Mike creates a very protective environment,'' he says.
''He's like the best of lovers; he makes you feel he's only for you.''

It is evident that this rapport with actors is of profound importance to
Nichols.

''I know,'' he says, ''that an actor needs, above everything, to be able to
trust someone, because of the necessity to call on deep and sometimes
frightening feelings. He needs someone to say, 'That's O.K., you're safe,
nothing bad will happen from exploring those feelings. No, you're not making a
fool of yourself' - or, 'Yes, you are making a fool of yourself in the best
possible way.'

''I think the role of director satisfies me partly because I am creating a
father that I miss. The great thing about playing an adult role, a father's
role, is that it reassures you as well. It doesn't matter what end of the Event
you're on, as long as it's taking place.''

Nichols, in fact, lost his father at the vulnerable age of 12. Born Michael Igor
Peschkowsky in Berlin in 1931, his life was shadowed virtually from infancy. His
father, a physician, had left Russia during the 1917 revolution for Germany,
where he met his future wife, the daughter of Jewish intellectuals. With the
rise of Hitler, Dr. Peschkowsky departed for the United States, where he
requalified as a physician and assumed the name Nichols, an Anglicization of his
patronymic, Nicholaiyevitch.

Nichols, 7 years old, and his younger brother were sent for - their mother being
too ill to travel - and Nichols remembers that when he stepped off the Bremen in
New York into his father's custody on May 4, 1939, he saw a delicatessen bearing
a Hebrew sign and asked, in wonder, ''Is that allowed here?''

At 10, he was banished to boarding school. His mother, who had joined the family
by then, was still ailing and not strong enough to care for two active boys.

''My parents had a lot to cope with,'' he says. ''It was hard for my them to
have a fresh little kid around, which is what I was.'' But Nichols felt unwanted
and lost at school. ''I was quietly unhappy,'' he says. ''I felt strange and
solitary. I didn't fit.''

The sense of strangeness was compounded by his appearance. Nichols had lost his
hair at the age of 4, and at school he was a natural target for bullying and
derision.

''It was a reaction to a shot I got for whooping cough - it was rare, but it
happens sometimes,'' Nichols says. ''Everyone who went to school with me
remembers. I was that little bald kid.'' He was as much remembered for his sense
of humor as for his baldness. If he suffered inwardly, his defense was to be
funny. He learned to laugh to save his life, in that special way that is part of
the Jewish heritage, laughing through tears - what in Yiddish is called lachen
mit yashcherkes.

After his father's death from leukemia, Nichols's schooling continued to be
financed by scholarships and he always held part-time jobs, but he was often
extravagant and his mother frequently helped him financially. He was both
grateful and guilty.

''Oh, I suffered,'' Nichols says, when pressed. ''And when I got to college I
went to a shrink and got shrunk for free, in the way you could in those days.
And I began to think, 'Yes, I had a tough childhood, I had all those problems -
but enough already! Let's get on with my life, let's start now.'

''And then, the miracle of college. Everything was wide open, everybody was
strange at the University of Chicago! It was Paradise! I began to see there was
a world that I could fit in. I was happy and neurotic. I found people who read
the things I read - Yeats, O'Neill, E. M. Forster, Dostoevski - people who liked
to stay up all night talking.''

Nichols's gift for comic exaggeration is a heritage from his Russian father.
''Being funny is inborn,'' he says. ''Sol Hurok, who was a patient of my
father's, once said to me, 'My boy, you're not as funny as your father was.' My
father could rage, but he also told very funny stories and he used to dance for
us in his underwear.'' His father, Nichols says, helped him to understand the
men in ''Uncle Vanya,'' which he staged in 1973.

''Vanya and Astrov were both like my father,'' Nichols says. ''Conversation was
their entertainment. Even Vanya's kvetching was entertainment. And Astrov's
'save-the-trees' routine was a number he did, to get women.''

''Uncle Vanya'' is the only classic that Nichols has ever staged. ''I want to do
'The Three Sisters' and there are certain Shakespeare plays I think about
doing,'' he says. ''What slows me is that in order to do a play - or a movie - I
have to feel I'm the best guy on earth to direct it. I have to feel I have some
insights into its secrets.''

That was the case with ''Streamers,'' the most successful serious play Nichols
has directed.

'' 'Streamers,' it seemed to me, was less about Vietnam than a metaphor for
Vietnam,'' he says.

''I wanted it to be shocking, in the way cruelty and violence and pain are
shocking in life, in a kind of uninflected, unmelodramatic way. Because it seems
to me that the really terrible things, when they come in real life, are quite
flat and ordinary. It's part of their horror. And you never have any preparation
for them. The emblem of 'Streamers,' to me, was the moment when Carlyle, the
black soldier, stabs one of the sergeants. The sergeant has cut his hand,
breaking a bottle of beer to defend himself. He's looking at his hand, and
Carlyle stabs him - walks up to him and stabs him. And the sergeant says to him,
'Wait a minute, will you, I cut my hand.' It's a truly horrifying moment, one
that I identified with very strongly because of the ordinary, the non sequitur
in the middle of death.

''Think of being semiconscious in the emergency room and hearing friends say,
'There's a Chinese place, I think, three blocks from here, but I don't know if
they're still open.' Somehow, things go on. This is neither good nor bad. It's
just the way it is.''

Nichols is as instinctive about rejecting projects as he is about those he takes
on.

''I turn down scripts about the Holocaust,'' he says. ''I rejected 'Sophie's
Choice.' It's just . . . my problem. I cannot imagine sitting on a crane on the
set of Auschwitz, saying, 'All right, let me see all the prisoners camera left.'
I just can't conceive of my doing it. It's not that I read the script and burst
into tears. It's that I'm physically incapable of dealing technically with those
events.''

He also turned down ''The Exorcist'' - for two reasons, he says. ''One was that
I didn't know what the hell it was for. And the other reason was that I was
incapable of putting a little girl through that for four or five months. I
couldn't imagine going to work, saying, 'Today is the day that you vomit blood,
and here's what you say . . . .' ''

If Nichols is tender about children because he remembers the sad little boy he
once was, he is also probably thinking of the children he has fathered -
10-year-old Max and 7-year-old Jenny, whose mother is Annabel Davis-Goff, a
novelist. Nichols also has a 20-year-old daughter, Daisy, from his second
marriage, who is studying art history in Paris.


After nine well-received plays and four movies, Nichols hit a creative lull in
1973. He directed two film failures (''The Day of the Dolphin'' and ''The
Fortune'') and he abandoned a Neil Simon movie, ''Bogart Slept Here,'' after a
few days of shooting, convinced it wouldn't work.

''People said I was afraid of failure,'' Nichols says. ''I really just felt dead
mentally, jaded. I'd always loved rehearsing, but I could barely arouse my own
interest. I must have been depressed without knowing it. I get more narcoleptic
than scared when things aren't going well.

''I remember walking into my office in California and picking up the script of
'Streamers' on the day we stopped 'Bogart.' Everything changed for me on the
spot. I called David and said, 'I want to do it.' ''

''Streamers'' was just a reprieve. After that, Nichols's theater career began to
slide, too. He concedes that at this time he was at one of the ''low points'' of
his life - a period that stretched through the production of Jean Kerr's ''Lunch
Hour'' in 1980. He was sleepwalking through his work.

Not until the making of ''Silkwood'' did he regain his creative enthusiasm. ''My
interest began with Alice Arlen and Nora Ephron, who brought me a draft of their
script,'' Nichols says. ''I liked them both enormously and I liked what they had
done. I was interested in the theme of being asleep and waking up. It was, in
fact, the situation in which I found myself at the time. I saw that Karen
Silkwood was a zombie, she was asleep during her work, and then she began slowly
to wake up. That was my central image for the character.

''Waking, she said to herself, 'Where have I been? Why haven't I been paying
attention?'

''And the pleasure of working with Meryl Streep! Her joy at getting to do the
role, approaching acting with the attitude, 'What do I get to do next?' Like a
child. That joy of hers is infectious. It reminded me how much I loved my work.
I go to pieces when I talk about Meryl.

''It was, I suppose, the confluence of the group of us, the subject, the way we
all felt about one another, the excitement about what we were doing. And I began
to think, 'I'm pretty good at this, and it isn't as hard as I remembered.' ''

After collaborating joyously with Ephron and Arlen and Streep, Nichols found
himself just as happy in the company of Tom Stoppard.

''I take on the mood of the person I'm working with,'' Nichols says. ''David
Rabe and I tend to get gloomy. Tom and I had nothing but laughs and joy, working
on 'The Real Thing.' While David writes from his unconscious, Tom writes
philosophically and intellectually. He has very definite ideas about how his
plays should be done.''

The fiercely verbal Stoppard does not deny this. ''A writer arrives at
rehearsals with strong prejudices about the noise his play should be making -
how loud, how soft, how high, how deep, how fast, how slow the actors' voices
should be,'' Stoppard says, sounding very much like the playwright-protagonist
of ''The Real Thing.''

''There was a particular scene, early on, that I thought should be taken in a
very leisurely way. I thought the actors' speeches should be dropped into little
pools of prepared silence. I said to Mike, 'I think this scene would be best if
done very slowly.' And he said, 'Or very fast.'

''He was contradicting me, while appearing to agree. That was so typical of his
cunning and courtesy. I loved him for that.'' (They did the scene fast.)

''Mike has relentless concern with every physical detail of a production. Once,
during a technical rehearsal, when he was working on a blackout, there was a
tiny flicker of light, no more than a glowworm would cast, and Mike called,
'What in God's name is that searchlight doing onstage?' Another time, he
glimpsed a mere ghost of a shadow moving onstage and he said, 'Why is that crowd
of people milling about in full view?' ''

Nichols soon will be working in New York on the technical aspects of
''Hurlyburly.'' He and Rabe cut 31 minutes from the play in Chicago. Although he
is excited about the play, Nichols still has doubts about whether he has solved
all its difficulties.

Even after the play ended its run in Chicago, he was still tinkering with one of
its major scenes, and he brought to it, as to earlier ones, several of his
trademarked ingredients: Illustrations from his personal life, improvisational
technique and his skill at concealing the mechanics of the Event.

The scene, which runs about 15 minutes, involves five of the play's seven
characters - William Hurt; Christopher Walken, as his housemate; Harvey Keitel,
as a former convict and bit player; Judith Ivey, as a nightclub balloon dancer;
and Jerry Stiller, as an unsuccessful Hollywood hack. (The seventh cast member
is Cynthia Nixon, who plays a nymphet.)

''I thought for some time,'' Nichols says, ''about the fact that jungle and
animal images are, to me, central to the play - the groping and crawling toward
each other of these people, partly because they are stoned, partly because they
are losing their humanity; but even more, because their language is the language
of people who have been disconnected from human endeavor, almost entirely.''

Nichols told his actors to think of themselves as drugged, lolling animals. Hurt
begins the scene lying across the bar; Ivey begins by reclining in a chair;
Walken lies on his back on the second-story platform, an arm dangling over the
edge.

''I think he's a cat,'' Nichols says. ''He takes random swipes at the people who
move beneath him, sort of like a cat in a tree. I haven't asked the others what
animals they are imagining themselves to be. All of them are prone, supine or
crawling.''

Nichols says he experimented with drugs - marijuana and cocaine - during the
time he was making ''Catch-22.'' ''What happens when Judith Ivey gets her drugs
is that she begins to slide out of her chair and go lower and lower, until she's
on the floor; and Bill Hurt slides down the bar and crawls to her to give her
more coke; and a little later, she crawls over to Harvey Keitel.

''The action is, I think, completely hidden, in the sense that I think you could
see the scene several times and never say to yourself, 'These people are
crawling, no one has walked for 15 minutes.'

''We were on the way to achieving this when we first got to Chicago, and then it
became a question of how to use the furniture, how to get them lower. You're not
meant to say, 'Oh, look, they're all crawling!' It's meant to convey an
atmosphere. It's supposed to give you a different feeling than if the words were
being delivered by people sitting and chatting upright in chairs.''

Nichols will continue to rehearse until the opening. ''Hurlyburly'' is anything
but a ''safe'' play.

''Elaine May has a wonderful motto,'' Nichols says. ''The only safe thing is to
take a chance. I think she means that if you stay safe, and don't take a chance
- don't do something that's different from the last thing, something that makes
you nervous and holds dangers - if you keep trying to do the thing that worked
last time, the encrustations of mannerisms begin to take you over. And pretty
soon you're no good at all - and therefore not safe at all. The longer you play
it safe, the less interesting is what you do.''

After ''Hurlyburly,'' Nichols hopes to reward himself by working again with
Meryl Streep, who said she is interested in the film version of Nora Ephron's
best-selling novel, ''Heartburn.'' Absurdist that he is, Nichols is drawn to the
heroine of ''Heartburn'' because she is ''a woman doomed to be in the right -
and, therefore, alone.''

''My approach to a light comedy like 'Heartburn' is the same as my approach to a
tragicomedy like 'Hurlyburly,' '' he says. ''I don't think comedy is an escape
from tragedy. They are both life.''

All of the plays (and movies) he directs are, he believes, about the eternal
comic-tragic self-delusion we all practice: ''Life is hopeless - but it isn't;
love is fleeting - but eternal; our personal lives are everything - but we are
unimportant.'' These are ideas, Nichols says, that have a lasting life.

...AND ELAINE MAY

IKE NICHOLS SAYS THAT HIS SUCCESS AS a director is due in part to his training
in improvisation - first with the Chicago-based Compass troupe, which became the
Second City company, and later as a nightclub act with Elaine May.  Nichols and
May split up professionally and personally in 1962, in a way that was very
wounding to them both. Nichols seems to find it painful, still, to discuss the
break. ''Several things happened,'' he says. ''One was that I, more than Elaine,
became more and more afraid of our improvisational material. We used to make up
several new things each night. We never wrote a skit down the first time, we
just sort of outlined it: You be so-and-so, I'll be so-and-so. I'll try to make
you, or we'll fight - whatever it was. That was it. We actually improvised on
national television!

''But the bigger the nightclub we were in, the bigger the television show we
were on, the more pressure there was to have the sketches we did be the best we
had. She was always brave. But I became more and more afraid. And we found
ourselves doing the same material over and over, especially in our show for
Broadway. This took a great toll of Elaine. And I nagged the hell out of her. I
was always saying, 'Can't you do that any faster?' and 'You're taking too long
over this.' ''

Nichols didn't realize it, but he was evolving into a director. (May says, ''I
always thought he'd be a wonderful director.'') ''She'd fill things, I'd shape
them. She had endless capacity for invention. My invention was not endless. But
it taught me about beginnings, middles and ends. I had to push the sketch ahead,
because I couldn't invent as she could.

''Elaine wrote a play called 'A Matter of Position,' and that's what fractured
our relationship.'' Nichols played the leading role. ''I was onstage, she was in
the audience watching me, judging me.'' He gropes for a way to explain what,
clearly, he would prefer not to talk about.

''As soon as we weren't in balance . . . equals on the stage . . . great angers
. . . and things . . . arose. We flew apart.'' The play closed in Philadelphia.

At the time of the breakup, Nichols remembers walking down Park Avenue with his
friends Felicia and Leonard Bernstein.

''Lenny had his arm around me and he said, 'Oh, Mikey, you're so good! I don't
know at what.'' Nichols laughs. ''It was a very Lenny thing to say. But I knew
just what he meant. I didn't know at what either.

''It took years for Elaine and me to come back to each other after that. And
what happened in those years was that we become two individual people, rather
than Nichols-and-May. When she became wholly Elaine May and I became wholly Mike
Nichols, we became the dearest of old friends.'' (In 1980, they acted together
in ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?'' at New Haven's Long Wharf Theater.)

''When Elaine and I split up - that was a shattering year for me . . . I didn't
know what I was. I was the left-over half of something. We're very close friends
now. I think now it's forever.'' - B.G.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: The Creative Mind: This article is the third in an occasional series
examining the process of creative thought among Americans in various fields,
ranging from the arts and sciences to business and commerce

GRAPHIC: photo of Nichols; photo of Nichols at his Connecticut farm; photo of
Nichols with Elaine May; photo of Nichols directing a scene, p. 23.; photo of
Nichols and third wife at New York home, p.24 .; photo of view south from
Nichols's Manhattan co-op, p.25.; photo of Ashley and Redford in Barefoot in the
Park ; photo of Nichols and May in 1960 as a team

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A Closer Look At The Hart Generation

BYLINE: By David Shribman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 32, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4484 words


AS LONG AS A YEAR AGO, AS long as 12 years ago and longer, Gary Hart knew it
would eventually happen - perhaps not in the early years or even last February,
the month in which he would be transformed into a major Democratic Presidential
contender,.  But Gary Hart had analyzed the population figures, he had assessed
the men who ran the Democratic Party and he knew that the time would come for
what he called the politics of a ''new generation.''

Whether or not Senator Gary Hart wins his party's nomination, it is clear he has
begun to transform the face of politics.  Even Hart's greatest detractors agree
that he was one of the first to grasp the potential power of this new
generation.  Time and again, they use the word ''intuitive'' when speaking of
the Colorado Democrat's sense of generational politics.

Hart's new generation includes many American college students; their older
brothers and sisters who carry backpacks instead of briefcases to work; young
parents who are beginning to save for their children's education; student
activists of the 1980's as well as high-school graduates of the same period;
young lawyers, accountants, real estate brokers, restaurateurs, salespeople and
high-school teachers.  In short, Hart's campaign is aimed in large measure at
the people that demographers and sociologists describe as the children of the
post-World War II baby boom.

All are targets of the Hart appeal, which is carefully calculated: the hair, the
appearance of youthful vigor, the talk about ''new ideas'' and a ''new
generation'' - especially television commercials placing Hart, who is himself 47
years old, against a background of ''video'' blue.  One advertisement, known in
the Hart camp by the shorthand title ''Generation,'' includes fast-paced film
footage of a civil-rights march, Vietnam War dead and a nuclear freeze rally.
Then the candidate speaks: ''We acted as a generation against racial hatred...to
stop the war in Vietnam...to demand a halt to the pollution of our land.  We
acted and we did overcome.  But now our promise is slipping away.  The
politicians of yesterday are trading our future by asking our price instead of
challenging our idealism.''

The political pundits are portraying the battle for the Democratic Presidential
nomination as a struggle between Hart and former Vice President Walter F.
Mondale. But Hart maintains the issue is how the party defines itself and how it
readies itself for the future.

The idea of generational politics, gestating slowly for more than a decade, has
now grown into a fullblown theory that Republicans and Democrats alike believe
may help determine more than who wins the right to face Ronald Reagan this fall.
Generational politics makes an issue of the future and the need for new
responses to political problems and bids a new generation of Americans to take
their place in the political system.  ''Whoever finds the key to that group,''
says Eddie Mahe, a prominent republican political consultant, ''is a long way
down the road to dominating the political scene for the next 30 or 40 years.''

In recent interview, Hart compared his political approach with Mondale's.  ''In
the great sweep and flow, basically Walter Mondale and I have the same beliefs,
the same principles,'' he said.  ''The question is how we act those out.  The
fault line of the party is now between those who have been in office for 20 or
25 years and those who have come into office in the last 10 years and who are
less tied to the arrangements dating to Roosevelt and Johnson.  This is not a
contest over values, but a contest over methods and process and control: Who
will be making the decisions, and what experiences do they bring to them?  Do
they have a healthy skepticism of Keynesian economics?  Did they learn the
lessons of Vietnam?  These are not two individuals at stake here, but two
different points of view.''

With the theory of generational politics, Gary Hart has propelled himself from
relative obscurity to become one of the three remaining contenders for the
Democratic nomination at the party's convention in San Francisco in July.  Some
political analysts already insist that the battle for the nomination is all but
over, but recent Hart victories in the Nebraska and Oregon primaries show Hart's
popularity has expanded to such constituencies as union members and people over
the age of 60, traditionally Mondale supporters.

Before San Francisco, Hart could increase his delegate count with the June 5
primaries in New Jersey and California.  His chances may be particularly good in
California, based on its favorable demographics, the natural appeal he has in
the West and momentum from his latest primary victories.  If Hart claims
California, a pivotal sate in the Presidential election, it would be a serious
setback for Mondale, who has built his support on traditioaal voting groups.  It
would also signal a positive response to the notion of generational politics
with its repudiation of old-line ideologies as being the politics of the past.

THE PRECEPTS OF THE GENERational theory are simple, but the implications are
large.  Between 1946, roughly the contours of the baby boom, some 76 million
prople were born, the largest generation in American history and one of the most
improtant forces in this nation's social history in this century.

This generation - described by the population Reference Bureau, a Washington
based research group, as the ''fateful bulge'' - has reshaped society from its
beginning.  The leap in elementary school enrollment from 21 million in 1950 to
30 million a decasde later forced this country to build, new schools by the
thousands.  This generation's inevitable appearance on the job market caused
disruptions throughout the economy that are still being felt.  And now that the
baby boomers have grown older, the number of households headed by people under
35 years old has grown to more than 25 million, up from 16 million in 1970.

''It's clear they have had, because of their numbers, a set of generational
experiences different from that of any of their predecessors,'' says Charles F.
Westoff, director of the Office of Population Research at Princeton University.

Certainly, their time was unlike any other.  The baby boomers, now between 20
and 38 years of age, grew up on fast food and television, dragged the nation
through the youth rebellion years of the 1960's, helped erode traditional views
of women and fueled the computer and information revolution.  Their impact has
been felt in every segment of society save one - electoral politics.

They are a critical but unknown element in the new political calculus, and the
race is on to capture their political loyalties.  Until Hart began his
Presidential campaign - his typical stump speech throughout most of the campaign
used the phrase ''new generation'' a dozen times - that race was being carried
on in stealth, in the neatly appointed, converted Washington town houses where
pollsters and consultants track the political trend lines much the way
Sinologists scrutinize the most casual gestures of Peking's political elite.

In recent months, Mondale, who built his campaign in the customary way - on the
endorsements of lading Establishment political figures and on the allegiance of
traditional Democratic voting groups - has come to recognize that the older
order has shifted, if not changed utterly.

''When they story of this election is written,'' Mondale said in a telling aside
at Emory University in Atlanta last March, ''I suspect it won't be about Mr.
Hart or about me, but about you.'' Last April, at the University of Cincinnati,
Mondale refined his theme of the future.  ''We don't elect a President just to
cope with each day's troubles,'' he said.  ''We must choose a leader with his
eyes on the next century.  The year 2000 is no longer a science fiction writer's
shorthand for the future.''

GARY HART'S EDUCATION IN GENERAtional politics began in 1960 when, as a graduate
student at Yale, he heard firsthand the call to the ''new frontier'' from John
F. Kennedy, then a Presidential candidate.  While running Senator George
McGovern's Presidential campaign in 1972, Hart spoke frequently of generational
politics and of the fissures that generational tensions can cause in the
political world.  In his memoir of that period, ''Right From the Start,'' Hart
wrote : ''While one generation has power, it also has strength, and some
fleeting claim to immortality. It relinquishes that power only under duress,
because the loss of power is a blunt reminder of mortality.  If, in primitive
times, the chief caveman was also the keeper of the fire, he fought to prevent
younger, stronger cavemen from taking the fire, for it was not only the key and
symbol of his power, but also his defense against obsolescence.''

The emphasis on change along generational lines has remained one of the enduring
themes in the life of a man who has changed his mane, his age, his signature and
his resume and whose political philosophy has been described variously as
liberlism, neoliberalism, classical conservativism and pragmatism.  When Hart,
as a relatively unknown lawyer, mounted his successful challenge to Colorado's
Republican Senator, Peter H. Dominick, in 1974, his slogan was, ''They had their
turn.  Now it's our turn.'' His major stump speech, entitled ''The End of the
New Deal,'' concluded: ''This nation desperately needs a new breed of thinkers
and doers who will question old premises and disregard old alliances.''

Yet the baby-boom generation has never come of age in electoral politics.
Although many of them were involved in the civil-rights and antiwar movements,
their impact in the voting booth has been slight.  A large number of these young
people became popularly known as the ''Me Generation,'' interested in
self-fulfillment.  Politics was something their parents did.

''These people are late, but they have been late for everthing - late getting
married, late settling down,'' says Patrick H. Caddell, a pollster and political
consultant to Hart who believes in the importance of generational politics.
''But they're coming.  They're rootless, but they're looking for something.''

Late last march, the day after Mondale won the Illinois primary, Hart paused
from the vigors of the campaign trail, put his black cowboy boots on the coffee
table in his Senate office and mused about why, for two decades, so many young
people found so little attraction in electoral politics.

''This is a generation that grew up in 20 of the worst years this country has
ever seen, starting with Nov. 22, 1963,'' he said, citing President Kennedy's
assassination as the beginning of the period.  ''In that 20-year span, there was
a wave of assassinations unprecedented in our nation's history, the most
divisive war since the Civil War, the biggest political scandal of our nation's
history and a period of the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression.

''All we've had for 20 years is bad news.  I can't tell you psychologically what
that's done to a generation, but it's profound.  These things linger on.  There
were reasons for these people not to get involved in politics.  I believe there
is a latent idealism in the American people, a need to serve something other
than their own interests.  When it isn't tapped, people get cynical.''

Hart, ironically, is not part of this generation.  Gary Hart was born Gary
Warren Hartpence in 1936, a full decade before the baby boom started, and his
childhood was not dominated by the cultural medium of television, nor was he
faced with the troublesome personal question about what he would do if he were
drafted to fight in Vietnam.

Yet, his law-school classmates remember that Gary Hart was fired with
Kennedyesque idealism and committed to the idea of public service.  ''Gary has
always talked the way he talks now,'' says a Washington lawyer who knew him at
Yale.

Hart went to Washington after law school, working in the Justice and Interior
Departments during the Johnson Administration.  He believes he is part of the
young political generation philosophically, if not technically, and his campaign
is partly based on an offer to give that generation a voice.

''You're dealing here with very sophisticated people,'' observes Hart.  ''They
don't want a messiah.  They don't want me to personalize an entire generation's
yearnings - just to be the vehicle of its expression.  I see this campaign as
aliberating vehicle for a lot of talent in this country.  I don't see myself as
necessarily the spokesman of a generation.  I think a generation can speak for
itself, but it needs a platform.''

While Hart is deliberately trying to attract those born in the postwar baby
boom.  He knows that generational politics has a wide appeal.  Dotty Lynch,
Hart's pollster, has found that young voters are not the only ones who are
attracted by the idea of a new generation of leadership.  a poll she took last
September of 1,500 Democratic and independent likely voters showed that 73
percent of those between the ages of 18 and 25 would be receptive to a candidate
who would bring about such leadership.  Even more astonishing, 73 percent of
those between the ages of 56 and 65 years old - and 60 percent of those over 65
years old - agreed.

Hart is not alone in his belief in the importance of generational politics.  For
more than a decade, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, has been
emphasizing the necessity to break with the past and to appeal to younger
voters, who have no firsthand knowledge of the Depression, World War II and, in
many cases, the Vietnam and Kennedy eras.

''The question is whether you can convince the people of that age that the
Democratic Party has a vision and a future,'' says Biden, who is 41 years old.
''Unless we appeal to those people, we are absolutely, positively dead.  There
is no way around it.''

In his short and disappointing run for the Democratic Presidential nomination,
Senator John Glenn of Ohio used the slogan ''Leadership for the Future'' to
carry somewhat the same message, but the organizational chaos that surrounded
his campaign and his failure to develop a compelling stump presence prevented
him from delivering it.  ''We lost the young people first, probably on a style
dimension,'' says William Hamilton, Senator Glenn's pollster.  ''We could say
that John Glenn understood the science and technology of the future, but he
didn't look like the kind of leader young people wanted in the future.''

Although Hart's recent primary victories in Nebraska and oregon were symbolic
boosts to his campaign (Mondale did not vigoroully campaign in either state), he
has done poorly in winning important sates with sizable numbers of delegates.
Hart attributes his rival's success to a strong organization in states where
unemployment is high and where there are traditional Democratic voting groups,
such as organized labor.  Symbolism aside, Hart's victories also establish a
popular credibility that he claims is lacking in Mondale's candidacy.

COMPARED WITH THE MONdale organization, Hart's campaign and staff all but shriek
the word ''young.'' Two of the most vociferous exponents of the generational
idea were Patrick Caddell, the 33-year-old campaign consultant, and David E.
Landau, the 30-year-old deputy campaign manager.  Hart's press assistant, Kathy
Bushkin, is 34; his pollster, Dotty Lynch, is 36, and his delegate-selection
expert, Michael Levy, is 20.  His chief organizer in Iowa, where the Hart
campaign first gained momentum with his second-place showing in the caucuses,
was 28-year-old Keith Glaser; his chief organizer in Maine was 23-year-old Ron
Briggs.  Neither John Kulewicz nor Jack Wickes, the two men who engineered
Hart's astonishing upsets in Ohio and early this month, had prior national
political experience.

Some of Hart's most admiring obsrvers, in fact, are in the Republican party,
where the importance of generational politics was detected earlier in this
decade and where efforts are being made to expolit it in the effort to re-elect
a President who is 73 years old.  ''The one unifying thing about the baby
boomers is that they are anti-Establishment and anti-institution and Mondale
embraced the democratic Establishment and big institutions like the
A.F.L.C.I.O.,'' says a top Republican strategist.  ''Ronald Reagan has not done
that.  We're not going to be dumb enough to let age be the determinant in
generational politics.  The Reagan appeal is also to people who don't go for the
Establishment and for big institutions.''

Representative Newt Gingrich, an aggressive Georgian widely regarded as one of
the most articulate younger Republicans, believes the Hart appeal is a signal
that there is a market for ideas, for exploring beyond the current policy
deadlock.  But he adds: ''Ronald Reagan is the most breathtaking new thinker
around.  He's a bigger new thinker that Gary Hart any day.''

The threat on the generational front from the aging President and his party
became apparent late last monh, when Hart flew to the University of North
Carolina for one of his most successful campus rallies.  The students were
squeezed into Carmichael Auditorium, and the pep band playing was hardly
necessary.  Hart received a rousing, wildly enthusiastic response.  But outside
the auditorium, several dozen students chanted, ''Reagan-Bush '84.'' ''Reagan
speaks to our generation as much as Gary Hart and as much as anyone,'' said
Coleen Jones, a freshman from Rocky Mount, N.C. ''It doesn't matter that he's
old.  The age means nothing.''

Jose Ortega y Gasset, the Spanish philosopher, wrote that each generation grows
up with a complete way of life that imprints itself indelibly on the
individual.'' Their political beliefs are formed, according to Seymorur Martin
Lipset, professor of political science and sociology as Stanford University,
''in their late teens, particularly if they've gone through a very heavy
experience.'' For many of the baby boomers, that experience is the 1960's.

''Those who were young in the 1960's still have not gotten over that,'' says
Anthony Esler, a history professor at the college of William and Mary who has
written extensively on the role of generations in history.  ''It was an
experience that devalued many of the institutions under which they grew up and
the values they were taught.  The war in Vietnam that was fought and the war on
poverty that was not fought left them with a sour taste.  Gary Hart talks
something of their language.  He shares attitudes toward the third world,
nuclear war, the environment.  He's cut his hair, but I don't hink he's changed
his colors.''

At the base of the Hart effort is his belief that these younger people have a
set of attitudes that is not so much a guiding philosophy but rather a political
bouillabaisse: They see economic renewal as a major, urgent issue but are
concerned about the environment; they have no illusions about the global goals
of the Soviet Union, but are eager to win arms-control agreements; they
recognize the importance of a strong natinal defense, but are skeptical of
intervention in third-world nations.  They are committed, moreover, to social
justice and the equality of women.

A demographic profile of those born in the baby boom, based on a new York Times/
CBS news Poll taken this winter, shows that they are better educated and are in
a better financial situation than the rest of the adult population.  They are
more likely to consider themselves professionals and more likely professionals
and more likely to consider themselves either Democrates or Republicans.

''Part of Hart's appeal has to do with the sense that we have profound
problems,'' says Robert Jay Lifton, a professor of psychiatry at Yale.  ''We
don't feel confident we can solve them.  That's a new attitude for Americans,
and Hart's appeal lies partly in the idea that these problems haven't been
solved by the old methods.''

By aiming his campaign at this group of Americans, Hart has both benefited from
its restlessness and, according to some scholars, helped it to become conscious
of its generational identity and its political potential.  ''The idea of a
generation became a selfconscious theme in the 19th century,'' says Daneil Bell,
a Harvard sociologist.  ''It has been going on for some time, but for the last
20 years it has been muted.  the fact that it has come up in such a strident
manner shows that this generation is finding an identity.  someone has been able
to come around and galvanize it.''

Some historians and sociologists believe that Hart's appeal is peculiarly suited
to this time and this generation.  ''Generational politics is usually a matter
of timing,'' says Robert Wohl, a historian at the University of California at
Los Anglees who has wirtten about the generation of 1914, specifically the young
men who fought in World War I and returned to their countries disillusioned.

''It usually comes at a time when there is a widely perceived lace of enthusiasm
for any of the alternatives,'' Wohl continues.  ''then people start to realize
that there's an opening for a new type of alignment, based on generation.  But
these kinds of strategies have a life of their own.  Once having created this
idea, Gary Hart will have to personify it.  It may transform him, turning him
into a very different kind of leader.''

Some scholars, however, say that it would be a mistake to view the baby-boom
generation as homogeneous.  ''They earn different amounts of money, not all of
them went to college, not all of them bought houses and many of them did not get
married,'' says Louise B. Russell, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution
and a student of the baby boom.  ''Just because they're the same age doesn't
mean that they will coalesce around one candidate or one issue.''

Hart's success among these voters is not necessarily evidence that the baby-boom
generation will fall permanently into the ranks of vaguely liberal candidates
like him, or even into the democratic Party. ''There are a lot of baby boomers
in the Moral Majority, and there are a lot of baby boomers who went to
evangelical religious colleges,'' says David Riesman, a Harvard sociologist.
''they have the advantages of a baby-boom education and are good organizers.
There has been a baby boom among blacks and Hispanics, too, and they are very
much different.  There are different baby boomers regionally: the ones on the
East and West coasts, in Chicago and the Twin Cities and Cincinnati are
differentt from the ones in Columbus.''

Yet younger Americans have responded to Hart with remarkable eagerness.
According to The Times/ CBS News exit polls, Hart topped Mondale among voters
between the ages of 18 and 29 years old in Primaries in New Hampshire,
Massachusetts, Illinois, Connecticut.  Pennsylvania, Ohio and Indiana.  He was
also strong among young white voters in Alabama, Georgia and New York, States
were young black voters were attracted to the candidacy of the Rev. Jesse
Jackson and where Mondale prevailed in the overall balloting.

Voters younger than 45 years old provided Hart with more than half of his total
vote in the primaries in New hampshire, Massachusetts, Georgia, New York and
Pennsylvania.  The exit poll that CBS News took in Oregon revealed that Hart not
only captured the 20- to 44-year-olds, but also union voters and those over 60,
assumed to be in Mondale's camp.  Hart made a similar sweep in Nebraska, where
another CBS poll found that Hart enjoyed victory margins of more than 3 to 1
among voters under 44.

Many Republican strategists believe that Mondale stumbled in the early weeks of
the political season because he portrayed himself as the candidate of past
achievements while offering himself to the nation that has always been
forward-minded.  ''It's a mistake to think that these voters are liberal across
the board,'' says a Republican strategist.  ''The main thing they have in common
is that they are future-oriented.''

Many top Republican strategists believe that Hart and his sudden spectacular
rise are suited to a generation that has grown up with expectations of immediate
gratification.  ''But we still think that we can still catch these people,''
says Mahe, the Republican consultant.  ''We know that the New Deal coalitin
cannot reach them.  We were kind of hoping that the Democrats would come up with
a New Deal ticket, so we could get ready for the battle of the century, which we
thaought would come in 1988.  If Reagan wins the election, 1988 is going to be
when the soul of both parties will be up for grabs.''

Political figures of both parties and all ideological orientations agree that
Hart has unleashed a potent political force.  It was apparent in the new England
primaries, when in a matter of days, the Hart rivulet became a flood.  ''People
feel there's something greater than orgnization or constituency groups at stake
here,'' Hart's co-chairman in Massachusetts, State Senator Gerard D'Amico, said
just before that state's primary.  ''It is whether we make a real break from the
past.''

Questions remain, however, whether the force of generational politics will be
enough to catapult Hart to the nomination or, moreover, whether he is the right
politiciam to ride the generational wave.  ''I just hope Hart doesn;'t screw it
up,'' says one of his senate Colleagues, a Democrat.  ''You don't have to
understand only the idea.  You also have to demonstrate that you have heart and
soul.  And I don't know if Gary Hart has heart.''

Strategists in both parties agree that, perhaps in a different form, perhaps
with a different name generational politics will endure beyond the 1984
election.  In the last four years, the proportion of voters between 25 and 44
years of age has grown from 38.5 percent of the electorate to 41.5 percent,
according to figures released this month by the United States Census Bureau.
Those people will remain a formidable potential force in American politics long
after Gary Hart's stump speeches fade into memory and, indeed, long after Ronald
Reagan becomes part of history.  The question to be faced in the elections to
come is what the baby-boom generation does with its immense potential politiical
power.

''You are dealing with voters who are mercurial, and it will take more than one
election to commit them to politics in the long term,'' says Robert Dallek, a
U.C.L.A. historian.  ''If Hart is elected, and if his administration turns out
badly, it may alienate them forever.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Gary Hart

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS May 27, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1328 words


Fiction1

112

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  2

27

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the wars of
the Holy Land. 3

1

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a mother
and daughter changes with changing values over 40 years. 4

311

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  5

48

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  6

1

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia. 7

59

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  7

64

DESCENT FROM XANADU, by Harold Robbins.  (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A man who
has everything - power, money, women - seeks to obtain immortality. 9

65

WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W.  Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What follows
the first nuclear war in 1988.  10

1112

LORD OF THE DANCE, by Andrew M. Greeley.  (Bernard Geis/Warner, $17.50.) In
seeking her long-lost cousin, a teen-ager probes the mysteries of life and
death.  11

816

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  12

1130

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  13

132

DEMOCRACY, by Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Love, ambition and murder
in Honolulu.  14

916

ALMOST PARADISE , by Susan Isaacs. (Harper & Row, $16.95.) Three generations of
show-biz people play out their destinies on two continents.  15

99

ONE MORE SUNDAY, by John D. MacDonald.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Behind the scenes with
a charismatic television preacher.  15

142

VALEDICTION, by Robert B. Parker. (Delacorte, $12.95.) Spenser, the Boston
private eye, loses in love but cracks a religious cult.




Nonfiction1

136

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2

33

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  3

25

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' TV series.  4

512

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  5

715

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.  6

54

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  7

411

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  8

74

CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Secretary of State gives his views on foreign policy.  9

122

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  10

94

KNOCK WOOD, by Candice Bergen. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the actress.  11

930

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H. Schuller. (Thomas
Nelson, $12.95.) Inspiration from a California preacher.  12

15

15

TOUGH-MINDED FAITH FOR

TENDERHEARTED PEOPLE, by Robert H.  Schuller. (Thomas Nelson, $14.95.) More
inspiration from a California preacher.  13



1

NATALIE, by Lana Wood. (Putnam, $15.95.) A sister's memoir of the actress
Natalie Wood.  14



20

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin.  (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  14

13

7

FURTHER UP THE ORGANIZATION, by Robert Townsend. (Knopf, $15.95.) Business
strategies for the 1980's.  14

14

87

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

19

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

1

GRANDMOTHER REMEMBERS, by Judith Levy.  (Stewart, Tabori & Chang, $12.95.) A
notebook in which grandparents can inscribe their memories for their
grandchildren.  3

39

WEBSTER'S NINTH COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard
work updated in 1983.  4

276

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.  5

46

THE LIFE EXTENSION COMPANION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $17.50.)
Advice about improving your health and lengthening your life.  The listings
above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in
every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in
all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond
that point, sales in this category are not generally large enough to make a
longer list statistically reliable.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

AN AMERICAN PROCESSION, by Alfred Kazin. (Knopf, $18.95.)

An analysis of the great figures in American letters from Emerson

in the 1830's to Hemingway, Faulkner et al. in the 1930's - the

''crucial century'' when our writers sought and found a voice.

CHANGES IN THE LAND: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of

New England, by William Cronon. (Hill & Wang/Farrar, Straus &

Giroux; cloth, $15.95; paper, $6.95.) A fresh and ingenious history

of the interaction of man and nature in early New England.

DAWN TO THE WEST: Japanese Literature in the Modern Era, by

Donald Keene. (Holt, Rinehart and Winston, $100.) A two-volume,

2,000-page study of Japan's fiction, poetry, drama and criticism -

a brilliant, monumental achievement.

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES, by

Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A novella and four short

stories by the Nobel Prize winner, all with his characteristically

wily predicaments and brainy language.

NOT IN OUR GENES: Biology, Ideology, and Human Nature, by

R. C. Lewontin, Steven Rose and Leon J. Kamin. (Pantheon,

$21.95.) A scientifically argued denial that human behavior is

determined by genetic inheritance.

WHAT MEN DON'T TELL WOMEN, by Roy Blount Jr. (Atlantic/

Little,

Brown, $14.95.) A collection of funny pieces about men and

women, Elvis, Southern hospitality, hats, opera, television,

sweating, salaries, what authors do and much, much more.

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike. (Knopf, $15.95.)A

very entertaining novel about three witches who can fly through

the air, levitate, make love charms and cause all sorts of trouble

for their neighbors in a contemporary Rhode Island town.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WESTCHESTER OPINION;
IN WAR, PEOPLE JUST DON'T CARE HOW YOU PLAYED THE GAME

BYLINE: By KEVIN G. ROBERTS; Kevin G. Roberts lives in Pleasantville.

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 26, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 905 words


IN 1957 the Hicksville, L.I., Little League championship was won by Levco Drugs.
I was on that team. I'm told that for weeks after the day of victory I referred
to it as ''the best day of my whole life,'' and in 1957 it probably was.

My father was the manager of the team and believed in baseball, practice and
fair play. He had played semipro in Brooklyn, a bit of information I let leak
more than once, and knew what he was talking about. He taught us the beauty of
the bunt, the dynamics of the double-play and the honesty of the homer. We
practiced the suicide squeeze play one day for about six hours and never did get
a chance to use it, but we knew how to ''execute'' it if we had to.

My father was not one of those managers who would send the shortest guy on the
team in as a pinch hitter just to draw the walk and put the winning run on base,
but rather one who would tell us before each game, ''Remember guys, it's not
whether you win or lose, but how you play the game.''

I, for one, would take this adage and file it away with the others on cheek
turning and book covers, but I knew that all the proverbs in the world weren't
going to help if I got caught looking at that third strike.

Yet my father's attitude toward good sportmanship must have had an effect,
because as I look back on those times, although I can clearly recall the nervous
feeling of standing in the batter's box, or the surprised achievement in
catching a fly ball in left field, I don't know if these recollections are from
that championship game or one we lost 27 to zip. In fact, my Little League years
were filled with more losses than wins, but were nonetheless, well, some of the
best years of my whole life.

Boyhood was officially over when, after graduating from high school, being told
by the S.A.T.'s that I wasn't ready for college, telling myself college wasn't
ready for me, I enlisted in the Marine Corps and found myself on Parris Island
the day President Kennedy was shot. For a while I felt guilty about not being
able to lament - I was so selfishly involved in my own pain caused by a drill
instructor hell-bent on transforming my 130-pound body into a mean, green,
killing machine - but I got over it in time for and with the help of the Vietnam
War.

When I entered the corps in September 1963, Vietnam was hardly an issue, and
never worth more than 15 seconds on the 6 o'clock news. By the time I was
discharged in September 1967 it was called everything from unpopular to unjust
to immoral, and I've been wondering ever since, what, personally, I had done in
Vietnam between May 1965 and June 1966 to support those descriptions.

I did not enlist in the service with the intent of cleaning house in Southeast
Asia. I did it because that is what one does when one is not going to college or
quite ready to pump gas for a living. I wanted to see the world, get some
training, and the like. Beating the draft or splitting to Canada were not
options I disdained, but merely nonexistent. A military obligation was something
I assumed every 18- year-old had, and so on Sept. 18, 1963, I joined up.

Now the reasons for and the politics of the Vietnam War will be argued and
discussed for as long as war is in vogue. I'm not naive enough to believe that
it was all about making the world safe for democracy, but on the other hand I
don't think it was some sinister corporate plot to earn profits through killing,
either. The United States, the same country that gave me Duke Snider and beer
parties on the aqueduct, asked me to help out in this matter of Communist
aggression, which I took at face value, and I did my job, duty if you will.

After returning home and being discharged I still kept my head down. The antiwar
protests were getting larger and louder and a growing frustration kindled within
me. Let me say, however, that I was not and am not bitter toward the protests,
because the very freedom for their existence is exactly what makes this country
the best. But the sentiment that has evolved from the antiwar movement, plus the
manner in which the war ended (''Peace with honor'' airlifted off the embassy
roof in Saigon) have led to the popular opinion that we lost the war. After 200
years, the United States war record is something like 10 and 1, and I found
myself on the team that chalked up the 1.

I've rationalized and told myself that we didn't lose the war, we kicked the
enemy daily. We didn't retreat, surrender or get driven to the sea. What
happened was, we simply stopped fighting.

But this reasoning hasn't helped. I still keep quiet when the subject of Vietnam
comes up and people talk of its loss as offhandedly as they would a Mets game.
At such times the stigma of being thought of as a loser can become painfully
real, and I have learned to confront the stigma only recently and deal with it
on a personal level; it's between me and my self-esteem.

I was there, one of America's fighting men, doing a job to the best of my
ability. I followed orders, kept my nose clean and my mouth shut and I lived
through it. Explaining this to people is not, and I can never let it be, as
important as knowing it myself. Because in the end, when the results look dismal
and the fans start booing, it becomes obvious that the old saws don't hold true
for every situation. Sometimes the loss overshadows the honest intent of the
individual, and other people just don't care how you played the game.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER IN REIVEW;
'HOME' IS A RARE PLEASURE

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 6, Column 6; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 480 words


NEW plays, revivals, reinterpretations of classics and second looks at works
that failed in the first place for the wrong reasons - discovery and
re-discovery - are what we expect serious regional theater to do. We do not need
retreads of successful, recent Broadway plays; one tends to approach such
selections with some suspicion and much trepidation.

To find an exception to that, and a singularly sensational one, is exceptional,
indeed. Such a rarity is ''Home'' by Samm-Art Williams at the Hartford Stage
Company. The play was twice seen at Off Broadway's Negro Ensemble Company and
then moved to Broadway during the 1980-81 season, when it ran for eight months.
At Hartford, it lives anew.

It is easy to figure out why a local theater would choose the play. ''Home''
calls for three actors and a single set: an economical antidote for the Hartford
Stage Company, which often specializes in spectacle and gargantuan tasks.
Besides, it can be perceived as an attempt to win over a black audience.
Perhaps, most of all, it is a play of proven merit.

For all that, ''Home'' remains a glowing work that proves one can go home again.
The title has a double meaning, insofar as it symbolizes the re-emergence of God
in the heart of Cephus Miles, the main character. His odyssey from the tobacco
fields of Cross Roads, N.C., to prison, where he spends five years for refusing
to serve in Vietnam, and to a ''very, very large American city'' and, at last,
back to his beginnings and the love of the land, is chronicled during a flowing,
intermissionless hour and 40 minutes.

The actor Delroy Lindo personifies Cephus's heartbeat sensuality and sheer
survival instinct. When he is sweeping barroom floors and shining shoes with
''holes inside his soles,'' his soul peers through.

The two actresses, Olivia Virgil Harper and Lorraine Toussaint - designated as
''Woman One'' and ''Woman Two'' respectively - play, by terms, Cephus's lovers
and his true love to whom he returns (Miss Harper as Pattie Mae Wells), a
welfare caseworker (''You're the case; I'm the worker,'' Miss Toussaint says
with a sneer), a drug pusher and voices of temptation and righteousness, a
''floozy'' and an innocent child. Miss Harper and Miss Toussaint give
performances of simplicity and size.

The playwright, himself an actor, has a loving command of lyric language. G. W.
Mercier's setting, composed of wooden ramps and planks, is as free a design as
the play needs to move, to leap and to be still.

Clay Stevenson's direction fulfills the fluidity of the play's form. The
characters are musically and seamlessly interwoven. ''Home'' is a tone poem
transformed into pure, life-enhancing theater - a real representation of roots
and renewal.




''Home,'' by Samm-Art Williams, at

the Hartford Stage Company, 50

Church Street, Hartford. 527-5151.

Through June 3.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Delroy Lindo in 'Home'

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 27, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. CENTER STARTS COUNSELING SERVICE

BYLINE: By PAMELA MARGOSHES

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 8, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 798 words


JERSEY CITY

 ANEW counseling and outreach project designed to meet the specialized needs of
black, female, Hispanic and handicapped Vietnam-era veterans has been started at
the Veterans Administration Center here.

The project, called ''Special Issue Groups,'' will involve a counseling session
each week for eight weeks. There will be a counseling group for each category of
veteran, with a limit of about eight participants.

The sessions will run sequentially, starting within a week. After each group has
ended its eight weeks of sessions, participants in need of more counseling will
be referred to existing services at the center.

The ''leader'' for the black veterans group will be Larry Kirkland, an ex-Marine
and the outreach specialist at the center.

The idea for the groups was born six months ago, when both Ann Talmage-Clark,
the center's supervisor, and Mr. Kirkland noticed that, despite the diversity of
northern New Jersey, very few black, female, Hispanic and handicapped veterans
were using the center's services.

Among other services, the center provides psychological counseling, discharge
upgrading aid (for veterans who left the military without having completed the
paper work necessary for filing for benefits in later years), employment
assistance and referrals to medical facilities for veterans who may need
health-care services.

The Jersey City center is at 626 Newark Avenue. Like its counterparts in Newark
and Trenton, it is for those veterans who were on active duty between 1964 and
1975. Nationwide, there are 135 veterans centers.

The four groups of veterans singled out for counseling are, in the words of Mrs.
Clark, ''the historically underserved.'' Such people, she said, are often the
most reluctant to go to a veterans' center because of a variety of sociological
and psychological factors, including alienation and racial and cultural
concerns.

A fifth group - Vietnam-era veterans who are currently incarcerated in New
Jersey - is also planned. With the consent of prison authorities, Mrs. Clark and
Mr. Kirkland hope to conduct counseling sessions in several New Jersey prisons,
including Rahway and Trenton State.

''Women, especially combat nurses, were in a very interesting and conflictual
position while in Vietnam,'' Mrs. Clark said. ''They often held positions of
extreme responsibility, positions calling on them to make daily life and death
decisions. But when they returned to the United States, they were often unable
to get jobs comparable to the jobs they had held while in the service.

''In addition, they were not allowed to join support and counseling groups for
veterans because the majority of the groups were for men only.''

According to Mr. Kirkland, black and Hispanic veterans experienced some of what
their female counterparts went through. Specifically, they were unable to get
responsible jobs when they came back to the United States.

''In addition,'' he said, ''blacks and Hispanics found that, when they returned,
their neighborhoods were torn by racial strife and conflict, and they then had
to fight against a double stereotype of being a Vietnam vet and being black or
Hispanic.''

Those veterans, Mr. Kirkland said, found they could not get the support and
understanding they were seeking in their communities because of the specific and
complicated problems of being a Vietnam-era veteran.

''That's where the Veterans Center comes in,'' Mrs. Clark said. ''We can offer
to the Vietnam veteran what his or her community may be unable to offer: a
shared community, a community of supportive persons, of peers who have gone
through exactly what the vet has gone through.''

Reaching out to Vietnam-era veterans is quite difficult, according to Mrs.
Clark.

''Often,'' she said, ''the very same kind of defense and survival mechanisms
which kept the veteran alive in Vietnam are what keeps the vet from coming to a
center for help.''

Mrs. Clark and Mr. Kirkland are visiting nursing associations, hospitals,
community-based organizations and churches and Federal offices (where many
veterans are employed).

During those visits, they tell the veterans, who are either employed by or
linked to these organizations, what the center has to offer.

''It is very difficult,'' Mrs. Clark said, ''to reach someone who may not want
to deal at all with memories of the war, but these field visits are often the
kind of push and incentive that these veterans need.''

According to Mr. Kirkland, the basic message during the visits is: ''We can
help. This (the center) is a safe place to share.''

The center's hours are 8 A.M. to 9:30 P.M. on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays,
and 8 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. on Tuesdays and Thursdays, The telephone number is (201)
656-6986.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 28, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
China Reports It Drove Vietnamese From 2 Hills

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

DATELINE: PEKING, May 27


China said today that it had ejected Vietnamese troops from two hilltop
positions they had held since Vietnam and China fought a border war in 1979.

The official New China News Agency said dozens of Chinese villages were within
range of the positions, which the radio said were in Chinese territory. In a
report from the border, it said that ''the Vietnamese forces were driven out of
China on April 28 and 30.''

Fighting along the rugged, ill-defined border has flared in the last two months,
with each side accusing the other of intrusions and artillery barrages against
border villages.

The Hanoi radio today reported fresh fighting. It said 280 Chinese troops and 11
Vietnamese civilians were killed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 28, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

STUDIES SHOW VIETNAM WAR FAILED

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1187 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 27


Officials of the Central Intelligence Agency concluded in 1966 and 1967 that
United States bombing in North Vietnam was not only ineffective but also left
the North Vietnamese with more transport and other military assets than they had
before the bombs began to fall.

The C.I.A. analysts came to believe that the Communists in both North Vietnam
and South Vietnam were not suffering manpower or supply losses at a rate that
would compel them to negotiate to end the war.

These conclusions were in C.I.A. reports, now declassified, that have come to
light during the pretrial period of a libel suit filed by Gen. William C.
Westmoreland, commander of American forces in Vietnam from 1964 to 1968.

General Westmoreland, now retired, contends that CBS News defamed him in a 1982
documentary that said he had conspired to withhold intelligence estimates
indicating an increase in enemy forces in South Vietnam.

Commissioned by McNamara

Among the documents are two informally called McNamara 1 and McNamara 2.
According to depositions by George A. Carver, who was special assistant to the
Director of Central Intelligence for Vietnamese affairs, the reports were
commissioned by Defense Secretary Robert S. McNamara.

The first was distributed in the Government in August 1966 and the second in May
1967. Both were top secret.

A Special National Intelligence Estimate, published later in 1967 for officials
cleared for secrets, was somewhat more optimistic, but not much.

In his deposition Mr. McNamara, who left the Defense Department in late February
1968, said he wanted to have an independent analysis by the C.I.A. on the
Communists' ability to continue the war.

The C.I.A. reports, covering hundreds of pages, were by no means optimistic.
They had a tone of cold intellectual skepticism.

One, written in 1967, said that ''27 months of bombing of North Vietnam have had
remarkably little effect on Hanoi's overall strategy in prosecuting the war, on
its confident view of long- term Communist prospects and on its political
tactics regarding negotiations.''

Some American policymakers, notably Walt W. Rostow, White House national
security adviser, felt that North Vietnam would be coerced into ending the war
by fear its industry might be destroyed.

The C.I.A., however, said that while electricity generating plants had suffered
significant damage, transportation, oil and lubricant resources ''remain as high
as they were when the bombing program started.''

President Lyndon B. Johnson's Administration saw three purposes in the bombing,
according to the C.I.A. studies: to improve morale in South Vietnam, to
interrupt the flow of men and supplies from North Vietnam to South Vietnam, and
to intimidate North Vietnam so it would negotiate an end to the war.

The C.I.A. studies suggest that only the first goal, that of improved morale,
was ever achieved.  Saying the bombing program in the North, known as ''Rolling
Thunder,'' had not hurt Vietnamese military abilities, the authors added:
''These capabilities have, in fact, been greatly expanded through large
infusions of military aid from the U.S.S.R. and Communist China.''

These views were not unknown in South Vietnam. One intelligence officer
contended that every time ''we hit a bridge, they repair the bridge and build
two bypass bridges - and end up with three times as many bridges as before we
started bombing.''

''Everybody had a lovely time - us bombing and them rebuilding - and everybody
got a lot of medals,'' he said recently.

The C.I.A. reports took much the same view, with one saying the ''flow of aid
far surpasses the total damage resulting from air attacks.''



Futile Air Attacks by U.S.

On the basis of aerial photography, observations by infiltrated non-American
trail watchers and other intelligence, the agency estimated North Vietnam had
only about 11,000 to 12,000 trucks, many of them devoted to moving supplies
south through Laos on the Ho Chi Minh Trail.  The agency added that transport
was ''not significantly affected'' by the bombing.

It came to nearly identical conclusions about the futility of attacks on North
Vietnamese fighter airfields and Soviet-made SAM-2 antiaircraft missiles. By May
7, 1967, the C.I.A. said, more than 2,250 SAM's had been fired at American
aircraft, resulting in 43 confirmed kills and 12 probable kills, as well as the
downing of 29 unmanned reconnaissance craft.

One of the most riveting passages in the 1967 report involved casualties,
including civilian casualties, from the air war. Some early foreign visitors to
North Vietnam, including journalists and others, were sternly criticized in the
United States for what was called their naive acceptance of North Vietnamese
casualty statistics.

The C.I.A. report essentially confirmed the North Vietnamese figures. It said
the monthly air casualty rate in the North - ''heavily weighted with civilians''
- had gone from 2,200 a month in 1966 to 2,800 a month in early 1967. It said
there could ''conceivably be large margins of error'' in such figures, but
added:

''Two recent reports, however, make us reasonably confident that our estimates
are of the right order of magnitude. The first report, a detailed statement from
Hanoi, 'Report of U.S. War Crimes in Nam Dinh City,' released a number of
statistics and allegations'' of bombing in 1965 and 1966.

''The information presented in this report,'' the C.I.A. said, ''seemed to be
accurate when measured against detailed studies made on the base of poststrike
photography and the casualties claimed by the North Vietnamese were also
consistent with independent casualty estimates made by this Agency, using Nam
Dinh as a pilot project.''

Dubious Prospects of Victory

But total casualties by early 1967 were not high, the agency said, running in
the vicinity of 19,000 to 20,000 people. ''The outlook for marked success in
achieving the current objectives of U.S. bombing programs is not bright,'' the
C.I.A. said. ''Not within memory,'' the 1967 report said, had the United States
faced a problem so difficult with so little foreign support. It added that the
problem grew from the prolonged nature of the war and dubious prospects.

''The longer the war lasts, the more intractable our problems will become,'' it
added.

Other documents, some C.I.A. and others military or diplomatic, offer insights
into the conduct of the war. For instance, it has become a common argument by
many military men and some officials that the Vietnamese Communists suffered a
devastating military defeat in the Tet offensive, which began Jan. 30, 1968.

However, a document called ''C.I.A. 349 of April 1968,'' showed little change in
the agency estimates of enemy strength after two months of fighting. The
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam, estimated the enemy had suffered a net
loss from 12,000 to 27,000 men, a serious but perhaps not crushing loss. The
military believed that 80,000 enemy troops had been killed in the offensive, but
agreed that recruiting and other means had replaced many of those losses.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 28, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By B. Drummond Ayres Jr. and Phil Gailey

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 738 words


Of Peyote and Headgear

Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn offered an amendment last week to
allow members of the armed service to wear ''unobtrusive religious headgear,''
such as an yarmulke, as long as it did not interfere with the performance of
their military duties. The measure, which was adopted by the House, would
overturn a Federal appellate court's decision upholding an Air Force regulation
banning the wearing of a yarmulke during duty hours.

At one point, the debate took this turn:

''The gentleman may not be aware of it,'' said Representative Charles Wilson,
Democrat of Texas, ''but I have a large Indian reservation in my district. I am
curious to know if this would apply to war bonnets, unobtrusive, if the warriors
felt that they would fight with more ferocity.''

Mr. Solarz said it would apply to a war bonnet only if it was ''a religious
obligation or requirement or custom or practice, and then only if it is
unobtrusive and if it does not interfere with the performance of their duties.''

Mr. Wilson said that might be difficult to determine. ''For instance,'' he said,
''there are Indian tribes that claim the right to use peyote because it has a
religious context.''

Mr. Solarz: ''Let me ask the gentlemen to yield in turn to ask him if peyote is
used as a headgear.'' Mr. Wilson: ''No, it is not, but I was using that as an
example of an Indian claiming the right to use peyote because of a religious
connotation.''

Mr. Solarz: ''If the gentleman would like to protect the right of Indians to
smoke peyote, or whatever else you do with peyote, he is free to offer a peyote
amendment. Have any of them been denied the right to use peyote in the armed
services?''

Mr. Wilson: ''No, but they have been denied the right to wear feathers into
battle, not like the Italian Army, I might add.''

A China Footnote

As Administration officials tell it now, there was a moment of mild panic among
White House and State Department officials when President Reagan arrived in
China a few weeks back. The first thing the Presidential party heard from
Chinese officials was news that Chinese troops were about to attack Vietnamese
troops in an escalation of the two countries' border dispute.

''We figured we'd been had,'' one United States official recalls. He and his
colleagues worried that the timing of the attack would further fray United
States relations with Vietnam and, worse, for the short term, would steal news
play from Mr. Reagan.

The attack took place, as scheduled. But reporters traveling with Mr. Reagan all
but ignored it.

The Cigarette War

When Dr. C. Everett Koop, the Surgeon General, called a news conference last
Wednesday to warn about the health hazards of cigarette smoke hanging in the
air, he appeared in a striking white uniform that, at first glance, seemed to be
that of a United States naval officer. On his shoulders were the three stars of
a vice admiral, and above his left breast pocket were campaign ribbons, row on
row.

Some reporters were impressed. And puzzled. Was the Surgeon General, in fact, an
admiral?

No and yes.

The Surgeon General, it was explained, is a member of the Commissioned Corps of
the Public Health Service, whose members wear Navy- style uniforms, but usually
only on Wednesdays or for some official functions. Corps ranks are the same as
Navy ranks, and the Surgeon General is a vice admiral in the Corps. As for the
campaign ribbons, they had nothing to do with the Battle of Midway or any other
victory at sea. They were Public Health Service decorations and honors from
foreign governments for accomplishments in medicine.

The Surgeon General/vice admiral left no doubt that he yearned mightily to pin
on another ribbon for victory in the war against the evil weed.

Olympic Trademarks

Washington is a lucrative town for lawyers specializing in trademark and patent
work, and some of them are discovering a sudden need to update their knowledge
in this area of the law. They are signing up for two one- day courses to be
held, coincidentally, in Los Angeles on the first and last days of the Olympic
Games. The courses, Tradmarks at the Olympics, are sponsored by the American Law
Institute and the American Bar Association. This tax-deductible program will
give lawyers a chance to continue their education and, if their busy classroom
schedule permits, attend some of the Olympic Games.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 28, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
WHEN LILACS LAST...

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: NEW HAVEN, May 27


It is the custom at university commencements to talk about commitment to the
future: to stand on Mount Pisgah and point out the Promised Land. But before we
can deal with the future, graduates and the rest of us in this country need to
know something of the past.

America is a country without memory. That feeling in the society seems to me
stronger now than ever. Those of us who are middle-aged or older have all had
the experience of talking to people in their 20's about some central part of our
experience and finding an utter lack of recognition. In college classes today
even a reference to Vietnam is likely to produce blank looks.

The United States has benefited in one way from being an ahistorical country. It
has escaped some of the terrible consequences of folk memory - the ineradicable
hatreds of an Ireland, a Lebanon. But when forgetfulness becomes a national
habit, when history is scarcely taught in schools, there is a price.

Without memory, individuals cannot function properly. Psychologists have written
moving descriptions of patients whose ability to remember has been crippled by a
stroke or other illness; without a sense of the past, they are unable to cope
with the present. And a nation, like an individual, is less than whole if it has
no sense of existing within a framework of history.

The point is not a political one. It goes to the cultural premises of the
society. But there are political consequences in a democracy. Two examples have
come to hand lately: ones of acute importance to our peace and survival.

The first is United States policy in Latin America. Behind it there is a long
history, a record of interventions marked by resentment and failure. The
proclaimed aim again and again was order, the means force, the result repression
- and disorder.

When President Reagan speaks about the need for U.S. action in Central America
now, there is no reference to history, no awareness of it. And on a particular
policy in the region, the covert war against Nicaragua, there is an even more
dangerous lacuna. That is the failure to understand what the rule of law has
meant to this country.

Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan made the point with great power in a
commencement address at the Syracuse University Law School. ''We are not only
forsaking our centuries-old commitment to the idea of law in the conduct of
nations,'' he said, ''but also by some mysterious collective amnesia, we are
even losing the memory that there once was such a commitment.'' He was talking
about the Administration's attempt to flee the World Court's jurisdiction when
sued by Nicaragua. Senator Moynihan scorned the Nicaraguan Government as
''Leninist.'' But the United States should have welcomed the chance to meet it
in court, he said. Instead, ''with a combination of ineptitude and arrogance,''
we said ''we would no longer accept the jurisdiction of the Court, although we
were clearly obliged to do so.''

 Senator Moynihan quoted Allan Gerson, counsel to Jeane Kirkpatrick, the U.S.
Representative to the United Nations. Mr. Gerson said that the World Court ''is
not empowered'' to decide issues involving the lawfulness of the use of force,
and that the U.N. Charter ''assigns questions of aggression and self-defense to
the Security Council.'' ''There is no way to characterize Mr. Gerson's assertion
save ignorance,'' Senator Moynihan said, noting that the Charter specifically
calls for judicial settlement of disputes. ''He does not know the history of our
country. . . . It is as if the United States had suffered a massive stroke and
all memory of a vital and fundamental tradition had vanished.'' The second
example is the nuclear arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Lord Zuckerman, who has advised several British Governments on scientific
issues, writes on the nuclear problem in the current New York Review of Books.
He states twin propositions riveting in their simplicity and urgency.
''Increasing the extent and variety of nuclear deployments has not brought
additional security over the years,'' he says. And whatever defensive systems
the two superpowers try to develop, ''no 'experts' could ever be able to
guarantee them immunity from massive destruction in a nuclear exchange.''
History shows the futility of trying to escape those truths: Witness the
American venture into MIRV's, matched by the Russians, increasing the risk for
both. If the nuclear arms race is ever to end, the two propositions must be
understood. Until they are, Lord Zuckerman rightly says, ''the
military-industrial-scientific complex of both superpowers will continue to
thrive,'' and so will the world's ''debt, poverty and starvation.'' But how can
leaders understand without an awareness of history?


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 28, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Playing Sousa Softly

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 432 words


A man who once marched in the first rank of a high-school band - because he
played the trombone - still remembers how the band played Sousa marches in the
Memorial Day parade.

Heat casualties were likely in those heavy uniforms, so the marchers formed up
early and held to a dignified pace. With that and the meditative attitude of
crowds along the way, the band played the Sousa standards - ''The Washington
Post March,'' ''El Capitan,'' ''The Thunderer'' - softly, and at a stately
tempo. And they sounded best that way, for they were carefully constructed,
ornate as antique clocks.

The trombonist had lost no loved ones in combat. Yet he felt strongly about the
day, and more so each year, especially after Vietnam. He came to understand that
remembering war dead is an ambivalent business.

Deaths may have been heroic, in clear defense of the nation. Or they may have
been needless, in pursuit of failed or foolish policies. They may also have been
something in between and so become the subject of agonizing argument.

That's what happened during the Vietnam War. The dead were politicized. Some
honored them not just for their sacrifice but to validate support for American
involvement. Others read out the lists of battle deaths at antiwar
demonstrations. Life magazine once published pictures of the men lost in one
week, in the style of a high-school yearbook.It took the country a few years to
disengage from war politics enough to give the Vietnam dead the respect they
deserved. The nation finally built a remarkable monument in Washington that does
not condemn false policy or proclaim false victory. Its only function is to
memorialize 50,000 dead.  Perhaps it's never possible to disengage fully from
politics. Planning the Vietnam Veterans Memorial stirred a controversy that
echoed the war debate. Doubts about the losses of life in Vietnam still echo in
Congress, in arguments about Central America. These days, the opportunity for
heroism seems slight, the risk of needless sacrifice enormous.  Is awareness of
that risk a limit on national power? Yes it is - a profoundly reassuring limit.
In fact, the trombonist has come to think that's what Memorial Day is about:
that a free, prosperous society places a high value on life and allows doubt
about past sacrifice to guide its policy in the present. That is true strength,
not weakness. That is playing Sousa softly, with deep respect.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: EDITORIAL

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 28, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

HONORING AN UNKNOWN

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 3; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Dave Dutil of Lewiston, Me., pausing to pray in the Capitol rotunda at
coffin of an unidentified American killed in the Vietnam War. With Mr. Dutil, a
disabled Vietnam veteran, was wife, Anne, left, and daughters Christine and
Michelle, right. Unknown American is to

be buried today in Tomb of Unknowns at Arlington National Cemetery. Associated
Press

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ONE OF 58,012 VIETNAM DEAD JOINS THE UNKNOWN



BYLINE: , Special to the New York Times
By ROBERT D. HERSHEY Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1300 words

DATELINE: ARLINGTON, Va., May 28


His voice choking with emotion, President Reagan led the nation in a state
funeral today for the only American known to have perished in the Vietnam War
who is still unidentified.

Under gray skies, which occasionally dripped with rain, the unknown Vietnam
casualty was pulled on a black caisson along a crowded seven-mile route from the
Capitol and, 11 years after the war ended, was interred in the Tomb of the
Unknowns at Arlington National Cemetery.



Awarded Medal of Honor


The serviceman, whom Mr. Reagan awarded the Medal of Honor, the nation's highest
military decoration, now lies in a crypt near unknown servicemen from the two
World Wars and the Korean War. They had been awarded Medals of Honor by other
Presidents.

''The unknown soldier who has returned to us today and whom we lay to rest is
symbolic of all our missing sons,'' the President said in his eulogy. In
Vietnam, 58,012 United States servicemen died.

Mr. Reagan also sought to reassure the families of 2,447 servicemen and 42
civilians still listed as missing that the Government would not relax its
efforts to account for them. Some of the families voiced concern recently that
today's ceremony would lead to a slackening of the Government's efforts to
account for those still listed as missing.



'We Close No Books'


''We write no last chapters, we close no books, we put away no final memories,''
Mr. Reagan declared. He called on the Vietnamese Government in Hanoi to ''return
our sons to America,'' a plea that prompted vigorous applause, the only
interruption in his nine-minute message.

Some of those in the audience of 4,000 invited guests, including military
officials, veterans, members of Congress, members of the diplomatic corps and
the families of 250 missing servicemen, rose from their seats in the white
marble amphitheater to clap in approval.

Today's ceremonies marked the end of a long journey for the Unknown, who was
formally designated as such at a service in Pearl Harbor on May 17. The body lay
in state in the Capitol Rotunda beginning Friday afternoon. Tens of thousands of
people, about 2,100 an hour on Saturday, according to Capitol police, filed by
on either side of the coffin, which was atop the catafalque that had been used
for all such occasions since the funeral of Lincoln in 1865.

At noon today the flag-covered, gray- metal coffin was put on a caisson drawn by
six gray horses as a 21-gun salute was fired from Fort Myer and Fort McNair, one
round a minute.

The procession made its way down Constitution Avenue past the Vietnam Memorial,
where 55 veterans bearing flags from each state and territory saluted as it went
by, toward Memorial Bridge and the cemetery on the Virginia hillside beyond.

Fly-Over Is Canceled


The only apparent hitch in today's official schedule was the cancellation of a
fly-over by 21 F-15 jet fighters, which were to have swooped over the procession
when it reached the midpoint of the bridge. A military spokesman attributed the
cancellation to low cloud cover, but a security man at the cemetery said the
pilots had had difficulty during practice sessions achieving the required
split-second timing.

While the Vietnam Memorial and the Rotunda were the scenes this weekend of much
private sorrow and commiseration, for many Americans the emotional peak came as
President Reagan neared the end of his eulogy.

Just before placing the Medal of Honor in front of the coffin at his left side
in the amphitheater apse, Mr. Reagan looked at the coffin and, his voice
breaking, said of the Unknown:

''About him we may well wonder, as others have, as a child, did he play on some
street in a great American city? Did he work beside his father on a farm in
America's heartland? Did he marry? Did he have children? Did he look expectantly
to return to a bride?

''We will never know the answers to these questions about his life. We do know,
though, why he died. He saw the horrors of war but bravely faced them, certain
his own cause and his country's cause was a noble one, that he was fighting for
human dignity for free men everywhere.''

'Thank You, Dear Son'


A half-minute later, his voice giving way again, the President concluded,
saying, ''Let us, if we must, debate the lessons learned at some other time.
Today we simply say with pride: Thank you, dear son, and may God cradle you in
his loving arms.''

With that, he laid a wreath in front of the coffin. The audience responded with
a standing ovation. Then came hymns and other music, scripture readings,
including the Twenty-Third Psalm, and the benediction. At the end of the
funeral, the Marine and Army bands struck up the ringing postlude, ''Pershing's
Own.''

The Vietnam Unknown was interred a few minutes later before a select group of
participants, including Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger and some
Vietnam veterans in wheelchairs.

Crypt Excavated in 1973


The Unknown was designated after a process that took more than 10 years. Unlike
the three other Unknowns, whose Arlington entombments were presided over in
November 1921 by President Harding and in May 1958 by President Eisenhower, the
process of finding a qualified Vietnam Unknown was long and frustrating. At one
point it appeared that the crypt, excavated in 1973 at a spot between the World
War II and Korean Unkowns and in front of the Unknown from World War I, would
never be filled.

The mostly small-arms nature of the Vietnam war, the ambitious evacuation
measures undertaken there and the enormous advances in forensic science allowed
the Government to identify virtually every fallen American serviceman. The other
wars had produced large numbers of unidentified dead and the task of finding a
qualified Unknown involved a random selection from a small number of exhumed
graves.

By 1982, military specialists had identified all the American remains from
Vietnam except four that had been brought to the military's Central
Identification Laboratory in Honolulu. While this brought some relief to many
families of servicemen who had been missing but were now identified, it also
frustrated those who wanted a Vietnam representative for the Tomb of the
Unknowns. It was thought that even these four might some day be identified.

Two of these were identified. One as Army Pvt. Alan K. Barton of Saginaw, Mich.;
the family of the second has asked that his identity not be publicly disclosed.
The fourth was designated as the Unknown when the third candidate was deemed
''possibly'' not an American.

The Pentagon, which waived its informal rule that 80 percent of a body must be
recovered for it to be designated an Unknown, has now intentionally destroyed
all identification records related to the Unknown to prevent inadvertent
disclosure of information that might provide clues to the identity of the man
intended to be a universal symbol of Vietnam battle dead.

Four Prayers by Chaplains


The 15-minute interment ceremony on the hillside just below the flag- draped
amphitheater began with four prayers of committal - Jewish, Eastern Orthodox,
Roman Catholic and Protestant - by military chaplains while the ramrod-straight
bearers held the flag that had been draping the coffin above it.

Then President Reagan, who had stood solemnly with his hand over his heart,
placed the wreath in front of the Unknown. Next came a 21-gun salute, which
echoed dramatically in the distance, the benediction and the firing of three
rifle volleys.

A bugler played taps. The bearers ceremoniously folded the flag while the band
played ''America the Beautiful.'' President Reagan saluted and the remains of
the fourth officially designated American soldier ''known but to God'' took his
place in history.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of President Reagan; photo of Vietnam veterans; photo of unknown
serviceman being carried to Arlington National Cemetary (page A14)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MOVING THE U.S. EMBASSY IS 'ANTI-ISRAEL'

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 366 words


To the Editor:


For several weeks I have been following with great interest, and also great
concern, news reports concerning the proposal to move our embassy in Israel from
Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.

I am deeply committed to the security of Israel, as demonstrated by my action in
providing for the massive airlift to Israel during the 1973 war and the alert of
our forces which prevented the Soviet Union from intervening in that war. It is
because I am committed to Israel's security that I am opposed to the proposal to
move our embassy.

Such a move would not contribute one iota to Israel's security. On the contrary,
it would jeopardize it.

Israel has desperate economic problems, with an inflation rate of 200 percent
and with 30 percent of its gross national product going for defense, the highest
percentage in the world. The Israelis suffered casualties in three months in
Lebanon which were the equivalent of what the United States suffered in 10 years
in Vietnam. The conclusion is inescapable: Israel needs peace.

The United States is the only major nation which can play a positive role in
building a structure of peace in the Mideast. Israel cannot have peace if it
continues to be surrounded by implacable enemies - not just the radical Syrians
but more moderate states like Jordan, Egypt and Saudi Arabia as well. It is
better for the United States to be a friend of Israel's neighbors and potential
enemies than to leave a vacuum which an avowed enemy of Israel - the Soviet
Union - is thirsty to fill.  The ability of the United States to influence
Israel's neighbors is at a low point, in part because of the tragic events in
Lebanon. If the U.S. moves its embassy to Jerusalem, the situation would be
dangerously exacerbated, and the U.S. would lose whatever influence it has today
to play a constructive role in the area.  Congress will soon make its decision
on the embassy proposal. So far, Congressional debate has presented the view
that a vote to move the embassy is pro-Israel and that a vote against moving the
embassy is anti- Israel. This puts the issue upside down: the exact opposite is
the truth.

RICHARD M. NIXON New York, May 24, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MILITANT OF 60'S WINS HONORS

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 153 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 28


Twenty years after he started the student's free speech movement in Berkeley,
Mario Savio graduated Phi Beta Kappa from college.

Mr. Savio, now 40 years old, his hair now grayer than some of the faculty
members, was graduated summa cum laude Saturday from San Francisco State
University after earning a bachelor of science degree.

He was admitted to Phi Beta Kappa, the scholastic honor society and was awarded
an Alumni Association scholarship to continue working for his master's degree in
physics next fall.

Mr. Savio, married and the father of two, has shunned publicity in the last two
decades after taking up his bullhorn to protest campus rules at the University
of California at Berkeley, touching off what came to be known as ''The Free
Speech Movement.''

The movement, which gave birth to the campus ''sit-in,'' became the model for
the more widepread movement against the Vietnam War.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SPURNED VETERANS JOIN RITE AT TOMB

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 365 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 28


Three hundred Vietnam War veterans in combat fatigues and jeans, refused a place
in the official funeral procession, marched silently in their own tribute today,
far behind the coffin bearing the remains of an unknown serviceman who had been
their comrade in battle.

Their appearance was evidently a surprise to the thousands of people who lined
Constitution Avenue to view the somber march on its way to Arlington National
Cemetery, where the Unknown Serviceman of Vietnam was buried in the Tomb of the
Unknowns. The crowds broke into applause when the ragtag band of veterans came
into view.

''By God, it's time we cheered them,'' said Gloria Mitchell of Baltimore, who
stood along the procession route and wiped a tear away.  ''I don't know whether
I'm happy or sad.''

At the head of the column of veterans, two men bore black flags honoring those
still listed as missing in action from the Vietnam conflict. A lone bagpiper in
the middle of the column added the soft drone of ''Amazing Grace'' when the unit
had passed the Vietnam War Memorial.

Why Participation Was Denied


When officials of the Military District of Washington organized the procession,
they decided that a band from each service branch and a color guard from each
service academy would march. But they denied a request from the group of Vietnam
veterans, who asked to walk along dressed in the camouflage fatigues and floppy
bush caps they wore in Vietnam's steamy jungles.

The officials said Vietnam veterans would be officially represented among the
hundreds of servicemen and women who marched in the procession ahead of the
coffin. However, no attempt was made to halt the unofficial marchers, who fell
in about a quarter of a mile behind the coffin as the funeral march left the
grounds of the United States Capitol.

All along the procession route, the Vietnam veterans were cheered and more than
a few had faces wet with tears.

When they entered the cemetery, they marched onto a grassy field reserved for
them in front of a giant TV screen where they viewed the hour- long ceremony.
Many of the veterans saluted during the full 10-minute period while a military
band played.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

JACKSON HEARS MEXICAN VIEW OF CUBA

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, May 28


The Rev. Jesse Jackson and a dozen Mexican senators struck an expected tone of
agreement today in a meeting nearly two hours long on such issues as ending
increasing militarization in Central America.

In his welcome to Mr. Jackson, Senator Miguel Gonzales Avelar referred to United
States policy toward Cuba. He said that if relations were possible between the
United States and China as well as the Soviet Union, they should be possible
with Cuba.

The wording came close to duplicating a statement that Mr. Jackson, a candidate
for the Democratic nomination for President, made Sunday on his Central American
position. He gave his views to 300 people at the Albuquerque Convention Center
before he came here this morning.

''I get the point,'' said Mr. Jackson with a smile after the translator had
rendered the Senator's words in English.

Attitudes on Honduras


But the meeting did bare some relatively harsh Mexican attitudes toward the
United States role in Honduras. There are 1,700 American combat troops stationed
in Honduras and 1,000 expected to be temporarily deployed there for approaching
military maneuvers. Senator Gonzalo Martinez Corbala referred to the American
presence and to military maneuvers in the country, which borders on Nicaragua,
as ''military occupation.''

He also said that efforts to ''harass'' the Government of Nicaragua with
''mercenaries'' were doomed to failure and that there would never be an
overthrow of the Government, just a ''conflict of the Vietnam type.''

After the meeting Mr. Jackson conceded that perhaps he had achieved little more
in the meeting than providing Americans with an opportunity to hear the point of
view of those who live with the ''growing tensions'' in the region.

When this visit was first announced by aides to Mr. Jackson, hope was expressed
that he would meet directly with President Miguel de la Madrid. But as Mr.
Jackson landed with his party of 65 reporters, camera operators, Secret Service
agents, associates and staff, local newspapers carried the news that the
President had left the city for an ''intensive working tour'' in the southern
part of Mexico. He was scheduled to return Wednesday, the day after Mr. Jackson
is to return to continue campaigning for the primary June 5 in New Mexico.

Beyond a private meeting and a picture-taking session with Foreign Minister
Bernardo Sepulveda in his spacious office on the 19th floor of a skyscraper,
spokesmen for the Government say it has sought to keep the visit as separate as
possible from the executive branch. Top Mexican officials had serious
reservations about the trip and wanted to avoid any action that could affect the
fortunes of a political candidate north of the border.

A planned outdoor rally and speaking engagement tonight by Mr. Jackson at the
National Autonomous University of Mexico was suddenly canceled by the
Government. According to a high Mexican Government official traveling with Mr.
Jackson, it was canceled after the Mexicans were told there was a possibility of
demonstrations.



'General Security' Cited

It was not clear who was planning the demonstrations or what the purpose was.
However, Jorge Bustamante, director of the Center for the Study of North
American Border Issues and the candidate's unofficial liaison representative on
his trip, denied that a possible demonstraation was the reason for the
cancellation. He said the reasons were a late afternoon rain and ''general
security and logistic concerns.''

Fred Mondragon, the chairman of the New Mexico Democratic Party, who accompanied
Mr. Jackson, said that the visit and Mr. Jackson's urging of United States
support for regional peace initiatives was likely to earn him some votes among
Mexican-Americans. He also praised Mr. Jackson's opposition to pending changes
in immigration laws.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TUESDAY, MAY 29, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 853 words


Washington has sent 400 missiles to Saudi Arabia, which plans to establish a
protected zone for shipping along the western coast of the Persian Gulf,
according to Reagan Administration officials. They said the Saudis had bought
the 400 Stinger antiaircraft missiles and 200 missile launches. (Page A1, Column
6.)

Oil exports from Kuwait have begun to be affected by the shipping war between
Iran and Iraq, according to oil industry sources. Kuwait is geographically the
most vulnerable country on the Persian Gulf. (A8:1-2.)

Two of the four Arab terrorists who hijacked an Israeli bus last month were
captured alive and then killed by Israeli security men, the Defense Ministry in
Jerusalem announced. The Israeli commission found that no order had been given
by superiors that the two be killed. (A1:4.)

A victory by Egypt's governing party was in prospect, according to parliamentary
election returns. The center- right New Wafd Party was trailing a distant second
in elections marred by two shootings and opposition accusations of vote-rigging.
(A9:1.)

A stronger world economy was pledged a year ago when the leaders of seven major
industrial democracies met for three days in Williamsburg, Va. The economy has
improved, but it is vastly more troubled than the leaders envisioned. One
economist, C. Fred Bergsten, concludes: ''Their promises were meaningless. They
did nothing to follow them up.'' (A1:5.) National

A state funeral was held as the remains of the only American known to have died
in the Vietnam War who is still unidentified were enshrined in the Tomb of the
Unknowns at Arlington National Cemetery. The ceremony was led by President
Reagan, whose voice choked with emotion. Under gray, occasionally rainy, skies,
the Vietnam Unknown was pulled on a black caisson along a crowded seven-mile
route from the Capitol to Virginia. (A1:1-3.)

Three-hundred Vietnam veterans, denied a place in the official march, proceeded
silently in their own tribute far behind the caisson bearing the unknown
serviceman who had been their comrade in arms. When the ragtag band of veterans
wearing combat fatigues or blue jeans unexpectedly came into view, the crowds
erupted in applause. (A14:6.)

A ban on testing antimissile arms and a limit to development of even more exotic
technologies for so-called ''Star Wars'' was urged with near unanimity at the
annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. The
gathering was notable for the passion and urgency expressed both among the
experts and in the audience. The Reagan Administration declined an invitation to
present its view. (C1:4-5.)

An educated eye is critical to scientific discoveries, according to experts
attending the meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science. One session stressed that for centuries all theories of science have
started and ended with thoughtful observations of nature. (C1:4-5.)

A shift in breeding programs for both plants and animals is being planned by
Federal agricultural scientists. They are charting an ambitious and, some say,
overdue change in emphasis from conventional methods to genetic engineering and
related biotechnologies. Top officials say that over the next few years they
hope to quadruple their spending on the advanced research. (A1:3-4.)

Wildlife refuges are threatened increasingly. Some managers and other workers at
the refuges agreed with conservationists in saying that the policies of the
Reagan Administration were loosening protections of the National Wildlife Refuge
System and the wildlife. (A1:1-3.)

A boycott of a television station in Jackson, Miss., is being urged by black and
union leaders. The new owner of the station, WLBT-TV, which commands
Mississippi's largest broadcast audience, has dismissed the station's most
popular anchor and its longtime manager, both of whom are black. Critics say the
new owners are decreasing minority involvement in the station's operation and
have been engaging in union- breaking tactics. (A12:1-3.) Metropolitan

Efforts to raise the drinking age in New York State to 21 from 19 are being
aided by the strongest lobbying campaign of Governor Cuomo's administration. His
efforts have had some success despite opposition to the plan by top legislative
leaders. Both sides have pressed efforts to sway undecided legislators.
(A1:1-2.)

A water tunnel would be completed and crumbling water and sewer lines in New
York City would be repaired under legislation that has won the support of
Governor Cuomo and key legislators. The bill would enable the city to establish
an authority to borrow $4.1 billion to complete the projects in 10 years.
(B8:1-2.)

Shakedown weekend in the Hamptons was marred by rain and some consequent
irritability. Young professionals from New York City who are rent- sharing
summer houses were gathering and getting to know one another. Edna Fessler, a
social worker, offered this appraisal of last season: ''Some people you can't
wait never to see again.'' (B1:1-2.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Quotation of the Day

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 39 words


''Let us, if we must, debate the lessons learned at some other time. Today we
simply say with pride: Thank you, dear son, and may God cradle you in his loving
arms.'' - President Reagan, honoring unknown Vietnam casualty. (A14:2.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE OLD RICH ARE DIFFERENT

BYLINE: By Charlotte Curtis

SECTION: Section C; Page 12, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 825 words


RICHARD DOUGHERTY has seen it all at least once as newsman, press secretary and
big-time flack, and before departing the Metropolitan Museum's public affairs
office to write ''a harmless, innocent, innocuous and one hopes amusing
detective novel,'' he paused, lit up one in a seemingly endless chain of Merit
cigarettes and delivered himself of some observations concerning the big rich.

''Hemingway was right,'' he said, leaning back in his swivel chair. ''The only
difference between the new rich and the rest of us is that they have more money.
But if, as I suspect, Fitzgerald was thinking of the old established rich, he
was right. They are different, very different.''

Mr. Dougherty was paraphrasing something he said in an informal speech about the
rich he gave in the confines of a musty, old, men's club, the name of which he
refused to divulge. The speech was witty and charmingly offhand, and included a
guide to what should be discussed while lunching with ''these curious
creatures.''

He recommended gossip (''because there are few things they enjoy more than spicy
news about each other''), foreign policy (though ''a certain caution is
necessary'') and international terrorism (because your companion ''may have had
some friend or relative recently kidnapped in Italy''). Even at this late date,
he advised against praising Franklin Roosevelt.  All fun and games, of course.
Yet for all that, he made some telling points. He said the established rich he
sees, and he sees them frequently, provide a leadership without which the arts
in America would be in deep trouble. And he found these patrician souls more
serious-minded and hard- working than skeptics might suppose.

''Over all they submit to hours and working conditions that would - under
different circumstances - make them ripe for unionization,'' he said. ''Moreover
they often work at this extraordinary pace under the disdainful eyes of staff
people who tend to treat them as if they were slightly retarded.''

He discerned ''a certain religious overtone to all this humorless and untiring
devotion to good causes,'' and said he was tempted to link it with guilt and the
expiation of guilt. Yet he believes this dedication is indeed inspired by a
genuinely religious conviction.

''They have a strong belief in a lord who is responsible for an ordered universe
in which each of us is assigned his proper role,'' he said. ''How else to
explain one's being born to the top of the heap, except that there be a Divine
Intelligence up there, who, on evidence, obviously knows what He's about?''

As donors, Mr. Dougherty has found the old rich remarkably magnanimous and
responsible. At least some of them understand the necessity of giving big money
for maintenance when it is the name rooms and name collections that are so
celebrated down the years.

''They see the city institutions like a great United Way,'' he said. ''They feel
they have to give across the board.'' He thinks the Metropolitan Museum is
''almost entirely their creation.'' The museum is also a memorial. Though it
receives $100,000 a month from some such sources and the occasional $5-million
gift anonymously, most really big money arrives not in cash but as fully-named
collections.

The latest of these, he noted, ever the publicist, is the $60-million Jack and
Belle Linsky Collection. It came not from the established rich but from a couple
who made their fortune in what Mrs. Linsky modestly referred to as ''our
stationery business.'' Her late husband founded Swingline, the stapling company.
The collection, comprising Old Master paintings, French furniture, porcelains,
bronzes and Renaissance jewelry, is to be unveiled next month.

The unveiling revealed, Mr. Dougherty returned to his analysis of the rich in
general. He is certainly not the first to insist they have tremendous power and
influence, especially in the arts, and that the anatomy of this power has been
neglected by scholars and contemporary novelists. Yet he said he was not going
to do a lot about them in his forthcoming detective story, though he might set
it in the Metropolitan. ''I'm going to try desperately to avoid any roman a
clef,'' he added. ''But there will be those who decide to put names to the
characters.''

Mr. Dougherty, a native of Bolivar, N.Y., is the son of actors who preached the
need to get out into the world. In his case, that meant the Air Force in World
War II, and Columbia University. Afterward, he says, he fell into newspapers. He
also worked in city government, wrote ''The Commissioner,'' which became
''Madigan,'' the movie and TV series, covered politics for the late Herald
Tribune and, since he opposed Vietnam, joined George McGovern's presidential
campaign as press secretary. In 1974, after ''a pit stop'' at NBC, he went to
the Metropolitan.

''I'm not a detached oddball observer of the rich,'' he said evenly. ''Some of
them are dear friends.'' As if we hadn't guessed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 29, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

RAPID GROWTH FOR SOME PUBLISHERS

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1048 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 28


A decade ago Facts on File would not have been among the exhibitors at the
annual convention of the American Booksellers Association. That is because since
its founding in 1940 it had been almost exclusively a news digest for libraries.

But today Facts on File is a major exhibitor and a growing force in trade-book
publishing (books of general interest). From a list of only two books in the
late 1970's, it now publishes more than 100 books a year.

Facts on File's rapid growth is a rarity in trade-book publishing, a business
with great financial risks and one in which newcomers have difficulty attracting
agents and publishable authors.

But despite the difficulties, a number of publishers who are exhibiting here, at
the four-day American Booksellers Association convention, which ends Tuesday,
appear to have successfully bucked the odds.



Changes for The World Almanac

Addison-Wesley, for example, is primarily a textbook publisher in science, math,
social sciences and the humanities. But the company, based in Reading, Mass.,
has won the respect of its competitors for the care and attention it gives to
its growing number of trade titles. One of its books, ''Theory Z'' by William
Ouchi, was not only on The New York Times best-seller list but its title has
passed into the language of business management.

The World Almanac has been around since the last century, since its founding by
Joseph Pulitzer, but only last year did it make it onto the best seller list.

The main reason for that is that for most of its life it was available only at
newsstands. But when Jane D. Flatt became publisher of World Almanac
Publications seven years ago, she set out to redesign the book's cover and to
get it into bookstores.

She also set about building a list of popular reference books, which this year
will total 17, including the company's first hardcover title: ''The Twentieth
Century,'' a 512-page illustrated almanac. Other books on this year's list
include a children's book on magic by Shari Lewis and ''The Complete Dr. Salk:
An A-to-Z Guide to Raising Your Child'' by Dr. Lee Salk.



Bedrick Aligned With British

''Our goal is to publish 30 books a year, which we'll reach next year, our fifth
anniversary as a trade publisher,'' Mrs. Flatt said. ''We'll do more hardcovers
and more children's books, and for the first time I've got a backlist - it's
small but it's important.''

When Peter Bedrick left Schocken Books in April 1983, where he had been
publisher, he wasted little time establishing his own publishing company. The
first Peter Bedrick Books came out last September and now, he says, ''By the end
of the year, we're going to have 70 books in print.''

Mr. Bedrick was able to get off to a good start because he entered co-publishing
arrangements with British publishers. ''It's a way to conserve your resources,
because you're not putting out a lot of advance money,'' he said. ''The British
publish the books and Harper & Row distributes them, so we have very little
overhead.''

Mr. Bedrick's list consists of pop-up books for children, miniature illustrated
nature books, an 18-volume series of ''The Library of the World's Myths and
Legends.''



Growth at Beaufort

Beaufort Books is only four years old, but it has expanded from 10 titles in its
first year to 70 in 1984. What's more, while its early lists consisted of a
large percentage of books acquired from its Canadian parent company, New
York-based Beaufort now originates about one-half its own books.

One of those, ''Home Before Morning'' by Lynda Van Devanter with Christopher
Morgan, the story of an Army nurse in Vietnam, was widely reviewed and sold for
a healthy sum to paperback. ''Michael Jackson: Body and Soul,'' an illustrated
biography by Geoff Brown, has sold about 150,000 copies through traditional book
channels and another 100,000 through book clubs.

Beaufort's fall list contains a biography of James Dean, a history of the Astors
and nine novels, including one by Elleston Trevor, who wrote ''The Flight of the
Phoenix'' and ''The Quiller Memorandum.''

''We plan to do more and more fiction,'' said Thomas Woll, publisher of
Beaufort, ''but we also intend to be careful about what we publish because
fiction is still often risky if you don't pay close attention to every step in
the publishing and marketing process.''

Aiming at Younger Market

Facts on File plans to stick with nonfiction, but that appears to be the
company's only self-imposed limitation. Its growing list offers a range of
encyclopedias, photographic books, self-help, reference books, dictionaries,
travel books and nature studies - many of them lavishly illustrated. Its series
of atlases, including ancient Egypt, China, the Islamic World, medieval Europe,
have been widely praised.

Facts on File originates about one- half its titles and imports the other half.
This fall it will begin publishing for the junior high school market, starting
with the first 6 of a 25-volume series called ''The Junior World of Science.''

''We were able to expand the way we did because we have our library base, and
the libraries are still our major customers for many titles,'' said Edward
Knappman, the publisher.

When Facts on File decided to move into trade-book publishing, Mr. Knappman ran
a 10-week in-house seminar at which booksellers and other publishing officials
provided advice to the company.

''We were a whole company of people who had worked on a news digest but knew
nothing about books,'' said Rachel Rephan Ginsburg, director of domestic
subsidiary rights and publicity. ''Even after we started, our poor little first
catalogue was so thin you could barely see it.''

Howard M. Epstein, president of Facts on File, acknowledged that the company
went to great lengths to keep in touch with the library market, but not at the
expense of bookstores. He mentioned, for example, that 45,000 copies of a
recently published book, ''The Corporate Steeplechase'' by Dr. Srully Blotnick,
were distributed through normal trade channels.

In addition, an increasing number of Facts on File titles have been sold for
paperback reprint and to book clubs. ''There almost isn't a book we publish that
we don't sell to one or more book clubs,'' Mrs. Ginsburg said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peter Bedrick

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE RAGTAG AND REGIMENTAL LEGACIES OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 939 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 29


It never fades away. Whenever Americans gather to remember the Vietnam War,
there is the gap between what is official and what is not.

It appeared again in the streets of this city on Monday when about 300 veterans
of the war formed a ragtag contingent far behind the crisp new uniforms carrying
one of their comrades to Arlington National Cemetery for burial at the Tomb of
the Unknowns.

Many of the uninvited marchers belong to an organization that has tried to
personalize the distance between official and unofficial in the nation's
struggle to digest its Vietnam experience. Called the Vietnam Veterans of
America, or V.V.A., the group says its membership is growing even as it becomes
more embroiled in controversy.

At the Memorial Day ceremony, the group's president, Robert O. Muller, 38 years
old, parked his wheelchair among leaders of traditional veterans' groups as an
honored guest. But in a recent interview, Mr. Muller spoke of a fight for
Congressional recognition by his 17,000-member organization and of its
politically sensitive role as intermediary between the United States and
Vietnam.

'We Asked to Go'


''We are not trying to substitute for the U.S. Government,'' Mr. Muller said in
typically blunt fashion. ''The Vietnamese did not invite us,'' he added in
reference to recent visits to Hanoi. ''We asked to go, because the U.S.
Government is not talking to them.''

There are no formal diplomatic ties between the United States and Vietnam, a
condition that the State Department officially ascribes to Vietnam's occupation
of Cambodia. For Mr. Muller, however, it is part of the war's unofficial legacy
of distrust and neglect. Given the diplomatic uncertainty, he said, his
organization felt compelled to take up such issues as servicemen still listed as
missing in action, health effects of exposure to Agent Orange and the
immigration of Amerasian children.

Mr. Muller and other V.V.A. members have made several trips to Southeast Asia
since 1981, mostly to explore the issue of servicemen still missing and the
possibility of repatriating the remains of Americans discovered by the
Vietnamese. These two matters have proven especially volatile between Washington
and Hanoi, with V.V.A. being instrumental in the return of some remains in
recent years. Although the Reagan Administration has opposed any intercession by
the group, Mr. Muller and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Paul F. Gardner
corresponded earlier this year about V.V.A. meetings with Hanoi officials.

'A Proper Turnover'


Referring to a February visit to Vietnam by Assistant Secretary of Defense
Richard Armitage, Mr. Gardner wrote to Mr. Muller in March that ''the Vietnamese
informed us in Hanoi that they had promised to turn over the remains in question
to your organization and did not wish to break their promise to you.'' He added
that they would be willing, however, to deliver the remains directly to the
United States Government in an appropriate ceremony. Mr. Gardner then asked Mr.
Muller to notify the Vietnamese of V.V.A.'s ''willingness to allow the
governments concerned to coordinate a proper turnover in the customary,
exclusively government-to-government manner.''

''As you know, Vietnam Veterans of America has long encouraged and worked for
direct government-to-government discussions,'' Mr. Muller replied in a letter to
Secretary of State George P. Shultz. ''Please feel free to call on us if we may
be of further assistance.''

In April the Vietnamese Government offered to meet with V.V.A. representatives
on a regular basis. Mr. Muller said Vietnam had agreed to repatriate the remains
of eight more Americans, to allow all Amerasian children to leave Vietnam within
a two-year period as a special category of emigrants and to receive scientists
for Agent Orange research. He described V.V.A. discussions with the Vietnamese
as ''solely humanitarian.''

A Letter of Dissent


But what is humanitarian to Mr. Muller apparently looks nothing short of
disgraceful to Clifford G. Olson Jr., national commander of the Veterans of
Foreign Wars. In a letter to members of Congress earlier this month opposing a
Federal charter for V.V.A., Mr. Olson wrote, ''The V.V.A. has done nothing of
substantive benefit for the Vietnam veterans that it purports to represent.''

''In fact,'' he went on, ''our Vietnam veterans have been disgraced and
dishonored by the V.V.A.'s shameful relationship with the Communist
governments'' of Vietnam and Cambodia.

V.V.A. has been recognized by the Veterans Administration since 1981, but a
Federal charter, while carrying no substantive benefits, would bring the group
fully into the ranks of traditional organizations such as the Veterans of
Foreign Wars and the American Legion. Last week, the House Judiciary Committee
approved the charter, but progress through the Senate is uncertain.

''The V.V.A. has grown and matured over the years, diversified its leadership
and worked constructively with Congressional committees to advance the concerns
of Vietnam vets,'' said a Senate staff member familiar with veterans' affairs.
''Trips to Vietnam, however, have antagonized members of this body and placed
their charter bill in jeopardy.''

Mr. Muller, a former marine whose spine was split by a bullet as he led an
assault near the village of Conthien in 1969, makes no secret of the fact that
he does not consider America's effort there to have been noble. The distance,
official or unofficial, between his organization and the United States
Government seems likely to endure through more Memorial Days.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Robert O. Muller

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

MOPEDS SPUR SECESSION TALK ON BLOCK ISLAND

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1036 words

DATELINE: BLOCK ISLAND, R.I., May 25


A casual visitor might mistake for comedy the talk of revolution on this
tranquil little island with its sandy cliffs, fields of June grass and weathered
Victorian hotels.

But Block Island's 620 year-round residents are angry, so angry at the courts
and the Legislature of Rhode Island that they intend to vote for secession from
the state next week at a town meeting. Then they would have to persuade the
state to let the island go. If they should manage it, both Connecticut and
Massachusetts have already offered to accept them.

Block Islanders are angry because the Rhode Island authorities have repeatedly
turned down their efforts to control an invasion of buzzing mopeds from the
mainland, 12 miles away, which they feel threatens their safety, privacy, even
their very way of life.

''I think everybody's behind the revolution,'' said Martha A. Ball, the
treasurer of New Shoreham, the only town on this 11-square-mile island. ''I
don't remember any issue in my lifetime that's brought people together like
this, Republicans, Democrats, people who don't want to get involved.''

What has further enraged many people here is that one of the dealers who rents
mopeds to tourists in the summer has filed a suit against the town and 13 local
officials charging them with a conspiracy to harass and ''unlawfully regulate''
his business. The suit asks for $1.5 million in damages from the town and
$25,000 from each of the individuals, including Miss Ball, who traces her
ancestry to one of the original settlers of the island in 1661.

The action was filed in Federal District Court in Providence by Mark J.
Hagopian, the owner of Miles-Un-Ltd.


Wills N. Brown Jr., another of the moped dealers, contends that island residents
have vandalized his machines, tried to drive moped riders off the road with
their cars and refused to sell him gas or rent him an apartment. Mr. Brown, an
airline pilot who is a resident of Connecticut, comes to Block Island to run his
business only in the summer, like most of the other dealers.

''There are some very powerful people out here with lots of money who want to
get rid of us,'' he said, standing over a fleet of 50 shiny red Japanese- made
mopeds. Last year, he said, some of the brake and throttle cables and gas lines
on his machines were cut and some tires were slashed.

''I'm not pushing dope or shucking jive,'' said Mr. Brown, a tall, powerfully
built man who served in the Air Force in Vietnam. ''I'm just practicing the
American free enterprise system, trying to earn money to put my kids through
college.''

Traceable to Tourist Boom


The battle started in the late 1970's as the number of tourists coming to Block
Island more than doubled to over 10,000 a weekend and a handful of entrepreneurs
began renting them mopeds. The vehicles proved a convenient, inexpensive way to
get around the island's narrow twisting roads.

But they were also a ''menace,'' said Lisa Sprague, head of the island's
volunteer rescue squad.

''People who have never ridden a bicycle before rent them, thinking they are a
toy,'' Mrs. Sprague continued. ''They get on, sometimes after a few drinks, and
crash.''

There is no hospital or ambulance service on the island, so Mrs. Sprague and her
colleagues on the 12-member rescue squad have to tend to the injured. In the
summer of 1982 they got 42 calls, last summer 78.

''It really ruins your own summer,'' said Mrs. Sprague, who is 29 years old and
the mother of twin 2-year-old daughters. ''You just get settled on the beach
when your beeper goes off.''

Ultimatum by Rescue Staff


If someone is seriously injured - last year there were fractured skulls and a
pregnant woman who lost her baby - someone from the rescue squad must accompany
the victim to a hospital on the mainland. Because the ferry and plane service to
Block Island is often interrupted by fog and storms, that can mean waiting a day
or longer for a return connection.

At the moment, all the members of the rescue squad have threatened to quit if
something is not done about the mopeds.

The mopeds, which now number about 500, are also considered an annoyance.

''You buy a house for $100,000 to $200,000 down a dirt road and you expect some
privacy,'' added Mrs. Sprague. ''But they suddenly come whipping around your
house and garden without any regard for anything.''

In 1981, however, a Rhode Island Superior Court struck down a town ordinance
that tried to limit the number of mopeds allowed on the island. Then last
summer, after the town passed an ordinance banning the introduction of any
further mopeds onto the island, the Superior Court ruled that the ordinance was
''unduly oppressive'' and ''unconstitutional.'' The ruling was upheld by the
State Supreme Court.

Earlier Setback Noted


Last fall the town voted 200 to 0 to appropriate money to hire a lawyer to
prepare two bills for the Legislature that would give Block Island the power to
regulate the moped dealers or require anyone using mopeds to have a motorcycle
license. The bills were both rejected in committee by the State Senate.

''They treated us like a bunch of sheep,'' said Bradfield Scranton, president of
the local Chamber of Commerce. More than 60 people from the island made the trip
to Providence to testify, 10 percent of the population, Mr. Scranton noted.

''But they had already made up their minds,'' he said. ''A deal had been made.''
As he spoke, the growl of a pack of mopeds almost drowned out his words.

1812 Technicality May Help


So now the island is preparing to vote on secession. Lawrence Pomeroy, a retired
lawyer from New York who lives here, believes the sticking point is that
secession would also require approval by the Legislature.

But Norris Pike, a member of the town council who introduced the secession idea
at a meeting earlier this month, thinks history may provide help. In the War of
1812, he related, when the British imposed a blockade along the American coast,
Block Island was cut off from the mainland and declared its neutrality.

''It's not clear whether Rhode Island ever recorded our charter after the war
was over and took us back,'' he said. ''So we may not be a part of the state.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 31, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A front-page photo caption yesterday incorrectly described the vehicles ridden
by Maggie Kent and Bruce Ross on Block Island, R.I. They are small motorcycles
owned by their riders.


GRAPHIC: photo of Willie N. Brown Jr. (page A17); map of Rhode Island; photo of
Maggie Kent and Bruce Ross riding mopeds

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 45 words


An editing error in John Wheeler's article ''Vietnam Veterans' Gains'' on Monday
produced a misstatement. The following is correct: ''John Kerry is Lieutenant
Governor of Massachusetts, Bob Kerrey is Governor of Nebraska and Charles Robb
is Governor of Virginia.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: correctionCORRECTION

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              331 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

Vietnam Memorial Chosen for City

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 31, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A front-page caption in some editions yesterday incorrectly identified two
winners of a competition to design a memorial in New York City for Vietnam War
veterans. William Britt Fellows was at the right and Joseph Ferrandino was
beside him.

GRAPHIC: Mayor Koch congratulating winners of competition for memorial to
Vietnam War veterans. From right: William Britt Fellows, Joseph Ferrandino and
Peter Wormser.

 Design, right, is of a 14-foot- high glass-brick wall etched with the words of
soldiers' letters and the news they received from home. The New York Times/Neal
Boenzi

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              332 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WALL TO HONOR CITY'S VETERANS OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By DAVID W. DUNLAP

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 603 words


A plain wall of glass brick, etched with words that American soldiers wrote from
the jungles and mountains of Vietnam and the news that reached them from home,
is to serve as the New York City memorial to the veterans of that war.

Planned for the former Jeannette Park at Coenties Slip, the proposal was
announced yesterday by Mayor Koch as the winner of a nationwide competition that
attracted 572 entries.

Standing over a scale model of the 70-foot-long wall, Mr. Koch gave a $10,000
check to the winning designers, Peter Wormser and William Britt Fellows, both
architects, and Joseph Ferrandino, a writer who was stationed in Vietnam with
the 101st Airborne Division. All are New Yorkers.

They described a 14-foot-high wall covered with excerpts of letters written home
from Vietnam, letters sent by families and friends, political speeches and news
dispatches of the day.

Simplicity Is Appreciated


The items would be chosen in the coming year. After a ticker-tape parade, the
memorial would be dedicated next May 7, 10 years after the end of America's role
in Vietnam.

''What I like is its simplicity,'' the Mayor said, ''and the fact that what will
appear on the wall will be the comments of those who suffered. These comments
will be a constant reminder of how much we owe the dead and how much we owe the
living.''

To be built of 12-inch-square glass blocks, the memorial would sit in what is
now called Vietnam Veterans Plaza, a brick expanse between Water and South
Streets, next to the 55 Water Street tower.

Two portals would punctuate the three-foot-thick wall. Along its length, at
about shoulder height, would be granite shelves on which visitors would place
wreathes or candles or leave messages and photographs commemorating the war. The
excerpts would be etched into the interiors of the blocks to protect against
vandalism.

At the announcement in City Hall, the designers appealed to the estimated
250,000 New Yorkers who served in Vietnam to share the letters they had sent and
received. ''The structure won't work without the participation of the veterans
and their loved ones,'' Mr. Wormser said. ''We're not looking for fancy prose or
edited letters.''

It was just recently, Mr. Ferrandino said, that he learned his mother had kept
his letters in a shoebox for 17 years. Reading them for the first time since
1967, he was jarred by some evocative sentences: ''I know today's Monday,
because we just took our malaria pill,'' and, ''We're eating captured rice.''

''There were some descriptions of countryside,'' he said, ''of jungles and
mountaintops, that I had tried to block out. We are trying to raise what's been
sanded off and bring it to the surface again.''

The winners were picked by the design committee of the New York Vietnam Veterans
Memorial Commission, which was appointed by Mr. Koch in 1982.

The memorial is expected to cost from $250,000 to $500,000. The commission hopes
to raise more than $1 million in donations, with at least half going to job
counseling and rehabilitation programs. ''The memorial is only half of this,''
Mr. Higgins said, ''the bricks and mortar.''

A mayoral assistant, Herbert P. Rickman said the park was an ''ideal site''
because of the growing population and number of tourists in lower Manhattan. He
said the wall would be under constant scrutiny, because it would be situated
among major office buildings. Beyond that, he said, the city had to hope it
would not be defaced.

Photocopies of correspondence should be sent to Vietnam Letters, 110 Church
Street, Suite 1700A, New York, N.Y. 10007.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              333 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AGENT ORANGE ISSUE

BYLINE: By RALPH BLUMENTHAL

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 983 words


What will $180 million buy the Vietnam veterans and their families whose lawyers
recently settled their lawsuit against the makers of Agent Orange? Is the
interest-bearing fund created May 7 by the herbicide manufacturers enough? To
many veterans and some of their lawyers, the questions remain unanswerable as
long as the number of claimants remains unknown.

The fund to compensate veterans and family members who link present health
problems to exposure to the dioxin-contaminated herbicide in Vietnam is growing
by more than $61,000 a day in interest.

But what if the figure is considerably larger than the 5,000 current claimants?
Suppose there are 20,000? Or 50,000? The final number may not be known for
years. Yet veterans have only the next few months, before a court-ordered
hearing on the settlement, to decide whether to accept it as a certain source of
some relief or to oppose it in hopes of returning the case to trial and possibly
winning better terms.

Question of Legal Fees

Another unknown variable is the amount of legal fees that will be awarded out of
the fund to the veterans' 960 lawyers by Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of
Federal Court in the Eastern District of New York. Lawyers in contingency cases
such as this are usually entitled to one-third of the award. But knowledgeable
lawyers estimate that the fees will total substantially less than $60 million
and will be paid out over time, perhaps out of the interest.

The veterans, in fact, will be in the difficult position of having to render a
judgment before knowing just what is in the settlement for them and their
families. Until the prospective number of claimants is better established and
the injuries categorized, no one will be able to say for sure what a cancer-
stricken veteran, his miscarrying wife or their birth-deformed child may be
entitled to.

The problem was much on the minds of the 100 or so lawyers and Vietnam veterans
and their wives who gathered in a Federal courtroom in Brooklyn last Thursday
for a briefing on the issues by the management team of lawyers who led the
veterans' case.

One angry listener, Diana Hackett, said three of her four children suffered from
multiple allergic reactions and blood disorders that she attributed to her
husband's exposure to Agent Orange while serving at American air bases in
Thailand in 1967-68. Yet, she said, given the uncertainties about the settlement
benefits, how could she go home ''and look my children in the eye'' and tell
them something would be done for them?

Other Problems


Another veteran wanted to know whether there would be compensation for the death
of his 2-month-old child, a loss he attributed to herbicide exposure in Vietnam.
Nobody could say.

Without knowing the benefits, lawyers for some of the veterans complained, how
could they recommend the settlement to their clients?

''I hear you,'' said Stephen Schlegel of Chicago, a member of the lawyers'
management team.

''If you've got a perfect scenario, let us know,'' said another member of the
team, Eugene Locks of Philadelphia.

''Even if you have an imperfect scenario, let us know,'' added a third member,
David Dean of Long Island.

By the time of the settlement hearing, or series of hearings - probably in
August - the lawyers expect to have formulated some clearer idea of how the fund
may work.

Payment of Claims


For example, according to Thomas Henderson of Pittsburgh, a veterans' lawyer who
specialized in tracing causes of ailments, they might be initially ranked to
provide, say, $500,000 for a case of soft-tissue sarcoma, a rare form of cancer
linked to dioxin. Then the amount may be weighted by various factors, including
the probability that an ailment was caused by Agent Orange, and the money
available in the fund at the time. Some claims, then, may be paid at 85 percent
of the full amount, or 50 percent, or 25 percent.

Upon closer analysis, according to Mr. Henderson, there may be far fewer real
claimants than has been estimated.

Although 2.8 million Americans served in Vietnam, and several hundred thousand
have been screened for Agent Orange effects, no more than 5,000 veterans and
members of their families - 16,000 people altogether - have filed claims with
the court for actual injury. As a class action, however, the lawsuit and
settlement automatically cover all Vietnam veterans and family members who may
yet come forward.

''I haven't seen enough information to suggest more than 1,500 provable birth
defects, and it may be substantially less,'' Mr. Henderson said. ''And I don't
think there are more than 2,000 cancers, perhaps 1,000 of them provable.''

Reason for Support


Given the uncertainties, why would the settlement merit any support from the
veterans?

Because, the lawyers sought to explain, the uncertainties of carrying through
the lawsuit were far greater. Widely considered the most complex and
far-reaching case of its kind, the veterans' lawsuit was plagued with monumental
legal and scientific problems.

For one thing, statutes of limitation varied widely in the 50 states and there
is no one national product-liability law. Because the herbicide was mixed from
the products of the Dow Chemical Company and six other manufacturers, no one
could ever say which company's product caused any particular injury.

The formation of the class for such a group suit also remained open to serious
legal question. At best, the lawyers said, the veterans could expect to wait
four years for an affirmed favorable verdict. At worst, they could lose a
retrial.

Perhaps most significant, the lawyers say, is that claimants against the fund
will not be treated as adversaries, but will need only to establish the
probability that their ailment stemmed from Agent Orange.

''We're all on the same side,'' Mr. Dean said.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: ANALYSIS

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              334 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 30, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WEDNESDAY, MAY 30, 1984 International

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 867 words


An additional Air Force aerial tanker and 400 Stinger antiaircraft missiles have
been sent to Saudi Arabia, the United States announced. The arms were sent to
help the Saudis improve their air, sea and land defenses against Iran. (Page A1,
Column 6.)

Iran vowed to fight any American military intervention in the Persian Gulf.
Meanwhile, Iraq reiterated its pledge to continue its air and sea blockade of
Iran's main oil export terminal until Iran responded to appeals to end the war.
(A1:4-5.)

The civil war, for the Lebanese, has become a way of life. The nine years of
strife have shaped a country that now limps along indefinitely in a permanent
state of fragmentation, more or less at war with itself. Also, for the first
time since the civil war began, many Lebanese say they feel alone, ignored by
the world, with nothing to wait for anymore. (A1:4-5.)

The withdrawal of the Soviet bloc from the Olympic Games in Los Angeles this
summer was denounced by President Reagan as the ''political machinations of
power brokers in countries that are less than free.'' In a visit to the United
States Olympic Training Center at Colorado Springs, Colo., Mr. Reagan remarked,
''The Games are moving forward and they will be successful.'' (A1:5-6.)

F.B.I. involvement in El Salvador was reported by Provisional President Alvaro
Magana. He said that over the last four months the bureau had trained a
Salvadoran unit that will investigte death squad activities and political
murders. (A1:2-3.)

Chinese-West European ties are being stressed by Prime Minister Zhao Ziyang, who
left Peking for a tour of France, Belgium, Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Italy.
Mr. Zhao's trip is the first by a Chinese leader involved in Peking's new trade
policy with the West. (A3:4-6.) National

Abandonment of at-large elections for local government offices in the South is
being ordered by Federal courts with increasing frequency on the ground that
such systems are racially discriminatory. Civil rights lawyers say the recent
flurry of decisions will open the door for the election of more black officials
throughout the region. (A1:1.)

Gary Hart opposed economic plans espoused by President Reagan and Walter F.
Mondale. Using the successful commercial and sports development of the
Hackensack Meadowlands as a prop, the Democratic Presidential aspirant told a
group of businessmen that there must be a ''third way'' for the nation's
economic future. (A1:1.)

Military recruits are filling goals easily, Pentagon officials say. From
mid-June to Oct. 1, the start of the 1985 fiscal year, young men and women can
enlist, but they will not be able to report for training and duty until after
Oct. 1. Officials also say recruits now include the highest proportion of high
school graduates since the end of World War II. (A21:1-2.)

Lack of crowds at the World's Fair in New Orleans has prompted a top management
change and a gigantic discount sale. The fair's marketing chief, Jeffrey Stack,
has been dismissed and ticket prices have been sharply reduced. (A16:1-4.)

At midday today the Moon will pass directly across the face of the Sun. Weather
forecasters said the spectacular solar eclipse would almost certainly be hidden
from viewers on the East Coast by heavy clouds. Nevertheless, eye specialists
fear that, where the spectacle is visible, some people will suffer needless loss
of vision, either from looking at the eclipse directly or through some optical
device. (A16:3-5.)

Block Island residents are angry at the Rhode Island authorities for repeatedly
rejecting their efforts to control the summer invasion of mopeds from the
mainland, 12 miles away, which they believe threatens their safety, privacy and
tranquil life. The 620 year-round residents of the sandy, picture-postcard
island plan to vote for secession from the state next week. Both Connecticut and
Massachusetts have offered to annex the Newport County island. (A1:2-4.)
Metropolitan

New York City's Vietnam memorial is to be a 70-foot-long wall of glass bricks,
etched with the words that American forces wrote from the war zone and the news
that reached them from home. A model of the memorial, which is to be placed in
the former Jeannette Park at Coenties Slip, was displayed by Mayor Koch as the
winner of a nationwide competition that attracted 572 entries. (B1:6.)

A hiring of 1,500 more police officers next year in addition to the 1,000 new
officers already requested by Mayor Koch is being sought by Edward L. Sadowsky,
the chairman of the City Council's Finance Committee. He said the 2,500
additional officers would raise the total police force to 27,500 by the end of
1986. (B3:1.)

A Westchester judge was upheld by a state appeals court, which ruled unanimously
that he correctly set aside a jury verdict finding Luis Marin guilty of arson
and 26 counts of murder in the 1980 Stouffer's Inn fire. The judge, Lawrence N.
Martin, now of State Supreme Court, ruled that the prosecution had not proved
its case, but that a ''brilliant summation'' by the prosecutor persuaded the
jury ''to go beyond the facts.'' (B2:3.) page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              335 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 31, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Susan Heller Anderson and Maurice Carroll

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 138 words


'Benvenuti a Brooklyn'

''Benvenuti a Brooklyn, la prima

dim ora americana per generazioni di immigranti e profughi'' (''Welcome to
Brooklyn, the first American residence for generations of immigrants and
refugees.'')

So starts the latest in a multilingual series of booklets for newcomers to
Brooklyn. The Italian pamphlet, along with one in Asian languages (Chinese,
Korean, Vietnamese and Khmer), has been published by Borough President Howard
Golden (with financial help from the Brooklyn Union Gas Company), joining
earlier editions for Polish, Greek, Haitian and Hispanic immigrants.

''According to the 1980 census of registered aliens, 13,660 immigrants from
Italy, 6,000 from China and hundreds of families from Cambodia, Vietnam, Japan
and Korea have settled in Brooklyn in recent years,'' Mr. Golden said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              336 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 31, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WESTMORELAND V. CBS: LEGAL DRAMA INTENSIFIED BY 2 CONTRASTING LAWYERS

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 2131 words


The legal matchup in Westmoreland v. CBS, like the military equation in Vietnam,
appears at first to be something of a mismatch.

Cravath, Swaine & Moore, which represents CBS, has 225 lawyers and clients
including Chemical Bank, Nestle and First Boston, and is one of Wall Street's
most respected and successful law firms. Gen. William C. Westmoreland is
represented by the Capital Legal Foundation, which has five lawyers and an
annual budget of $1.5 million - about the total two top partners at Cravath earn
annually.

If anything, this seeming disparity has grown greater in recent days, as Cravath
called in several other prominent New York lawyers to read drafts of its motion
to dismiss the case. These included Floyd Abrams of Cahill Gordon & Reindel;
Robert Sack of Patterson, Belknap, Webb & Tyler; Arthur L. Liman of Paul, Weiss,
Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison, and Harry Johnston 3d of Time Inc.

''It would take a Houdini to make the parties appear equal,'' said Dan M. Burt,
General Westmoreland's lawyer, who estimates that his organization has spent
roughly $900,000 on the case up to now. ''There's no way I can compete with a
class act like Cravath. They have the time, the money and the power.'' Two years
ago, General Westmoreland, the former American military commander in Vietnam,
filed a $120 million libel suit against CBS. The suit stemmed from a CBS
documentary that charged the general, along with other American military and
intelligence officials, with understating enemy troop strength in Vietnam for
political reasons.

Nothing about the Westmoreland case is small. CBS furnished some 55,000 pages of
documents to General Westmoreland, and received more than 250,000 pages from the
Army, Central Intelligence Agency, and other government institutions.

Since the dispute began, the lawyers have been at center stage. Both David
Boies, who heads the Cravath legal team, and Mr. Burt have issued press
releases, granted interviews, and, in a way, approached the limits on
prohibitions that bar lawyers from commenting on pending cases.

So public a posture is unfamiliar to Cravath, which like most Wall Street law
firms, has long been known for shunning publicity of any kind. Lawyers at the
firm hope a recently filed motion for summary judgment - that is, for dismissing
General Westmoreland's lawsuit - will return the case to where they feel most
comfortable: a court of law.

''This marks a turning point in the case, the first time we've assembled and
marshaled the facts,'' said Mr. Boies. ''There might be a lot of publicity and
press conferences, but what's going to count, whether from the standpoint of the
litigation or the public perception, are the facts, and that's really what this
brief is.''

As in another of Cravath's epic battles - in which the firm successfully
represented I.B.M. in multiple antitrust actions brought by the Federal
Government and several competitors - the Westmoreland case is one in which the
term ''legal brief'' is something of a misnomer. The motion to dismiss General
Westmoreland's suit, delivered to the fourth-floor chambers of Judge Pierre N.
Leval at the Federal courthouse in Manhattan, was 378 pages long and was
accompanied by 620 pages of affidavits from 57 individuals, ranging from the
writer David Halberstam to George Romney, the former Governor of Michigan. It
culminated 18 months of research, interviews, and travel and a frantic four-day
burst of writing, collating and proofreading. For Mr.  Boies, who once toyed
with an academic career in history, the case has meant retracing the steps of
those who put together the documentary, and, in a way, reliving the Vietnam era.
His desk is cluttered with depositions from Robert McNamara, Dean Rusk, and
others from that era, and on his wall is a map of Vietnam in 1968, obtained from
the Military History Book Club.

Mr. Boies has already taken the depositions of more than 50 people, making stops
in Athens, Ga., (for former Secretary of State Dean Rusk); Paris (for the former
National Security Adviser Walt W. Rostow); Munich (for Col. John Barry Williams,
former Vietnam desk officer for the Defense Intelligence Agency). This month he
heads to London, and, he said, a trip to Hanoi was once contemplated.

The Cravath lawyers dispute Mr. Burt's assessment that they are Goliaths to his
David, and contend that their expenditures are ''in the same ballpark'' as those
of Capital.

Westmoreland's Gains


But whatever the resources of his lawyers, General Westmoreland has scored some
important gains since filing his suit, from the standpoints of both the law and
public relations.

Last year, Judge Leval ruled that CBS had to provide him with its own highly
critical internal investigation of the documentary, and, later, Mr. Burt
obtained transcripts of damaging taped interviews with network executives.

These disclosures, lawyers following the case say, have done more than secure
the general a measure of rehabilitation unusual in a libel case. They have
helped him shift the focus of the debate from the original charges against him
to CBS, and its methods and motivation in putting the broadcast together.

Superficially, the lawyers in the Westmoreland case are like the opposing
generals in Jean Renoir's film ''La Grande Illusion'' - ostensible rivals who in
fact have much in common. They are about the same age - Mr. Boies is 43, Mr.
Burt, 41 - and have similar educational backgrounds, including degrees from Yale
University Law School. Both are Democrats and neither served in the Vietnam War,
which both opposed.

2 Different Approaches


''I had X-rays that kept me out of that war,'' said Mr. Burt. ''I marched
against it, I hated it. It was a terrible business.''

Yet the Westmoreland case is hardly a gentlemanly joust between peers. Instead,
it is a contest between two lawyers with fundamentally different approaches to
lawyering and to life.

The logistics of large-case litigation, particularly the need to take
depositions jointly, has created an awkward intimacy between them, and the two
talk of one another guardedly. Mr. Boies used words like ''intelligent,''
''aggressive,'' ''clever'' and ''engaging'' to describe Mr. Burt; Mr. Burt
called Mr. Boies ''a very amusing man, in the English sense.''

Mr. Boies, who spent his summers in the 1960's on civil-rights work in the South
and later campaigned for Robert F. Kennedy, now considers himself a more
traditional advocate, pleading a cause for a client. Had General Westmoreland
come to him for advice, he said, he would have had no philosophical objections
to representing him.

On the other hand, Mr. Burt, who practiced law in Marblehead, Mass., and Saudi
Arabia before joining Capital in 1980, admits to viewing the case as something
of a crusade. The precise objective of that crusade has sometimes seemed more in
dispute in the past two years than anything General Westmoreland did.

Charges by CBS Lawyers


CBS and its lawyers charge that Mr. Burt and the Capital Legal Foundation's
prime financial backers - among them, Richard Mellon Scaife, the Olin Foundation
and the Smith Richardson Foundation - are using the general to advance their own
objectives: to legitimize the Vietnam War, intimidate the media and lower the
legal obstacles to libel judgments.

''General Westmoreland has been captured by neo-conservative groups, who are
knowingly abusing the legal process to refight their version of the Vietnam
War,'' said Mr. Boies. ''Any private group without its own agenda would have
told him, 'Look, you're going to lose.' ''

Mr. Burt, who describes himself as a libertarian, called charges that he had
sought to try the case in the press ''hypocrisy of the first order,'' and
accusations that he is the agent of right-wing activists ''lunatic.'' No single
backer accounts for more than 30 percent of his annual budget, he said, and that
donor, Mr. Scaife, had begun contributing before the Westmoreland case began.

''I don't appeal to the hard right, and the big fat cats aren't contributing to
this case,'' Mr. Burt said. ''If corporations had courage, we'd be in a
different world. They're in business to make money, not to fight causes.''

''The only person who calls the shots here is me,'' he continued.

Mr. Burt added that his sole objective in the case was to gain redress for ''a
very decent old man who's taken a lot of flak for what he believed in.''

''No individual should find the foot of a behemoth on his neck for no reason at
all, without the ability to lift that foot off,'' Mr. Burt said. ''This case is
a question of an individual against a machine, Winston Smith against Big
Brother.''

Veterans Send Money


The second largest source of funds for the suit, Mr. Burt said, was small
contributions from Vietnam veterans and others. More than $140,000 has been
raised, he said, much in response to a mass mailing earlier this year sent to
anyone who had contributed to the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington.

''General Westmoreland needs YOUR help to save his integrity and the honor of
thousands of American military citizens who served you and our country during
the Vietnam War,'' the letter said in part.

An extra $29,000 has been raised by a separate organization, Veterans for
Westmoreland. Many of the donors include notes to their former commander, whom
they usually refer to as ''Westy.''

''Sir, I am very glad to send these few dollars to help in your Defence and I
shure hope that you win,'' one veteran wrote.

Personal Factor for Burt


Mr. Burt admits that his crusade has a personal as well as a philosophical
component. A man of slight build who grew up in a working-class neighborhood in
Philadelphia, Mr. Burt compared himself to the figure in a poem by Yeats whose
breast had been lacerated by ''savage indignation.''

He said he had numerous ''emotional scores to settle,'' including some against
corporate institutions ''given to stereotyping people'' and ''insensitive to the
concerns of the little guy.''

One such institution, he said, is Cravath, Swaine & Moore. When he was a Yale
Law student 15 years ago, he recalled, a Cravath partner took him to dinner at
Mory's. Mr. Burt, who is 5 feet 6 inches tall, found that he had difficulty
reaching his plate.

Watching him struggle, the Cravath lawyer said, ''That's the story of your life,
Dan - always three inches from the table.''

That experience, Mr. Burt said, had made his successes thus far in the case
especially satisfying.

''I've laid some ghosts to rest,'' he said.

Few people were surprised when CBS retained Cravath for the Westmoreland case.
The firm had done other work for the network, and had defended Time Inc. in
several libel cases. More noteworthy was the selection of Mr. Boies, who had
previously tried only three large cases before a jury and had never handled a
libel suit.

George Vradenburg 3d, deputy general counsel at CBS and a former associate at
Cravath, said that Mr. Boies's experience on the I.B.M. case, which, in its
complexity and duration, has often been compared to the Vietnam War, made him
especially well qualified for the Westmoreland case.  The shadow of the I.B.M.
litigation hangs over the Westmoreland suit, and Cravath and Mr. Boies have been
accused both of ignoring its teachings - that is, to use all one's resources -
and of following them too literally.

Some First Amendment lawyers observe that the greatest deterrent to libel suits
is the unlikelihood of ever collecting damages, largely because defendants can
drag them out almost indefinitely. They wonder why Cravath hasn't ''papered''
the 69-year-old General Westmoreland as it did the Justice Department in the
I.B.M. case.

Others say that the firm has retained too much of the ''megacase'' mentality.
CBS's voluminous summary-judgment motion, they say, is self-defeating, since
Judge Leval will assume that buried within it is at least one question a jury
should hear.

The relatively expedited pace of the litigation, Mr. Boies explained, stemmed
from CBS's desire to put a quick end to the Westmoreland case.

''It was our perception,'' Mr. Boies said, ''that they are never going to win in
court, and that the case is primarily a publicity tool. The sooner we get this
resolved in court, the better.''

He added that the motion could not have been shorter, given that General
Westmoreland contends that CBS has libeled him in 16 separate ways and included
230 false statements in its broadcast.

''This is not a case where The National Inquirer says a movie star is drunk in a
restaurant or Y is a member of a crime family, where there is a single issue of
fact.'' Mr. Boies said. ''It takes a long time to knock each of these charges
down.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dan M. Burt (page B4); photo of David Boies (page B4)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              337 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 31, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTIONS

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 41 words


A front-page caption in some editions yesterday incorrectly identified two
winners of a competition to design a memorial in New York City for Vietnam War
veterans. William Britt Fellows was at the right and Joseph Ferrandino was
beside him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: correction

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              338 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 31, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

THE 16-MILLIMETER FILM IS CELEBRATED AT FESTIVAL

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1074 words


Librarians, not movie stars, are among the judges. The winners will get blue
ribbons encased in Lucite rather than statuettes called Oscar, and most of the
films will have their major showings in school and college classrooms, not
anywhere named Loews or RKO.

Yet, when the names of the first- place films are announced tomorrow night at
the American Film Festival, being held all this week at the Roosevelt Hotel, the
winners will rejoice as though they had never heard of ''Terms of Endearment.''

''This is the Academy Awards of 16 millimeter,'' said Leo Dratfield, president
of Films Inc. in New York City, a veteran distributor whose entries in this
year's festival include a film on homeless people in Phoenix and one on the
threatened extinction of the condor.

Unlike the better-known event last month in Los Angeles, the American Film
Festival, sponsored by the non- glamorous sounding Educational Film Library
Association, is not for first-run feature films. The $32.5 million spent on one
''Return of the Jedi'' would easily cover the production costs of at least
one-third of the entire annual output of the nontheatrical film industry.

Films selected as finalists from among the year's 9,000 nontheatrical films are
being screened all week and the jurors are casting ballots for the final tally
tomorrow. The screenings from 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. are open to the public at a
cost of $35 a day today and tomorrow.



Winners to Be Shown Saturday

The winning films will be shown on Saturday from 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. and
admission will be $10 for the day.

Most of the work is by small independent film makers and eventually will be
shown in programs at libraries or circulate like books to individuals and
groups. The films also will be acquired by audio-visual departments of schools
and colleges for loan to teachers and professors to use in classes.

''We serve an area of 3,000 square miles and there is only one movie theater in
the whole region that ever shows these kinds of films,'' said Michael D. Miller,
head of audio-visual services for the Mid-Hudson Library System, based in
Poughkeepsie. ''We loan films through 70 public libraries and eight colleges.''

For some adults, the mention of educational films evokes tedious memories of a
darkened classroom where flickering black and white images were accompanied by
the droning voice of an omniscient narrator.



Computer in Many Entries

But just as popular movies have changed so have educational films. They are now
almost always in color, employing the latest cinematographic techniques.
Narrators have been replaced or supplemented by dialogue and storylines. Above
all, the information is wrapped in an entertaining format and the worst offense
is to be didactic and boring.

Educational films also strive to be current and it is no accident that the
computer appears in so many of this year's festival entries.

Among the finalists in the science and mathematics category, for example, movies
about computers have taken a place alongside films on such perennials as
mollusks, crystals and paramecia.

In the elementary/junior high school instructional category, a walking, talking
computer named Kingpin has a leading role in a film on how to write a research
paper, ''Library Report.'' The film makes the point that students should develop
old-fashioned research skills instead of hoping that a computer will do the work
for them.

''What do you think I am, human?'' an excitable Kingpin asks Beverly when she
tries to give him her notes so that the computer can write the paper for her.

Some documentaries as slick as anything on commercial television also are being
fed into the educational market, as exemplified by ''Vietnam Memorial,'' a
contender in the social issues category.



Films on a Memorial and Divorce

The film, intended for adults as well as high school and college students, is a
powerful account of the dedication of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in
Washington in November 1982, focusing on the emotions of veterans and grieving
parents of dead servicemen. It brought tears to nearly everyone in the screening
room this week as the film showed bereaved visitors to the memorial trace their
fingers across the thousands of names etched in the wall, searching for loved
ones and former comrades.

Just as juvenile literature has taken on more controversial subject matter so
have educational films.

This could be seen in ''The Way It Is: After the Divorce,'' in which an
off-camera interviewer lends an air of authenticity to what is actually a
performance by professional actors. What unfolds is the heart-rending tale of a
12-year-old girl's struggle to adjust to the divorce of her parents, a film sure
to be used in school guidance programs.

While much of the fare at the festival has specialized appeal, the skills behind
such films are universal to the craft and so the nontheatrical industry has
become a training ground for film makers aspiring to reach commercial television
and Hollywood.

A few of the films, such as ''The Good Fight,'' which played last month on
Manhattan's Upper West Side, find their way into certain theaters, and a number
of other films are going into schools and libraries after running on public
television.



'In a State of Turmoil'

But, mostly, they fill a need otherwise not fully served even in an era when
cable-television stations and neighborhood video stores are starting to cut into
the informational and educational market.

''We are not really in competition with the video rental stores,'' said Marcia
Purcell, principal film librarian for the New York Public Library, which she
said has experienced no drop in the demand for films at its 82 branches.

There are problems, though, and the imperiled profits in an industry that relies
on nonprofit customers are leading to mergers of distributors and takeovers by
large corporations. Also, the spread of videotape recorders is lending
uncertainty to the future of 16-millimeter film.

''It is true that the industry is in a state of turmoil,'' said Catherine Egan,
president of the Educational Film Library Association and assistant director of
audio-visual services at Pennsylvania State University. ''But for years people
have been predicting the death of the 16-millimeter film and the independent
film maker who makes this product. The American Film Festival is proof that this
hasn't happened.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of visitors to the American Film Festival

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              339 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THE EVENING HOURS

BYLINE: By Anne-Marie Schiro

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 699 words


THE interior garden of the I.B.M.

Building on Madison Avenue at

56th Street made its debut as a party setting Wednesday night, and a dandy
setting it was with its towering bamboo trees reaching for the skylight and its
huge pots of peonies, irises and black-eyed Susans. Round tables covered
alternately in red and blue cloths with white floral centerpieces completed the
picture.

The party - the Red White and Blue Gala for the Mayor's Commission for a New
York Vietnam Veterans Memorial - was also a first.

''It's a very moving evening,'' Mayor Koch told the 700 dinner guests, ''a
mixture of festivities and sadness. The Vietnam War divided America. But tonight
that war has brought us together.''

The party brought together Wall Street, real estate and big business for
champagne in the Trump Tower Atrium (serenaded by the United States Military
Academy Band) and dinner in the I.B.M. Garden Plaza.

Several hundred more guests arrived for after-dinner dancing. All expenses were
underwritten, principally by Remy Martin Amerique. As a result, the evening
raised more than half of the commission's $1 million goal for building a
monument and funding a jobs program for New Yorkers who served in Vietnam.

THERE was another first on Wednesday: the Y.C.L. Ball at the Grand Hyatt Hotel
for 19-to-29-year- old supporters of the Youth Counseling League, which serves
emotionally disturbed adolescents.

''It's the first event for this age group,'' said Betsy Kaiser, a co- chairman.
''They're alumni of the Gold and Silver Ball, which is for 15-
to-18-year-olds.''

Drew Schiff, a Brown University student, was one of those alumni.

''When we had a meeting about tonight's party,'' he said, ''the majority decided
on a ball. Hopefully, it will be a little more mature, a little more adult.''

There were more bottles of beer than one usually sees at a society ball, but not
as many sequins.

John McCabe of Providence College put on white tie and tails to escort his
cousin, Karen Welsh, who wore short lace gloves with her puff- sleeved white
dress.

''I've been looking forward to this since September,'' said Mr. McCabe. ''We had
a pre-Y.C.L. Ball party at the Hard Rock Cafe, and I drove down from Rhode
Island with some friends. I think it was worth it.''

PRINCESS NILOUFER arrived in New

York from Paris this week in a rainstorm and was guest of honor at a cocktail
party in Janice Levin's apartment in another rainstorm. But her spirits were not
dampened.

''To me, New York is Christmas,'' said the granddaughter of the last Sultan of
Turkey. ''I had my first fairy tale view of New York in 1961 at the Imperial
Ball. I came for 10 days and stayed for two months. I couldn't leave. I wanted
to marry an American. I went back to Paris and met Ed Pope at Maxim's.''

Edward Pope Jr., to whom she was married in 1962, is indeed an American, but
they live in Paris.

''We haven't been here in two and a half years,'' the Princess moaned, ''an
eternity, a real eternity.''

''I've been in New York 23 years,'' George Stavropoulos chimed in. ''I love New
York. If they asked me to leave, I'd go to a monastery!''

PEOPLE magazine is giving itself

a 10th anniversary party this week that is lasting, on and off, for four nights
and is scheduled to go on the road to Chicago, Los Angeles and Detroit. Now,
that's a party.

Some 1,200 guests turned up at Tuesday night's opening celebration, which began
with cocktails in the Vivian Beaumont lobby, moved into the auditorium for an
original 45- minute musical called, of course, ''Ten,'' and then, under cover of
umbrellas, splashed past the Reflecting Pool for dinner and dancing under a
12,000-square-foot tent.

The most frequent cover subjects - John Travolta (12 times) and the Princess of
Wales (11 times) - did not show up, but among those who did were Patricia Hearst
Shaw, Janet Leigh, Robert Preston, Mike Wallace, Susan Strasberg and Aileen
(''Annie'') Quinn.

Miss Leigh, in mauve sequins, said she had never been on the magazine's cover,
but she has written her autobigraphy,entitled ''There Really Was a Hollywood.''

''It's not one of those bed-to-bed biographies,'' she explained, ''but it's
about love.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of William F. Buckley Jr. and Sharon Mann

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              340 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

200 GATHER IN PARIS TO RECALL DAYS BEHIND GERMAN LINES

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 947 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 31


Their names are Mike and Elmer and Nigel and Pierre. They are retired insurance
salesmen and farmers and real estate salesmen. Forty years ago, some were in
German-occupied France and others were parachuted in just after the Allied
invasion of Normandy on June 6.

They were underground agents known as Jedburghs, whose strategy was ''surprise,
kill, vanish.''

But it is hard to imagine a more peaceful group than the 200 or so Jedburghs who
gathered Wednesday night at the Hotel George V to celebrate the 40th anniversary
of their operations in support of the French Resistance in the German Army's
rear areas.

Many of the Jedburghs have lived their postwar lives at quiet jobs in small
towns, but not all of them. The master of ceremonies Wednesday night was William
E. Colby, a former Director of Central Intelligence. And at the head table sat
Jacques Chaban-Delmas, the youngest general in the French Resistance and later
Prime Minister of France.

Group Was Formed in '44

The Jedburghs originated early in 1944, when the American Office of Strategic
Services and the British Special Operations Executive established a joint
enterprise to be known as Special Force Headquarters, which was to organize all
underground resistance in France in support of the invasion.

The program called for large-scale paramilitary activity, the maximum delivery
of arms and supplies to the French and a major attack on the Germans on and
after D-day. Thereafter, the Resistance was to raid German communications,
ambush troops and convoys and prevent the demolition of key installations when
the Germans withdrew.

To integrate Free French activities with the Allied operations, several
three-man teams, called Jedburghs, were to be trained and parachuted in uniform
into France, Belgium and the Netherlands to direct and coordinate the operations
of the resistance forces in those countries.

Origin of Name Obscure

Jedburghs? No two men could agree on the origin of the name. One thought it
derived from a Scottish castle. Another was sure it had its origin in a
forgotten commando-type operation in the Boer War.

The members were chosen carefully. Elmer Esch, a farm boy from Iowa, remembers
that he was headed for duty at a camp for German prisoners of war when he was
tapped for a specal service. He did not know what it was, but ''anything sounded
better than that assignment,'' he said. So he was shipped to Milton Hall, an
Elizabethan mansion 100 miles north of London, where he joined 240 other
volunteers, most of them American and British but also including French, Belgian
and Dutch.

At Milton Hall, they practiced silent kiling in sunken gardens, dropped in
training harnesses onto quiet lawns, fired demolition charges on the golf course
and practiced the Morse code on hand- powered wireless sets. It was all, as they
said in those days, ''very hush,hush.''

It also was very intensive. Their parachute training concluded with a night drop
after three days. At Fort Benning, Ga., where American paratroopers had been
trained, troops did not do a jump until they had six weeks of training.

Putting together three-man teams that would work effectively was a problem.
Ultimately, it was decided that teams that formed by mutual consent were likely
to be more efficient. So an Englishman and an American or a Frenchman and an
American would, in their words, decide to become ''engaged'' and ultimately
''married.'' A radio operator, usually an enlisted man, would be added, and the
group would be given its code name, Harvard or Ammonia or Ronald.

In May 1944, the first Jedburgh teams were sent to North Africa to be dropped
behind the German lines in southern France. Six more teams were dropped in
Brittany in June. From there, they radioed intelligence about German troop
movements to the Allies in the Normandy beachhead.

Led Hit-and-Run Attacks

By the end of August, after the Allies had broken out of the beachhead, all the
remaining teams had been dropped into France, Belgium and the Netherlands. About
them, they gathered Resistance fighters and led them in hit-and-run attacks and
in the destruction of German depots.

They were not without honor. Of the 82 Americans who participated, 53 received
the Distinguished Service Cross, the Croix de Guerre, the Legion of Merit, the
Silver Star, the Bronze Star or the Purple Heart. Their British, French and
other colleagues were similarly honored.

On Wednesday night, they sat in the resplendent Salle de Paix in the hotel, all
of them older but with a few exceptions remarkably trim. Their wives said they
had never known about that episode of their husbands' lives until a few years
ago, when reports of the Jedburghs' operations began to leak out.

Their operations did not end with the end of the war in Europe. Some were
shipped to China and Burma for the last actions of the Pacific War. A few moved
from the O.S.S. to the Central Intelligence Agency, and one or two - they were
growing old now - operated in Vietnam.

Tonight, they participated in a ceremony at the Resistance Monument at Mont
Valerien outside Paris. And on Friday night ,they will relight the flame at the
Arc de Triomphe.

At the dinner Wednesday night, the stories, in no way diminished by time, passed
back and forth across the dinner tables:

''Remember those Brittany fishermen?''

''The Germans were more scared than I was, which is saying something''

''Met an Englishman who was on my team. Hadn't seen him for 40 years. Fine guy.
Never knew he was a lord.''

As a guest left the hotel, the doorman asked who the old fellows were. Told, he
shrugged his shoulders. It was not his war.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              341 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Bolivia Seeking to Halt Sale of Guevera Diaries

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 140 words

DATELINE: LA PAZ, Bolivia, May 31


Bolivia, saying it has been robbed of part of its history, announced today that
it would try to stop the last diaries of the revolutionary Ernesto (Che) Guevara
from being auctioned in London.

Defense Minister Manuel Cardenas told reporters that Bolivia wanted the diaries
back and would ask the British Government to stop the sale, which is to take
place at Sotheby's on July 16.

Mr. Cardenas said the diaries disappeared from the vault of Bolivia's
intelligence agency. A spokesman for Sotheby's denied that the diaries had been
stolen. He said Sotheby's was satisfied that the diaries' owner, who is
non-British, had valid legal right to sell them.

Che Guevara, once Fidel Castro's closest assistant, was killed by Bolivian
troops in 1967 after trying to lead an insurrection there that he wanted to
become ''another Vietnam.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              342 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Two Veterans Plead Guilty in Temple Fire

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 119 words

DATELINE: GREENFIELD, Mass., May 31


Two Vietnam veterans pleaded guilty today to the firebombing of a Buddhist
temple on New Year's Eve to call attention to stress that they say veterans
suffer from the war.

Roland Voudren, 33 years old, and Donald Taylor, 37, pleaded guilty in Franklin
Superior Court to charges of burning a building and destroying a church.

The offenses carry a maximum sentence of 15 years in prison, but their lawyer
and the prosecutor urged that the two instead receive psychiatric counseling
over three years of probation.

Judge Charles Alberti took the recommendation under advisement pending a hearing
when their doctors could testify. Mr. Voudren and Mr. Taylor were released
pending the hearing, about June 12.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              343 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 2, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK;
GETTING ON THE TEAM

BYLINE: By Sydney H. Schanberg

SECTION: Section 1; Page 23, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 767 words


I'm sick and tired of being impersonated by law-enforcement agents. Every Tom,
Dick and Harry with a badge thinks he can cross-dress as a reporter. So I'm
going to do something drastic about it.

But first, a little history about this heinous design to compromise the press's
independence, integrity and legitimacy.

The Central Intelligence Agency has been assigning agents to pose as journalists
for years and refuses to stop. The F.B.I. a few weeks ago repeated again that it
has an inalienable right to impersonate in peace or war. The Internal Revenue
Service said the same on page 1 of this newspaper this week. And so on, right
down to local cops, and most recently, sheriff's deputies in Morristown, N.J.,
who posed as a television crew to entrap drug-law protesters smoking marijuana.

With the poison having seeped so deep, how can anybody trust us anymore, talk to
us confidentially, if they think they're talking to a cop?

This is my counterplan. Starting today, I shall cease posing as a reporter and
start posing exclusively as an agent of the C.I.A., F.B.I., I.R.S., D.I.A.,
C.I.C., D.E.A., N.Y.P.D. and any other undercover initials that occur to me.

Every self-respecting, red-blooded journalist coast to coast should do the same.
If it works, we could put the press-impersonators out of business in a month.

All it takes is a publicity campaign to spread the word about our masquerade to
the public nationwide. Once that's done, no cop or investigative type will be
believed by any citizen.

A typical scene, I predict, will go like this. A highway patrolman pulls a
driver over for speeding on the Long Island Expressway. The cop strides up to
the window, asks the driver for his license and registration, and the driver
suddenly starts to laugh.  ''What's so funny?'' the cop growls.  ''Come on,''
says the driver. ''Don't put me on, I know who you are.'' ''Oh, yeah? Well, who
am I?'' ''You're Schanberg, of course - or one of the other wacko journalists in
his crusade,'' replies the grinning motorist, as he revs his engine and speeds
off.  It will happen a thousand times a day all across America. The Jones's
phone will ring, Ed Jones will answer it and the voice on the other end will
say: ''Mr. Jones, this is Rappaport of the I.R.S. We need some clarifications
about your expense-account deductions on your '82 return. Could you bring
everything down to my office next Wednesday at noon?'' ''What do you take me
for, Schanberg - a greenhorn?'' Jones snorts into the receiver. ''I've got no
time for these charades. Get lost.'' Rappaport's ear suffers pain as the phone
slams down.  Or an F.B.I. agent rings the apartment buzzer of a member of the
Woolly Wobbly Mugwump Alliance, which has just edged its way onto the subversive
list. ''We have a few questions we'd like to ask you. Can we come up?'' ''Is
that you again, Schanberg?'' squawks the voice irritably through the intercom.
''Carrying this a bit far, aren't you? Get off my stoop right now or I'll call
the precinct.''

As doors are slammed in their faces, C.I.A. operatives will plead their
legitimacy through keyholes: ''I'm not Schanberg! I'm Agent Y4734. Just call my
office, they'll confirm it.'' Did you ever hear of the C.I.A.'s confirming an
agent's identity over the telephone? That operative's career is finished.

I realize this campaign will have a devastating effect on law enforcement,
espionage and counterespionage everywhere. No one will ever take a G-man or
T-man or traffic cop seriously again.

But that's what they're doing to us. What source is going to take a reporter
seriously if the source thinks he might be talking to a narc?

We had to protect ourselves. There was no other way.

And the law-enforcement types really shouldn't complain. They were always
telling us to stop carping and nattering, stop playing the adversary and get on
the team. So we did.

They can bar reporters from covering D-Day on Grenada - but can they bar the
C.I.A.? We're finally in the locker room.

It's a great victory for the press. Just as the public was beginning to turn
against us for being arrogant and self-important, we joined the F.B.I. Has any
decent American ever asked: ''Who elected the F.B.I.?'' Or declared: ''The
I.R.S. lost Vietnam''? Or accused the C.I.A. of being elitists or, worse, pinko
dupes?

It's nice for a change to be on the side with the subpoena power and the bugging
equipment.

Nonetheless, I'm willing to call it off whenever they are. Cross-dressing is
pornographic. If they'll promise to stop it, we'll get back into our clothes,
too.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              344 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 2, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 578 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 14.

1. This caused dogs to howl, the temperature to drop by six degrees and flowers
to close their petals. What was it and why was it rare?

2. ''People have started to live in self-enclosed bubbles, but bubbles don't
make a nation,'' said a sociologist about a country so fragmented that almost
every inch, including the Presidential palace, has been claimed by rival sects.
What country is it?

3. ''I won't tell you what I got to hold - samples from a toxic waste dump.''
Who made this remark and what were the circumstances?

4. A new vaccine has proved highly effective in protecting children against a
common and potentially dangerous viral disease, varicella. By what name is the
disease better known?

5. Perhaps more by design than usual, a golfer won his own tournament last
weekend. Identify him and explain.

6. Citing ''grave concern with the growing escalation'' in the Persian Gulf
crisis, the United States took its first concrete action since the conflict
between Iran and Iraq widened two weeks ago. What did it do?

7. ''If governors got everything they wanted, they wouldn't need state
legislatures,'' Governor Cuomo said. What were the circumstances?

8. One of 58,012 was honored and an effort was made to reassure families of
2,489. What was the occasion and what do the numbers represent?

9. Some fossils in a major exhibition at the American Museum of Natural History
have aroused a cultural and political battle. What is at issue?

10. Authorities on food believe that Marco Polo did, in fact, bring pasta to
Italy when he returned from his sojourn in China. True or false?

11. ''Not even the special circumstances of this case justify such behavior,''
an Israeli official said of the deaths of two terrorists. What were the
circumstances?

12. These children are playing on a rare specimen at the New York Botanical
Garden, one of 25 that have temporarily sprouted in New York City parks.
Identify it and explain.

13. ''A guest must know when to pack his bag and leave,'' said the first
American to manage the illustrious Vienna State Opera. He is resigning in anger
and moving to Monte Carlo. Who is he?

14. A 14-foot-high glass-brick wall was selected as the winner of the
competition for New York City's memorial to veterans of the Vietnam War. What
will be etched upon the wall?

15. The nation's trade deficit soared in April by more than (16/17/18/19)
percent, the (second/third/fourth) consecutive record monthly gap between
imports and exports.  16. Later this year, some perfect plastic spheres, each
one one- hundred-thousandth of an inch in diameter, will go on sale. Why is that
historic?

17. According to a recent poll, a majority of citizens in Europe's 10 Common
Market countries believe that a united Europe (would/would not) improve the lot
of their children.

18. Three athletes gained the right to represent the United States by winning a
race that was held mostly on foreign soil. Who were they and what was the race?

19. A centuries-old scent revived by the youth movement of the late 1960's is
becoming a major force in the fragrance market of the 80's. What scent is it?

20. There were 3,800 kosher butchers in the five boroughs of New York City in
1940; today there are approximately (200/400/800/1,600).

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              345 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 2, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

HARVARD'S 'CORE' DEAN GLANCES BACK

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass., June 1


When Henry Rosovsky helped develop Harvard University's pioneering core
curriculum in the mid-1970's, he remembers, The Harvard Crimson attacked it as a
''counterrevolution.''

''Welcome back to high school,'' the student paper said of the new program,
which was designed to refocus and toughen standards for a liberal arts
education.

But Mr. Rosovsky, who is stepping down at the end of this month as dean of
Harvard's Faculty of Arts and Sciences, was amused recently when The Crimson
said the first task of his successor would be to insure that the core curriculum
did not fall apart.

Dean Rosovsky, who is 56 years old, reflected on student acceptance of his
reform in an interview that also touched on some of the major problems
confronting Harvard, such as raising faculty salaries and the school's increased
difficulty in attracting the best professors.

A Native of Poland


Mr. Rosovsky, who is from Danzig, now Gdansk, in Poland, has in his 11 years as
dean been Harvard's second- highest administrator, after Derek Bok, the
president, and arguably its most influential figure. Mr. Rosovsky not only
started the core curriculum, which has been widely copied around the country; he
also helped heal an acrimonious political rift in Harvard's faculty growing out
of the Vietnam War. He also put the school on a sound financial basis despite
inflation.

A cheerful, reflective man who can be both humorous and tenacious, Mr. Rosovosky
has been so popular with Harvard's professors that he was given two minutes of
sustained applause when he delivered his final report to the faculty two weeks
ago.

But Mr. Rosovsky likes to joke that he will be best known ''for something I
didn't do.'' That was his rejection of an offer to become president of Yale in
1977, so as to see through his overhauling of Harvard's curriculum.

''I'm afraid they will put that on my tombstone,'' he said, with his feet
planted on a coffee table in his office in Harvard Yard.

Positive Response by Students


In his report, Mr. Rosovsky listed several measures of the success of his
curriculum reform. Half the students taking the new courses in the core
curriculum, now part of the requirement for a Harvard degree, are chosing them
as electives, beyond the number they need, he noted.

''That's a pretty good sign,'' he said, drawing on his pipe.

Equally important, the core, as it is called here, has generated the largest
number of new courses ever injected into Harvard's curriculum, with new classes
making up 91 of the 149 in the core's total. Moreover, Dean Rosovsky said, 88
percent of those teaching the core courses are full professors, not junior
faculty members, indicating the core program's attraction to teachers.

The core, which replaced Harvard's old general education program, requires
students to demonstrate a proficiency in writing, mathematics and the use of
computers, as well as an ability to reason, not just assemble facts.

In his final report, Mr. Rosovsky attacked a frequent criticism that while
Harvard might be great at research and good for its graduate students, its best
faculty members neglect undergraduate teaching. A study he commissioned in the
last year found these ''barbs'' unjustified, he said.

Classes Seem to Satisfy


The report found, for example, that while full professors made up slightly below
half the faculty, the classes they taught accounted for more than 50 percent of
undergraduate course enrollments. In addition, Mr. Rosovsky said, statistics
compiled both by the university and an undergraduate guide to courses showed a
steady trend toward greater student satisfaction with classes over the past
decade.

As for the criticism that many Harvard courses are taught with a large number of
students and a distant professor, Mr. Rosovsky said the number of classes with
more than 50 students had declined since the 1950's. Only one- sixth of student
enrollments were now in such large classes, he said, while courses with fewer
than 20 students made up half the total and 30 percent had fewer than 10
students.

But Mr. Rosovsky acknowledged a concern about maintaining the quality of
Harvard's faculty. The problem, he said, is not keeping outstanding professors,
although a few have been lured away from Harvard by large salaries at schools
such as the University of Texas; rather, the problem is attracting top teachers
to Harvard.

Harvard has traditionally selected for tenure few of its junior faculty members
- the assistant and associate professors - preferring to scour the world for
talent. Mr. Rosovsky said only 30 percent of Harvard's full professors came up
through the ranks, as against 50 percent at other Ivy League schools and 80
percent at some good state universities.

Competition and Marriages


Harvard's policy is becoming harder to follow as the number of first-rate
colleges has increased in recent years, adding to the competition, Mr. Rosovsky
acknowledged. The rising number of two-career marriages has also made it harder
to get families to move to Cambridge.

At the same time, the dean feels the gap between salaries for college teachers
and other professions has widened, lessening the attraction of a teaching
career. A close relative of Mr. Rosovsky, who just finished at the Harvard
Graduate School of Business Administration, has taken a job in business with a
starting salary of $40,000, he said. An assistant professor at Harvard makes
only $21,000 a year, he noted.

After relinquishing his dean's post, Mr. Rosovsky plans to write a book about
managing a university. The title will be ''The University: An Owner's Manual.''

''That's reflective of my love affair with the automobile,'' he said. ''I think
I'm the only dean of a respectable college who subscribes to Road and Track
magazine.''

He Will Research Japan


Mr. Rosovsky will also return to teaching and research on his specialty, the
economic history of Japan, a field he left in 1973 just as interest in Japan
exploded.

''Some of the lessons people are talking about learning from Japan may be
oversimplified,'' he said. ''We have become mesmerized by what the Japanese have
achieved, ''We tend to forget that the Japanese had enormous good luck after
World War II.'' He cited the American assumption of Japan's military burden,
Japan's undervalued currency and cheap labor and the climate of free trade.

Without disregarding Japan's accomplishments, he said that the answer to the
Japanese challenge was for America to recapture its neglected ideals and
strengths, a stress on youth and its ''shirt-sleeve ethic.''

But Mr. Rosovsky is fascinated with the success of Asian-Americans at Harvard,
whom he called ''no doubt the most over-represented group in the university.''

More than 10 percent of next year's freshman class will be Asian-Americans, he
said, though they make up only 1.5 percent of the total population.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Henry Rosovsky

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              346 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 2, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 423 words


Questions appear on page 13.

1. It was an annular eclipse of the Sun, during which, unlike a total eclipse,
the Sun is never fully obscured from any point on Earth.

2. Lebanon.

3. At an appearance in Bel-Air, Calif., Senator Gary Hart made the comment,
referring to campaigning in New Jersey.

4. Chicken pox.

5. Jack Nicklaus defeated Andy Bean in a playoff at the Memorial Tournament at
Muirfield Village in Dublin, Ohio. Nicklaus is the host of the tourney and
designed the course on which it was played.

6. It sold 400 Stinger antiaircraft missiles and an Air Force aerial tanker to
Saudi Arabia.

7. The Legislature defeated a bill to raise New York State's legal drinking age
to 21 from 19, a measure for which the Governor had lobbied harder than for any
other in his 18 months in office.

8. The interment of the remains of a Vietnam War serviceman in the Tomb of the
Unknowns at Arlington National Cemetery. The numbers represent the 58,012
American servicemen who died in the war and 2,447 servicemen and 42 civilians
who are still listed as missing.

9. A statewide coalition opposed to the racial policies of South Africa objects
to the fossils, which are from South Africa.

10. False.

11. A commission of inquiry determined that two of the four Arab terrorists who
hijacked an Israeli bus last month were captured alive and then killed by
security men. One passenger was killed and seven others were wounded in the
hijacking incident.

12. ''Large Torso: Arch'' is one of 25 Henry Moore sculptures that will be on
display in New York parks for nine months.

13. Lorin Maazel.

14. Excerpts from letters written home from Vietnam, letters sent by families
and friends, political speeches and news dispatches of the day.

15. 18. Fourth.

16. The spheres were produced in a weightless environment on a recent space
shuttle flight and are the first commercial products to be made in space.

17. Would not.

18. Pete Pfitzinger, Alberto Salazar and John Tuttle were the first three
finishers in the United States Olympic marathon trial. The race, which started
in Buffalo, was run mostly in Canada, to a finish line near Niagara Falls.

19. Musk.

20. 400.

21. The American Telephone and Telegraph Company.

22. The Transit Authority permanently withdrew its fleet of Grumman Flxible
buses without consulting the agency, in violation of a Federal-city agreement.

23. Japan. Korean lettering found on a few balloons suggests that they are used
as devices in the propaganda war between North and South Korea.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              347 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHITE HOUSE IS AT THE MERCY OF EVENTS

BYLINE: By STUART E. EIZENSTAT ;
 Stuart E. Eizenstat, a partner in the Washington office of Powell, Goldstein,
Frazer & Murphy, an Atlanta-based law firm, was Assistant to the President for
Domestic Affairs and Policy under President Carter.

SECTION: Section 3; Page 2, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 819 words


HERBERT STEIN'S fine book, ''Presidential Economics,'' provides trenchant
criticism of the economic policies followed by all the Presidents of our time,
from the liberal policies of Democratic Presidents to the ''supply-side''
economics of today's conservative Republican incumbent, and even those practiced
by Richard Nixon, whom he served as chief economic adviser.

His comments call to mind several hard lessons I gathered through four years
with President Carter.

First, although Presidents are held accountable by the electorate for the
economy's performance, their ability to influence the course of a $3.3 trillion
economy is more limited than voters - and Mr. Stein - recognize.

Some limits are imposed by our own system of government. Our Federal Reserve is
the most independent central bank in the non-Communist world and may lead
monetary policy in different directions than Presidents desire. Fed Chairman
Volcker's dramatic 1979 move toward a more monetarist policy - despite the
concerns of Administration economists - helped produce the high interest rates
so troubling to Mr. Carter.

And Congress over the last ten years has also restricted Presidential latitude
in economic policymaking. The authority President Nixon exercised to impose wage
and price controls or which Jimmy Carter used to invoke credit controls has been
denied future Presidents. The 1974 Budget Reform Act has removed a President's
monopoly on economic and budget forecasting.

Unanticipated events can also throw into havoc a President's economic game plan,
events to which Mr. Stein gives insufficient weight. Droughts will cause
inflation to quickly shoot up. The oil price shocks of 1973-1974 and 1979-1980,
caused respectively by the Arab oil embargo and the Iranian revolution, led to
the new phenomenon of ''stagflation,'' simultaneous high inflation and high
unemployment, bedeviling the economic policies of Presidents Ford and Carter,
and leading to their defeats in the following Presidential elections.

Financial markets are themselves important constraints on Presidents. If a
President's economic program affects stock and bond markets, they have almost an
implicit veto over that program.

A second lesson, well dramatized by Mr. Stein, is that modern Presidents have
underestimated the inflationary pressures in our society and overstimulated the
economy to reduce unemployment. There are enormous short-term political
pressures on Presidents to run an expansionary fiscal policy, since rising
unemployment creates such visible pain.

Lyndon Johnson tried to achieve a Great Society at home and win the Vietnam War
abroad simultaneously, without a tax increase. Richard Nixon, haunted by the
memory that the 1959-1960 recession cost him his first chance at the Presidency,
made sure history did not repeat itself in 1972. Jimmy Carter was committed to
end the ''Ford recession'' and reduce over a 7 percent unemployment rate by
economic stimulus. Ronald Reagon has used deep tax cuts to end the latest
recession, but left huge deficits that may produce the next.

Like others, our Administration failed to recognize early enough the dangers of
rising inflation, which temporarily lowered unemployment but ultimately led to a
downturn in public confidence.

A third corollary lesson is that rising inflation must be stopped quickly and
forcefully; the longer Presidents wait, the more painful the ultimate remedy
must be. I found this to be the case in the Carter Administration, as Mr. Stein
undoubtedly did in the Nixon Administration.

In a society where each group wants more for itself and sacrifice only for
others, rising inflation cannot easily be avoided. Half-measures and gradualism
will not slow resurgent inflation.


THE temptation to heat up the

economy as soon as inflation

temporaily abates must be avoided. A heavy dose of stimulus to end a recession
may ultimately set in motion forces leading to the next one.

 As Mr. Stein suggests, it is better to set a clear fiscal course aimed at
achieving a given level of nominal growth, and let the natural course of budget
deficits or surpluses self-adjust the economy.

But unlike Mr. Stein, I believe that a voluntary income policy can encourage
wage and price restraint, when combined with sound fiscal and monetary policies.
But it will not work in the face of soaring inflation, nor while the economy is
stimulated to reduce unemployment.

Finally, even the best general economic policy will leave unsolved structural
problems, such as intolerably high levels of black unemployment, the growing
number of displaced older workers, and the declining competitiveness of our
basic industries - problems which Mr. Stein does not adequately address.

But I support Mr. Stein's call for a ''new consensus'' on economic policy, in
light of the limitations of past Keynesian economics and today's supply- side
economics.




LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              348 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FROM OUR PREP SCHOOLS: THE GOOD NEWS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 75 words



* To the Editor:

The two news stories that dominate the first page of the second section of your
May 24 issue bear the headlines ''After Nightmare of Vietnam, Valedictorian at
City College'' and ''In a Reformatory in '66, an M.D. Today.'' Can't you find
any heartwarming stories about spoiled, native-born, upper-middle-class kids who
make good despite

their

 upbringing?

EDWARD STEINBERG Teaneck, N.J., May 24, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              349 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IDEAS & TRENDS;

BYLINE: By Margot Slade and Richard Levine

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 235 words


For Those Lost

In Vietnam



Vietnam veterans have traveled a long road to gain an honored place among
American soldiers and fitting monuments to their dead. The war ended 11 years
ago. Last week, an unknown soldier - his unidentified remains representing all
who died in Vietnam - joined those from other wars in the Tomb of the Unknowns
at Arlington National Cemetery. In New York City, plans were unveiled for a
Vietnam memorial - a wall of glass 14 feet high and 70 feet long etched with
words soldiers wrote to their friends and families, and with news they received
from home.

''The unknown soldier who has returned to us today and whom we lay to rest is
symbolic of all our missing sons,'' said President Reagan in his eulogy, part of
a state funeral that included the awarding of the Medal of Honor. The toll
includes 58,012 dead and 2,489 still unaccounted for. The President tried to
reassure their families that Government efforts to discover their whereabouts or
recover their remains would not slacken. ''We write no last chapters, we close
no books, we put away no final memories,'' he said.

Three hundred Vietnam War veterans in combat fatigues and jeans, who had been
denied a place in the official procession, marched in silent tribute far behind
their comrade's caisson. Crowds applauded at the sight. Said one bystander, ''By
God, it's time we cheered them.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              350 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE DOMINELLI AFFAIR

BYLINE: By Robert Lindsey

SECTION: Section 6; Page 52, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6278 words


Robert Lindsey is chief of the Los Angeles bureau of The Times.

NO COURTROOM IN San Diego was large enough to accommodate the expected crowd, so
the bankruptcy court hearing was scheduled in the auditorium of the Veterans War
Memorial Building. Long before the session began on a hot afternoon last month,
groups of well-dressed men and women began assembling beneath the tall
eucalyptus and pine trees outside the ornate old structure in Balboa Park. Then
they filed in, anxious for another look at a man whom so many of them had, only
a few months earlier, revered as ''The Genius.''

First, though, they had to pass, one by one, through an archway containing a
metal detector. United States marshals wanted to be sure no one was carrying a
concealed weapon that could be used against the accused. When the more than 400
people finally saw Jerry David Dominelli, some of them gasped. He looked so
pale, so suddenly gray - almost bewildered. Finally he spoke, in response to
questions about at least $112 million in investors' money that he had accepted
and was now missing. Six times, the 42-year-old Dominelli repeated the same few
words: ''I decline to answer based on my Fifth Amendment right against
self-incrimination.'' As they exchanged angry glances, some of those in the
audience must have been thinking of another warm May day, just a year earlier,
when things were very different. The brassy rhythms of a mariachi band had
rolled across the rippled waters of Mission Bay as more than 1,500 men and women
gathered outside the Hilton Hotel. The musicians, under their big sombreros,
strolled past tables laden with tacos, enchiladas and guacamole. In the hotel
swimming pool, a huge, floating ice sculpture carried the message: San Diego
Loves Roger Hedgecock.

Hedgecock, a maverick Republican and an environmentalist, had just been elected
Mayor of the nation's eighth largest city, and this was his inaugural party. He
was there, smiling and greeting his supporters, including business and
professional people, cultural and social leaders - and the man who was picking
up the $8,500 tab, Jerry David Dominelli.

Many of the guests at the inaugural party had approached Dominelli with a sense
of awe. He was a near-legendary figure, said to be earning millions of dollars a
day through the foreign-currency trades of his investment bank, J. David &
Company. He lived in a $2.1 million home, bought exotic foreign cars by the
dozen, supported virtually every charity in the city. And he was even helping
more than 1,000 of his neighbors to become rich beyond their wildest dreams - or
so it had seemed.

Today, Jerry Dominelli is being held in Federal prison in downtown San Diego
accused of bankruptcy fraud and conspiracy to commit fraud, charges he denies.
The man who once claimed to have made millions now says he is too broke to
afford his own lawyer and has asked the Government to supply one. Eleven of his
companies are in bankruptcy. Efforts to uncover the millions of missing dollars
put into his company by San Diegans have thus far failed.

The investors, who include some of the city's most successful and illustrious
citizens, are distraught. So are two of the people who were closest to
Dominelli: Nancy Hoover, a former Mayor of the nearby town of Del Mar who was a
Dominelli business associate and shared his huge mansion, and George Mitrovich,
a longtime political organizer who worked for J. David & Company while trying to
change the political order of things in San Diego. So is Mayor Hedgecock, who
was an odds-on favorite to win re-election next Tuesday before revelations of
close financial ties with Mrs. Hoover. His political future - and that of a
recent political turn to the left in San Diego - is in jeopardy.

Mystery still surrounds the extraordinary turnaround in the life of Jerry
Dominelli, and he has refused to be interviewed for this article. But the
picture that emerges from dozens of interviews with his friends and former
employees and with others who knew him is of a complex, driven man. Though
Dominelli insists that he will make good investor losses, bankruptcy officials
say that this is increasingly doubtful. Questions have also been raised by court
lawyers and investment advisers as to just how much currency trading he actually
conducted. Some of his former clients compare him to Meredith Willson's Prof.
Harold Hill, the ''Music Man,'' who emerged from nowhere, charmed a whole town
into believing in his scheme and then tried to sneak away with the loot. If you
believe his critics, Dominelli took the whole town.

As the details emerge, it is becoming clear that the J. David story has several
themes. It is a love story. It is a story of trust and, possibly, betrayal in a
tree-shrouded paradise of towns whose names - La Jolla, Del Mar, Rancho Santa
Fe, Escondido - sound like melodies. It is a story of greed in a community where
success and upward mobility are almost a religion, and where getting rich quick
seemed part of the local birthright.







 JERRY DOMINELLI'S INNER SANCTUM WAS A huge, wood-paneled office filled with
antiques and etched glass in a building he owned in La Jolla. He was usually at
work there before dawn, former employees say, his face illuminated by the glow
of computer screens as he tracked fluctuations in the European currency market.
His desk was piled high with newspapers and business publications from around
the world.  Irene Schaffer, who published a small newspaper in La Jolla, recalls
a 1982 visit. ''You'd think you were in 18th-century London,'' she says. Nancy
Hoover sat on a sofa, Mrs. Schaffer says, ''her cat crawling all over her. She
was very relaxed, but Jerry was going off the wall, screaming into two phones,
'Buy. Sell,' saying lots of four-letter words. He was in a complete frenzy, and
she was a sort of a sponge, absorbing him.''

In public, the 5-foot, 8-inch Dominelli was a very different person - physically
nondescript, almost shy, with thick horn-rimmed glasses and curly salt-
and-pepper hair. He did not smoke and rarely took a drink. He had a tendency to
shun the public limelight.

It was in 1979 that Dominelli founded J. David & Company. A native of Chicago,
he had graduated from the University of San Diego 10 years before and had worked
at several stock brokerage houses. According to former employees, the new firm
was based on an approach that had long been used successfully by major banks and
financial institutions.

Dominelli's plan was to allow ordinary investors to profit from speculation in
the rise and fall in the value of foreign currency. He envisaged an investment
pool that would work much like a Wall Street mutual fund in which investors'
money is combined to buy stocks. Using this approach, Dominelli set out to
create a large pool of funds to move in and out of the foreign currency market.
Just a tiny upward movement in the value of Swiss francs or German marks, a
matter of less than a cent on a dollar's worth, could yield thousands of dollars
in profit. The same maneuver would be repeated a dozen times a day.

The currency markets are volatile and require specialized knowledge and skills.
Dominelli proclaimed himself an expert, and he said he sought no fee for
handling his clients' money - just 20 percent of their profits.

Initially, potential investors were skeptical, but some acquaintances gave
Dominelli a few thousand dollars to work with, and they were delighted. Monthly
statements showed profits of 3 percent or more - as much as 40 percent on an
annual basis. Word spread, and starting in 1981, a torrent of money began to
pour in. The J. David & Company roller-coaster ride had begun.







 RANCHO SANTA FE IS A RURAL ENCLAVE OF rolling hills, walled estates and golfing
fairways about eight miles inland from the coastal communities of La Jolla and
Del Mar. The cost of an address in Rancho Santa Fe ranges from about half a
million, for a fairly modest home, to several million dollars for one of the
many estates hidden along winding roads. Late in April, Nancy Hoover agreed to
an interview in the house she shared there with Jerry Dominelli.

At the time, Dominelli, in flight from a San Diego court subpoena, was staying
on the Caribbean island of Montserrat. He was being compared by bankruptcy
officials with Robert L. Vesco, the fugitive American financier who fled the
country after being accused of defrauding investors of more than $200 million.
Mrs. Hoover felt the comparison was unfair, and she said she wanted to tell
their side of the story. She stipulated that nothing of substance she said could
be quoted directly.

The house is a large, rambling place with the kind of Mediterranean-style tile
roof that is popular in California, soaring ceilings and exposed wooden beams. A
swimming pool was visible through the huge picture window in the living room.

Nancy Hoover had already jogged several miles that morning. She is 5 feet 11
inches, with a bronze tan and blonde hair that falls below her shoulders; at the
age of 45, she still has a claim to be what Madison Avenue once called ''The
California Girl.'' On this occasion, she sought to smile, but she was plainly
troubled. Her eyes were red and she dabbed at them with tissue. She had just
heard, she said,






 that the authorities on Montserrat had decided to arrest Dominelli.

She began to talk about her past but was interrupted again and again by calls
from friends. Each time, she sprang from her seat to answer. ''I keep thinking
it's going to be Jerry,'' she said. Then the phone rang, and she learned that he
had been put into a Montserrat jail. She burst into tears and left the living
room, and a few minutes later, a friend came in and said: ''Mrs. Hoover would
like you to leave. She says she can't go on.''

Nancy Hoover and Jerry Dominelli had met in 1977 when they had adjoining desks
at the offices of the Bache Halsey Stuart brokerage house in La Jolla. Both were
already married and had children, but romance blossomed. Even their friends
thought them an odd couple.

''They seemed a lot different from each other,'' one says. ''He was a Republican
and voted for Reagan; she was a liberal. She liked athletics; he couldn't care
less about sports.''

According to the friend, ''Jerry's much more of an introvert than Nancy, a very
intelligent guy, extremely well read; he'd devour 10 newspapers a day. But he
was an intensely private man while she was very much into social things. She
liked to get her picture taken, he didn't.''

Mrs. Hoover, the daughter of a Navy man, spent her childhood in various ports
around the country. While attending college, she met and then married George
Hoover. Following five years of service in Portugal and Brazil with the United
States Foreign Service and the birth of two children, Hoover resigned his
position and settled in Del Mar, where he and his wife both became stockbrokers.
Mrs. Hoover also entered local politics, serving on city committees concerned
with the environment. She was elected to the City Council in 1974 and two years
later took her turn in the rotating job of Mayor.

In 1979, Nancy Hoover left her husband to live with Dominelli, and a year later,
she left Bache Halsey Stuart to join J. David & Company, where she eventually
became an officer of the firm. According to various investors, she helped
convince them to invest with Dominelli, making ample use of a slick brochure
that set forth a number of successful trades allegedly achieved by the firm.

Dominelli and Nancy Hoover lived well. According to Louis Metzger, the court-
appointed bankruptcy trustee who is overseeing liquidation of the Dominelli
companies, singly or together they appear to have bought at least five homes,
dozens of cars, a Grumman Gulfstream jet plane, two Learjets and at least one
race horse. It was not uncommon, a former J. David salesman reports, for Nancy
Hoover to spend $10,000 on clothes and gifts in an afternoon at Capriccio, a
swank shop in La Jolla. Last December, on the eve of the company's collapse, the
couple spent $25,000 on a Christmas party for the staff of J. David at the Hotel
del Coronado and another $6,000 on a party for employees' children.  Their
contributions to charities became a local legend. When the San Diego Symphony
Orchestra was on the brink of collapse, they provided $100,000 to keep it
playing. They gave $120,000 to build an Olympic-sized swimming pool at the
University of California, $250,000 more for a university theater, $100,000 to
the San Diego Opera and $20,000 to buy a World War I Spad airplane for a local
aerospace museum.





 George Mitrovich recalls an appeal for $40,000 from a group seeking to build a
Jewish Community Center in La Jolla. ''I told them they might be lucky to get
$1,000 or so,'' he said. ''They wanted to show Nancy the property; she said she
would go look at it at 3:30 on a Thursday afternoon. On Thursday, she wanted to
go running. I told her we were going to be late for our appointment, and she
said, 'How much do they want?' I said, '$40,000.' She said, 'Do I have to go
there? Can't we just give the $40,000 to them and I can go running?' '' Nancy
Hoover, Mitrovich said, went for her run, and he called to tell the Jewish
leaders that the money was theirs.

The couple also had their individual interests. Dominelli's passion was
automobiles, and they were said to have poured millions of dollars into a
professional Porsche racing team. Friends say he kept a string of luxury cars -
Ferraris, Mercedes-Benzes, Jaguars. Once he proposed building an underground
garage for more than 20 cars at the sprawling estate in Rancho Santa Fe, but the
neighbors protested and the project was dropped.

The J. David triathlon team was a pet project of Nancy Hoover. High-caliber
athletes were selected and given salaries and expenses so they could travel
around the country to compete in the swimming-cycling-running contests that make
up a triathlon.

As the money rolled in, J. David invested in gold mining and oil exploration
projects, bought buildings, opened an office in London, bought an investment
company on the island of Guernsey in the English Channel and a life insurance
company in Arizona and invested in dozens of other enterprises. Before things
started to go wrong, between the San Diego office and other offices in such
places as New York and Hong Kong and a permanent crew of construction workers
remodeling Dominelli's office and home, the firm had 270 employees.


Just how many people invested with J. David & Company is uncertain, but
bankruptcy officials say the figure is between 1,000 and 1,500, and almost no
element of San Diego's social or political hierarchy seems to have been immune.
Scores of judges, surgeons, socialites, bankers, journalists, lawyers, business
executives, entrepreneurs and retired people pressed money on Jerry Dominelli.
A businessman in nearby Orange County invested more than $10 million. A
certified public accountant invested more than $500,000. ''I figured the guy was
honest,'' the accountant said. ''I knew he was spending a lot of money, but we
concluded that he was making a lot of money.''

According to news accounts, the ranks of investors even included Allen R. Glick,
a La Jolla businessman and former Las Vegas casino owner whose name has figured
prominently in several Federal investigations of organized crime, though he has
never been charged with criminal activity.

Some who put up money were stalwarts of the local Democratic establishment -
''members of the La Jolla, Del Mar quiche and Volvo set,'' as an aide to
Republican Senator Pete Wilson commented recently with a touch of partisan
satisfaction. Murray L. Galinson, one of Walter F. Mondale's principal campaign
planners, was one. Another was Simon Casady, a prominent liberal Democrat.

For Patrick Carroll Shea, a lawyer who represents one of the investors, what's
puzzling about the J. David affair is that ''some of the most sophisticated
investors'' in the county and other affluent communities in California and
elsewhere were putting money - ''some of them with no questions asked'' - into
an obscure kind of investment that promised a sky's-the-limit rate of return.
''It always sounded too good to be true,'' another lawyer admitted. ''You always
felt something was wrong with it.'' He said he had mortgaged his house to raise
part of the $80,000 he invested with J. David.

''It had all the outward appearances of success,'' the lawyer added. ''Dominelli
and Nancy Hoover were the darlings of San Diego. George Mitrovich of the City
Club was involved in it. They had these incredible offices. They were always
making big contributions to charity. I made withdrawals on a regular basis and I
always got my money without any trouble. He just seemed like a genius.''

The confidence investors had in some of the people associated with Dominelli is
a common refrain. James R. Mills, former president pro tem of the California
State Senate, put in $50,000. ''A lot of sharp, very sophisticated investors I
knew had put a lot of money in it,'' he said. Then he added, ''The reason I got
into it was Nancy Hoover.''


George Mitrovich, a tall, slender, gray-haired 48-year- old, waved both arms,
palms outstretched, making a point; his Presidential cuff links, given him by a
friend who worked in the Reagan Administration, flashed brightly. Over breakfast
of sausages and fried eggs in the coffee shop of the San Diego Hilton, a few
steps from the inaugural party of the year before, the one-time director of
public affairs talked of J. David & Company.

''Maybe in the end it really was a huge scam,'' he said. ''But if it was, it was
pulled off with an adroitness and skill that you wouldn't believe. If there was
any illegal activity going on, I never saw it.''

An activist against the Vietnam War, Mitrovich served as a press assistant to
the late Robert F. Kennedy, Democratic Senator Harold Hughes of Iowa and
Republican Senator Charles Goodell of New York. In 1973, he returned to his
native San Diego intent on turning the city around.

Mitrovich soon established the San Diego City Club, a forum for out-of-town
speakers, mostly Democrats and Republican moderates. He saw it as a base from
which to mount an assault on those he felt controlled the city, a partnership of
conservative businessmen and the equally conservative Copley family, which owns
the city's two major newspapers. ''This has been a town run by and for the
interests of the Republican Party,'' he said. ''Deals are made, understandings
are reached, for the benefit of the power structure.''

The people in charge of the city, he said, ''are intelligent enough to know that
in a competitive situation like you have in Los Angeles, San Francisco or New
York, they wouldn't be very important or powerful, so they do what they can to
keep talented people away. They can have a very nice life style by keeping out
the competition.'' But, he added, ''there are a lot of people who are impatient
for change.''





 Mitrovich worked for J. David & Company for more than two years. The job, he
said, left him plenty of time to pursue his political goals. Dominelli provided
him with a $17,000 Peugeot, the use of a $750,000 home and a salary that ranged
from $36,000 a year at first to $60,000 - not enough, he said, to afford to
invest in the firm. Mitrovich also served as the chairman of the commission that
operates the San Diego Jack Murphy Stadium, home of the San Diego Padres
baseball team and the San Diego Chargers football team.

Did he never, during those two years, wonder where the money was coming from for
Dominelli to buy those expensive sports cars or for Nancy Hoover to spend
hundreds of thousands on charities? ''If you come from any traditional
framework,'' Mitrovich replied with exasperation, ''youre not going to
understand it, because it defies tradition; this was the most unstructured place
I ever worked at. Nothing, nothing was normal. I believed Jerry Dominelli was a
genius at what he was doing.''

Mitrovich left the firm last January. ''Resigning was the most difficult thing
I'd ever had to do in my life,'' he said. ''Here were two people whom I loved,
Jerry and Nancy, who had been good to me, but I had to leave.'' He was silent
for a moment; then he said: ''In retrospect, the whole experience was
surrealistic; the whole thing was bizarre, beyond belief.''


As the J. David roller coaster climbed ever higher, some brokers in the San
Diego area warned their clients to beware. But according to former employees,
the first real danger signals came last December when the firm's checks began to
bounce. The following month, several investors filed suit against Dominelli,
claiming that he had diverted their money to his own use.

As Mitrovich remembered it, investors began storming the firm's elegant offices
in what amounted to a run on the bank. ''The place became an absolute zoo,'' he
said. Then a senior executive entered his office after talking with Dominelli
and told Mitrovich, '''We have a hemorrhage of money and Jerry doesn't even know
how much his overhead is.'' Dominelli had promised his staff that money to ease
the crisis would be coming from foreign banks, Mitrovich said, ''but it never
came.''

Under pressure from the investors, Dominelli's companies declared involuntary
bankruptcy on Feb. 13. In bankruptcy court, he insisted that he would produce
the missing money, but rejected demands by court officials that he provide a
list of his investors or reveal where the money was located. Because of his
refusal, a Federal judge on Feb.  25 ordered him to jail for contempt of court,
but 10 hours later he was free, having promised to supply the information. The
money, Dominelli said, was on deposit at five banks in Switzerland and Austria
and one in the Bahamas. Subsequently, Louis Metzger, the court-appointed
bankruptcy trustee, flew off to visit the European banks, but when he returned
to San Diego, he said he had found ''not a penny - nothing.'' Meanwhile,
Dominelli had been subpoenaed to appear at another court hearing, but instead he
flew off to Montserrat.

A 40-square-mile British Crown Colony in the Leeward Islands, Montserrat is
inhabited by a few thousand descendants of British and Irish colonists and
former West African slaves - plus a handful of expatriate Britons, Canadians and
Americans. The expatriates tend to specialize in the operation of dozens of
offshore ''banks'' that, in reality, are little more than postal drops and a
collection of brass plates on the sides of buildings. Over the years, these
banks have been of great interest to the United States Internal Revenue Service
during investigations of purported tax-evasion schemes. The particular
attraction of the Montserrat banks for many is that the secrecy of their records
is closely guarded by the Government.

Dominelli had already been doing business through banks on Montserrat, and he
was greeted with some enthusiasm on his arrival on April 14 by Eton-educated
John A. Osborne, chief minister of the colony. Dominelli and several assistants
took up residence in a two-story white villa overlooking Iles Bay.

But by this time, Dominelli was a wanted man in San Diego for ignoring a court
subpoena, and dozens of American journalists followed him to Montserrat.
Everywhere officials of the tiny island went, they encountered reporters'
notebooks, cameras, microphones and questions about Jerry Dominelli. Meanwhile,
Dominelli was telling reporters that the investors' money was safe, that he
would repay it, while also announcing that he planned to settle permanently on
Montserrat. Soon his presence blossomed into a major political crisis as
Osborne's opponents claimed that he was embarrassing the islanders by giving
shelter to an accused criminal.

Two weeks after Dominelli arrived, Osborne ordered his expulsion. He flew to
nearby Antigua hoping to find a new sanctuary, but the United States State
Department had been there before him and he was told to move on. His next stop
was Miami, where he was arrested by Federal marshals. Debra Hart, his secretary,
and her husband, Calman, a word processor, were also held. As she was led away,
Mrs. Hart, a blonde woman in her mid-20's from a Mormon family in Utah, told a
reporter: ''We go where he goes. I believe in him. I trust in him.'' Charges
against the Harts were later dropped.

Back in San Diego, Louis Metzger was assigned to oversee liquidation of the
companies. He has told investors that he has been unable to find the more than
$112 million that he said should have been in investors' accounts. Meanwhile, at
least five Federal, state and local agencies are investigating Dominelli's
operations.

There is, however, a relatively small group of J. David investors who are not at
risk. Metzger says that hundreds of residents withdrew more than $20 million
from the firm last winter, shortly before it collapsed. He suspects that there
was an unlawful, advance warning of the impending bankruptcy, and he is trying
to reclaim some of these funds.

Mayor Hedgecock, who once publicly praised J. David & Company as a ''model of
corporate responsibility'' because of its charities, had invested $45,000 by
last winter, when he withdrew the money. He has said that he used the funds to
help repay a controversial $130,000 loan he had received from Mrs. Hoover. The
loan was made without his signing a note. There have been no charges that
Hedgecock had inside knowledge of the problems at J. David when he withdrew his
funds.

Edwin Miller, the San Diego District Attorney and a longtime political
antagonist of the Mayor, has claimed that Hedgecock had hidden ties to
Dominelli. In a civil lawsuit filed May 21, Miller accused Hedgecock and Thomas
C.  Shepard, one of the Mayor's closest political advisers and head of a
political consulting company, of failing to report to the state government
$357,000 in J. David campaign contributions.

Both have angrily denied the allegations. Hedgecock and Nancy Hoover have
insisted that all of their transactions were legitimate. Shepard, while
acknowledging receipt of funds from J. David, says they were an investment in
his company, not disguised campaign contributions for Hedgecock. The Mayor's
1983 campaign treasurer and campaign committee have also been named in the suit.

Whatever the truth of the matter, the Copley-owned Union and Tribune, San
Diego's two major newspapers, have given these and similar charges prominent
treatment - so much so that, according to Hedgecock's campaign advisers, his
prospects in the primary election on Tuesday have been badly damaged.


For close to a century, San Diego was a kind of urban backwater next to the
Mexican border, known mostly as the quintessential ''Navy town,'' home port for
much of the Pacific Fleet and enough retired admirals to mount a two-ocean war.
The nature of the political dialogue in this town was summed up in an anecdote
about the late James D. Copley who was said to refuse to go to a dinner party if
a Democrat was present. But things began to change in the 1960's.

Dozens of new industries, particularly in the electronics field, started setting
up shop. The new prosperity and the balmy climate sparked a population boom.
During the 1970's, San Diego was one of America's fastest growing major cities
and passed San Francisco to become California's second largest city after Los
Angeles.

Some of the newcomers were a different breed. The new industries and the
construction of a University of California campus in town brought an influx of
intellectuals, who demanded a richer cultural life. Many were of a liberal bent,
and they wanted a more open political climate.

In 1971, Pete Wilson was elected Mayor. Though a conservative Republican, he
kept his distance from the old-time leadership. He mobilized some of the city's
recent migrants, building a coalition that successfully challenged the
growth-at-any-cost ethic that had been espoused in the past by business
interests.

Three years later, Government lawyers accused the man at the top of the
Republican power structure, C. Arnholt Smith, of fraud, grand theft and other
crimes. A close friend of former President Richard M. Nixon and the principal
owner of the San Diego Padres and about 60 other enterprises, Smith was known
far and wide as ''Mr. San Diego.'' Investigators claimed that about half of the
loans made by the bank were to his own enterprises, and that many of the loans
were fictitious or uncollectable. Smith was convicted of grand theft, tax
evasion and was sentenced to prison in 1979. Because of a string of appeals, the
sentence has never been carried out.

Meanwhile, Mitrovich, Nancy Hoover and others connected with the City Club had
begun to groom a new political leader. Roger Hedgecock is 38 years old, a lean,
dark-haired man who is a bit of a Republican maverick. A fiscal conservative, he
campaigned for Senator Barry Goldwater during the 1964 Presidential race. But he
became an ardent environmentalist after the disastrous offshore oil spill at
Santa Barbara, and strongly supported limits to San Diego's growth.

He was city attorney for Del Mar when he ran for the San Diego County Board of
Supervisors in 1976. He won, backed by a broad coalition of environmentalists,
conservative Democrats and moderate Republicans. When Pete Wilson won a United
States Senate seat in 1982, Hedgecock started campaigning to fill out the rest
of Wilson's term. In the election, Hedgecock edged out Maureen F. O'Connor, a
Democrat whose campaign benefited from the wealth of her husband, Robert O.
Peterson, founder of the Jack In The Box fast-food chain.

Hedgecock promptly achieved a number of popular successes. He won voter
approval, for example, of a long-proposed new convention center in San Diego's
downtown, which is in the midst of redevelopment. In fact, Hedgecock was riding
so high five months ago that he was expected to win the nonpartisan mayoral
primary by polling far more than the 51 percent needed for re-election. Then
came the collapse of J. David & Company with its negative impact on Hedgecock's
political fortunes. Now his campaign aides believe he may not get enough votes
to avoid a run-off election. His principal opponent in Tuesday's election is
another Republican, political newcomer Richard Carlson, a former local
television anchorman and savings-and-loan executive who is backed by many
members of the city's conservative establishment.

Beyond the Mayor's own difficulties, the J. David affair has a larger political
significance. It threatens to undo the fundamental shift in



 San Diego's political life that was celebrated at the party beside Mission Bay
just a year ago.


Some of the investors in J. David & Company remain loyal to Dominelli. When they
run into each other on the tennis courts of La Jolla these days, the rumors fly.
One favorite: Organized crime was using Jerry Dominelli, perhaps without his
knowledge, to launder illegally gotten gains and abruptly withdrew funds from
his firm last winter, causing the collapse. Another loyalist rumor: Dominelli's
inexplicable behavior may be explained by a brain tumor. Neither rumor is
supported by the available facts.

Such flights of fancy are inspired by the spate of unanswered questions about
the J. David affair. But two are foremost: Why did so many seemingly
sophisticated people confidently pour so much money into an investment scheme
promising an unrealistic rate of return of 40 percent or more? Where has their
money gone?

Lawyers and other people familiar with the case say that the rapid growth of the
J. David investment plan was rooted primarily in these forces: Simple greed,
spurred by a wild real-estate boom in recent years, and a peculiar kind of group
dynamics that persuaded otherwise cautious people to suspend their caution
because their peers had done so.

Many of the people who gave their money to Dominelli belonged to a landed
aristocracy peculiar to California; they are middle and upper middle- class
families who bought homes prior to 1974 when the boom began. They saw the value
of these homes triple, sometimes quadruple, over a five-year period. According
to lawyers, some of these families were less suspicious of the high profits
Dominelli promised because of their experience in real estate. Moreover, they
had the wherewithal: they could borrow huge amounts of cash against the inflated
value of their homes to invest with J. David.

''La Jolla was a perfect place to do it,'' said Irene Schaffer, the publisher.
''A lot of people in La Jolla came from humble origins, but had made a lot of
money in real estate. They are people who haven't had money very long; they are
overly impressed with success and don't care how you got in. I think people in
La Jolla wanted it to work and they made Dominelli think it could work. They
made an image for him, and he had to live up to it; maybe that's why he got into
trouble.''

The J. David affair was not the first alleged fraud to be hatched in San Diego
and nearby Orange Counties in recent years. According to court records,
residents have lost tens of millions of dollars after promises of huge - and
unrealistic - returns on investments in speculations on home-owners' second
mortgages, diamonds and gold bullion.

Noting similar frauds in Florida and Arizona, Michael Lipman, a San Diego lawyer
and former head of the fraud unit of the United States Attorney's office in San
Diego, said: ''I think it may be endemic to the Sunbelt. To some degree, people
are more cynical back East.''

Lipman explains the phenomenon in these terms: ''Basically, it's greed. Some
people, deep down inside, know something is wrong, but they want the profits.
Before you give someone $50,000, you'd think they'd at least ask for a financial
statement, but they don't. The investors are all impressed by the trappings, the
fancy cars, the big offices, but nobody asks the obvious question: How do they
do it?''

Patrick Carroll Shea, the lawyer who specializes in representing clients
defrauded in investment schemes, sees similar forces at work whether the scheme
is a chain letter promoted among blue-collar workers, huge profits in
real-estate mortgages offered to middle-income families or a diamond investment
scam promoted among doctors.

''In all of them,'' Shea said, ''whether they start out legitimately and become
fraudulent in midstream or are fraudulent from the beginning, the engine that
powers the enterprise is the same - the communication within a given community
that encourages people to invest without really undertanding the investment
scheme. We've seen that in spades in the Dominelli case.''

Usually, Shea went on, it starts slowly. One or two members of a social group
will invest conservatively in a proposed venture while their friends





 ridicule the promoters' promises of huge profits. After these initial investors
begin reporting paper profits, the skepticism begins to fade, Shea said, and a
few more friends will venture into the enterprise. When they, too, report
apparent success, the circle of investors begins to grow ''like a family tree''
and now includes the more respected and trusted members of the group. Suddenly,
Shea said, ''the skeptics decide they're missing something good and decide
they'd better get in on it.'' At which point some of the shrewder investors get
out, taking their profits.

The more obscure the source of profits in an investment scheme, Patrick Shea
said, the faster the family tree can grow: ''There's an unstated premise that
this kind of investment activity, whatever it is, is so sophisticated that you
can't possibly understand it, no matter how sophisticated you are, but you're
not supposed to, because you've got a guy who's a genius at what he's doing.
What is puzzling and peculiar about the Dominelli case is that these were very
sophisticated investors.''

The second major puzzle - the whereabouts of the investors' money - could be
solved if Dominelli would answer the court's questions or actually produce the
funds. Meanwhile, investigators say they can only speculate that he may have
spent it on himself or lost it in bad currency trades. Some financial advisers
in the area suspect that Dominelli may not actually have engaged in major
currency trading once his firm was established and pulling in clients.

At the bankruptcy hearing last month in Balboa Park, Dominelli was confronted by
his investors for the first time since he was returned in handcuffs from Miami.

They wanted solutions to the puzzle, but got none. Avoiding their inquisitive
looks, ''The Genius'' looked straight ahead, through glasses that seemed riding
at half staff on his nose, as he took the Fifth Amendment. Then he was quickly
returned to prison.

Louis Metzger had bad news for the investors. He told them that, as
investigators sorted through Dominelli's files, they were finding evidence that
he had mixed some of their money with his corporate accounts and implied that
Dominelli had spent at least some of their money for his own use. It could take
months, Metzger said, to sort out the mystery of where the money went.

Ronald S. Orr, a lawyer who is working on the case with Metzger, offered
investors at the meeting this comment about recouping their losses: ''We do not
suggest that you get your hopes up.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of George Mitrovich; photo of Mayor Roger Hedgecock of San Diego;
photo of NYT headine about Dominelli; photo of home of Dominelli and Nancy;
photo of a handcuffed Dominelli escorted by a Fed; photo of Nancy Hoover

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              351 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FASHION;
 BRIDGING THE GENERATIONS

BYLINE: By June Weir

SECTION: Section 6; Page 98, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1161 words


HEN PROFESSIONAL arbiters of fashion speak, thousands of women listen. But,
closer to home, what effect to these same doyennes of style have on their own
daughters?  How four New York women - all with high-visibility careers that
allow them to have some influence on what American women wear - have been able
to guide their daughters and at the same time give them enough freedom to
develop individual styles illustrates the point.

Ellin Saltzman holds one of the top jobs in the fashion field. As Saks Fifth
Avenue's fashion director, she attends all of the leading designer shows in
Europe and the United States, seeking the newest looks for the specialty store.
She also visits the other Saks stores throughout the country to keep an eye on
what women want to wear. For these various functions, she usually chooses
impeccable clothes from Yves Saint Laurent, Karl Lagerfeld, Geoffrey Beene,
Oscar de la Renta, Calvin Klein or anyone else who happens to strike her fancy.

Her lively 18-year-old daughter, Elizabeth, who is taking time off from her
studies as a freshman at Bennington College to work at SoHo's trendy boutique
Parachute, admits that the way her mother wears clothes has influenced her. ''I
want people to look at me,'' she says, ''and see me as my mother's daughter -
with style. It's taken me a lot of time to develop my own look.''

For daytime, Elizabeth's runaround clothes are usually a black shirt, black
tights, black sweater and black boots. ''All through high school, I was known as
an outrageous dresser, always wearing pinks, yellows and blues,'' she says.
''Then I changed to dark colors, especially black and gray, plus some white, to
look more severe and grown up. Also my mother wears only black. She's known as
the 'the woman in black.' '' For evening, on the other hand, she might wear her
father's white cotton boxer shorts, something loose on top and white leather
boots or sneakers. ''I realize that for evening I don't have to get all done up,
but I do love Karl Lagerfeld's clothes,'' she says. ''I get a kick out of
borrowing one of his slinky long dresses from my mother.''

Mrs. Saltzman views her daughter's approach to dressing as a ''combination of
rebellion and great style. It's been a wonderful way of asserting her








 freedom from her father and me. Now our relationship as mother and daugher is
very close. But for a while it was a clash.I think that she represents a whole
new generation that is much less studied and more international. I envy her
ability to put it all together. I find she's a year ahead of what's going on.
Professionally, she has influenced my thinking. She's a terrific forecast
service.''

The lesson in all of this, Mrs. Saltzman concludes, is that ''it's most
important for a mother to realize that her daughter is not a reflection of
herself, but a real individual. When I was a kid in the 1940's, the first sign
of growing up was to dress like your mother. Now, it's the total opposite.''

Another case in point: The fashion editor of Vogue magazine, Polly Mellen, and
her 30- year-old daughter, Leslie Bell, who attended Skidmore College and the
School of the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston and now has her own potter's and
fabric design studio in Burlington, Vt.

Known for a stylish wardrobe filled with designer clothes, Polly Mellen is
capable of starting a new trend just by the color of her shoes or the way she
ties a scarf. It's her business, and her passion. Conversely, far from fashion's
limelight, Leslie admits that she rarely shops, rarely wears a skirt and is
paramountly concerned with comfort. Her pottery-studio uniform is a sweatshirt,
jeans, a big canvas apron and running shoes. Her big dream: ''If I had unlimited
funds, I'd love to buy Brooks Brothers men's wear.'' Here her modern mother
agrees. ''I'm crazy about men's clothes - the shirts, the trousers, the soft
ties. But my husband, Henry, doesn't like me to be too mannish. When I get a bit
much, he speaks right up.''

In describing how her mother influenced her style, Katherine Locke, a 20-year-
old sophomore at Brown University, says, ''I picked up my mother's love of
accessories and layering. We're both very much alike.''

Her mother, Edith Raymond Locke, was editor in chief of Mademoiselle magazine
for a decade and now produces and hosts her own cable- television show, ''You!''
a video magazine for women. She sees their fashion views somewhat differently.
''Katie is much more daring and individual than I am,'' says Mrs. Locke. ''I
find myself becoming less conservative due to her. Always, she has wanted to
look a certain way - low belts, long bulky sweaters, long skirts or pants. I
remember one time, I wanted Katie to wear a certain outfit, and she didn't want
to. I said, 'But I make my living telling people what to wear.' She countered
with 'That's O.K., Mother, but I just want to be myself.' '' Being herself now
means skirts, ties, sweater vests and black pegged pants for college. She, too,
likes going into her father's closets. ''He's all for it,'' she laughs. ''He
thinks I look good in his clothes.''

The designer China Machado and her 19-year-old daughter Emmanuelle La Salle,
known as Manuela, an actress and model, seem like sisters. Both have the same
high energy level for their shared interests in cooking, traveling and dancing.

Before Miss Machado started her own small company, producing handknit clothes,
she was a couture model in Paris, a favorite model of the photographer Richard
Avedon and the fashion director of Harper's Bazaar magazine.

Her mother, says Manuela, is ''glamorous - she doesn't try to be, she just is.''
And her influence has been great. ''People tell me I have a flair,'' says the
daughter. ''But I know it comes from watching my mother getting dressed.''

When Miss Machado goes out at night, she enjoys wearing Oscar de la Renta, Bill
Blass or Geoffrey Beene. And from her travels, she has collected ethnic clothes
from Korea, India, Vietnam and Arabia. She calls them ''eternal clothes.''

''I dress as comfortably as possible,'' says Manuela. ''Black pull-on pants are
a necessity to my life, as are black suede boots.'' When her daughter puts on a
sweater designed by her mother, Miss Machado finds Manuela makes them look
young. ''She puts them on with a miniskirt, boots and a belt. She's an
individual.''

As Ellin Saltzman concludes, ''I see great style coming from my daughter,
Elizabeth, and her friends. It's not my style, but I respect them for it.''



Below: Ellin Saltzman and her daughter, Elizabeth, favor armloads of bracelets.
Mrs. Saltzman's turtleneck tunic and black wool skirt is by Calvin Klein.
Elizabeth's outfit consists of pieces that she has collected over the years.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of outfits described below

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              352 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS June 3, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 46, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1365 words


Fiction1

32

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a mother
and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  2

113

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  3

6

2

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  4

2

8

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land. 5

4

12

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  6

5

9

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  6



1

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town. 8

7

10

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  9



1

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot. 10

7

5

DESCENT FROM XANADU, by Harold Robbins.  (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A man who
has everything - power, money, women - seeks to obtain immortality.  11

12

31

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.  12

13

3

DEMOCRACY, by Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Love, ambition and murder
in Honolulu.  12

11

17

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  14

9

6

WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W.  Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What follows
the first nuclear war in 1988.  14



1

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.































  Nonfiction1

137

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2

36

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' TV series.  3

2

4

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  4

4

13

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  5

7

12

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  6

9

3

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  7

6

5

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  7

5

16

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.  9

8

5

CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Secretary of State gives his views on foreign policy.  10

10

5

KNOCK WOOD, by Candice Bergen. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the actress, daughter of Edgar Bergen.  11

14

88

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  11



9

MAFIA PRINCESS, by Antoinette Giancana and Thomas C. Renner. (Morrow, $15.95.)
Growing up in the family of the mobster Sam Giancana.  13

13

2

NATALIE, by Lana Wood. (Putnam, $15.95.) A sister's memoir of the actress
Natalie Wood.  14

14

21

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin.  (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  15

14

8

FURTHER UP THE ORGANIZATION, by Robert Townsend. (Knopf, $15.95.) Business
strategies for the 1980's.



















 Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

110

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

310

WEBSTER'S NINTH COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard
work updated in 1983.  3

1

RANDOM HOUSE COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Random House, $14.95.) New revised
edition.  4



10

PUTTING THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER TO

WORK, by Kenneth Blanchard and Robert Lorber.  (Morrow, $15.) Increasing your
productivity and that of those with whom you work.  5

2

2

GRANDMOTHER REMEMBERS, by Judith Levy.  (Stewart, Tabori & Chang, $12.95.) A
notebook in which grandparents can inscribe their memories for their
grandchildren.  5

5

7

THE LIFE EXTENSION COMPANION, by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw. (Warner, $17.50.)
Advice about improving your health and lengthening your life.









 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

CHANGES IN THE LAND: Indians, Colonists, and the Ecology of

New England, by William Cronon. (Hill & Wang/Farrar, Straus &

Giroux; cloth, $15.95; paper, $6.95.) A fresh and ingenious history

of the interaction of man and nature in early New England.

CITIES AND THE WEALTH OF NATIONS: Principles of Economic

Life, by Jane Jacobs. (Random House, $17.95.) A vigorously

argued thesis that national policies around the world stunt the

organic growth of cities, where most wealth is produced.

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES, by

Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A novella and four short

stories by the Nobel Prize winner, all with his characteristically

wily predicaments and brainy language.

IN THE FREUD ARCHIVES, by Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $11.95.)

Superb reportage on the struggles of two newcomers with the

orthodox psychoanalytic establishment over Freudian theory and

the Freud Archives in London.

NOT IN OUR GENES: Biology, Ideology, and Human Nature, by

R. C. Lewontin, Steven Rose and Leon J. Kamin. (Pantheon,

$21.95.) A scientifically argued denial that human behavior is

determined by genetic inheritance.

SWEENEY ASTRAY: A Version From the Irish, by Seamus

Heaney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.95.) An exhilarating

translation of a medieval story poem about an outcast named

Sweeney who in his mad agony writes incomparable lyrics.

WEAKNESS AND DECEIT: U. S. Policy and El Salvador, by

Raymond Bonner. (Times Books, $16.95.) A significant attempt by

the New York Times reporter who covered El Salvador from 1980

to 1982 to explain our deep involvement in that troubled Central

American country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              353 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS June 3, 1984Fiction1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 48, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 781 words


THE NAME OF THE ROSE, by Umberto Eco.  (Warner, $4.95.) Murder in an Italian
monastery. 2

ANCIENT EVENINGS, by Norman Mailer.  (Warner, $4.95.) Ten centuries of rites and
orgies in long-ago Egypt.  3

CROSSINGS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $3.95.) A clandestine trans-Atlantic
romance survives the stresses of World War II.  3

GENTLE FEUDING, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $3.95.) True love overcomes a bloody
feud between two Scottish clans.  3

SEEDS OF YESTERDAY, by V. C. Andrews.  (Pocket, $3.95.) Concluding volume of a
horror series about the Dollanganger family.  6

INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM, by James Kahn. (Ballantine, $2.95.) More
perilous adventures of the hero of ''Raiders of the Lost Ark''; novelization of
the current film.  7

ICEBREAKER, by John Gardner. (Berkley, $3.50.) James Bond's mission is to break
a neo-Nazi group somewhere in the Arctic.  8

CIRCLES, by Doris Mortman. (Bantam, $3.50.) The mettle of a woman who has
everything - career, husband - is tested by an unexpected crisis.  9

GODPLAYER, by Robin Cook. (NAL/Signet, $4.50.) The marriage of two physicians
crumbles as death stalks their hospital corridors.  9

THE LITTLE DRUMMER GIRL, by John le Carre.  (Bantam, $3.95.) A young
Englishwoman caught between Israeli and P.L.O. agents.  11

SON OF A WANTED MAN, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $2.95.) A young man inherits
his father's place as head of a gang of Western outlaws.  12

LEGION, by William Peter Blatty. (Pocket, $3.95.) Investigating the crucifixion
murder of a 12-year- old boy.  13

BLACK HEART, by Eric Van Lustbader. (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) Tracking the
murderer of a Presidential candidate into the jungles of Cambodia.  13

V, by A. C. Crispin. (Pinnacle, $2.95.) Novelization of a TV miniseries about an
invasion from outer space.  15

BALEFIRE, by Kenneth Goddard. (Bantam, $3.95.) Pursuing a ruthless cop-killer.













































 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores and from representative wholesalers with more than 40,000 retail
outlets, including newsstands, variety stores, supermarkets and bookstores.
These figures are statistically adjusted to represent sales in all such outlets
across the United States. The number of titles within the two subdivisions of
nonfiction can change from week to week, reflecting changes in book buying.

Nonfiction

General 1

OUT ON A LIMB, by Shirley MacLaine. (Bantam, $3.95.) The actress's
autobiography.  2

IN SEARCH OF EXCELLENCE, by Thomas J.  Peters and Robert H. Waterman Jr.
(Warner, $8.95.) Lessons to be learned from well-run American corporations.  3

TOUGH TIMES NEVER LAST, BUT TOUGH PEOPLE DO!  by Robert H. Schuller. (Bantam,
$3.95.) Inspiration from a California preacher. 4

MEGATRENDS, by John Naisbitt. (Warner, $3.95.) Predictions about America in the
next decade.  5

BLUE HIGHWAYS, by William Least Heat Moon.  (Fawcett Crest, $3.95.) A trip
through the back roads of America.  6

THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck.  (S&S/Touchstone, $8.95.)
Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.  7

LIVING, LOVING & LEARNING, by Leo F.  Buscaglia. (Fawcett Crest, $5.95.)
Inspirational talks by a California professor.  8

CHARLIE COMPANY, by Peter Goldman and Tony Fuller. (Ballantine, $3.95.) What
their experience in Vietnam did to some 50 infantrymen.  9

THE SHOEMAKER, by Flora Rheta Schreiber.  (NAL/Signet, $3.95.) The true story of
a psychotic killer and his son.
















Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous 1

THE ONE MINUTE MANAGER, by Kenneth Blanchard and Spencer Johnson. (Berkley,
$6.95.) How to increase your productivity.  2

'TOONS FOR OUR TIMES, by Berke Breathed.  (Little, Brown, $6.95.) Cartoons from
the comic strip ''Bloom County.'' 3

RAND MCNALLY ROAD ATLAS: United States, Canada, Mexico.  (Rand McNally, $5.95.)
The 1984 edition.  4

BREAKDANCING, by Mr. Fresh and The Supreme Rockers. (Avon, $2.95.) How to do the
new dance, with many illustrations.  5

COLOR ME BEAUTIFUL, by Carole Jackson.  (Ballantine, $8.95.) Beauty tips for
women.  6

GARFIELD TIPS THE SCALE, by Jim Davis.  (Ballantine, $4.95.) Cartoon humor.
















LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              354 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS FOR VACATION READING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 28, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 4711 words


This list has been selected from titles reviewed since the Christmas Issue of
December 1983. It only suggests high points in the main fields of reader
interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject headings. Quoted
comments are from The Book Review.  Autobiography and Biography

ALAN TURING: The Enigma.  By Andrew Hodges. (Simon & Schuster. $22.50.) This
first full biography of the eccentric homosexual English mathematician who was
in ''large part responsible for the concept of the computer'' provides a
compelling picture of ''a most intriguing man'' who eventually took his own
life.



AUSTIN AND MABEL: The Amherst Affair & Love Letters of Austin Dickinson and
Mabel Loomis Todd.  Edited by Polly Longsworth. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.
$24.95.) Annotated correspondence recording a long love affair between Emily
Dickinson's married brother and the wife of one of the Dickinsons' neighbors.



BLACK APOLLO OF SCIENCE: The Life of Ernest Everett Just. By Kenneth R. Manning
(Oxford. $29.95.) This biography of Ernest Everett Just (1883-1941) stresses the
''interplay of Just's genius and dreams with a racist but dynamic society.''



CHARLES DE GAULLE: A Biography.  By Don Cook. (Putnam. $22.95.) This ''highly
readable'' book ''paints a vivid picture of an egotistical loner'' who became
the symbol of his nation.



CHILDHOOD . By Nathalie Sarraute. (George Braziller. $14.95.) Written as
Nathalie Sarraute entered her 80's, these ''beautifully paced'' vignettes
recount her early years before World War I. ''The reader can watch a literary
sensibility hunting persistently for that most ridiculed of literary prizes: the
truth.''



D.

W. GRIFFITH: An American Life.  By Richard Schickel. (Simon & Schuster. $24.95.)
''A definitive biography'' of the pioneer film maker which ''presents Griffith
with all his faults. Yet the man who emerges wins our sympathy and compassion.''


DOSTOEVSKY: The Years of Ordeal 1850-1859.  By Joseph Frank. (Princeton. $25.)
''Drawing upon Russian sources that previous English-language biographers have
overlooked or neglected, Mr. Frank offers fresh materials about Dostoevsky's
intellectual and literary development'' in the decade of his imprisonment and
exile in Siberia.



H.

G. WELLS: Aspects of a Life.  By Anthony West. (Random House. $22.95.) A
''highly personal, curiously constructed'' book by the son Wells had with
Rebecca West. ''Mr. West performs a valuable job of emotional archeology'' in
recreating his parents' origins and youth but betrays a profound grievance
against his mother in this ''powerful if perverse document.''



AN INTERRUPTED LIFE: The Diaries of Etty Hillesum, 1941-1943.  Introduced by J.
G. Gaarlandt. Translated by Arno Pomerans. (Pantheon. $12.95.) Written in
Holland between 1941 and 1943 by a victim of the Nazis, these diaries ''offer a
story of spiritual growth (that) is in all ways unique. . . . It disturbs our
notions of political resistance and physical survival.''



JED HARRIS: The Curse of Genius.  By Martin Gottfried. (Little, Brown. $19.95.)
''The first serious biography'' of the difficult and troubled ''maverick''
Broadway producer and director whose name is known for such outstanding
productions as ''The Front Page'' and ''Our Town.''



THE LEDGE BETWEEN THE STREAMS.  By Ved Mehta. (Norton. $17.50.) In another
volume of his continuing autobiography, Ved Mehta, ''through the realities of an
unusual little boy and his family,'' recreates the meaning of the summer of 1947
when the Indian subcontinent was divided into India and Pakistan.



LIFE AND DEATH ON 10 WEST.  By Eric Lax. (Times Books. $14.95.) The story of one
woman's struggle against leukemia, told ''with considerable power and
compassion,'' and accurately conveying ''the medical science involved.''



THE LIFE AND TIMES OF COTTON MATHER.  By Kenneth Silverman. (Harper & Row.
$29.95.) The first comprehensive biography of ''the archetypal Puritan'' divine,
this ''remarkable'' book will tell the reader ''all he need know'' about the
events and personalities in it ''without interrupting the flow'' of the
narrative.



MAYOR.  By Edward I. Koch with William Rauch. (Simon & Schuster. $17.95.) An
entertaining, outspoken best seller by New York City's Mayor on local and
national politicians and his own record.



MRS. PAT: The Life and Letters of Mrs. Patrick Campbell.  By Margot Peters.
(Knopf. $22.95.) A solid biography of the famous and flamboyant English actress
who enjoyed her greatest success as the most celebrated Eliza in Shaw's
''Pygmalion.''



MY LAST SIGH.  By Luis Bunuel. Translated by Abigail Israel. (Knopf. $15.95.)
The late Spanish movie director's autobiography - a ''lovely testament'' - has
the ''same startling but delectable perversity and deep humor as his best
films.''



ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS.  By Eudora Welty. (Harvard. $10.) The author's earliest
years in Mississippi, when she remembers listening for stories (different from
listening to them).



PAULA MODERSOHN-BECKER: The Letters and Journals.  Edited by G"unter Busch and
Liselotte von Reinken. (Taplinger. $29.95.) The papers of the German painter
(1876-1907) who at great personal cost tried to accommodate her life as a woman
with her art.



PETER HALL'S DIARIES: The Story of a Dramatic Battle.  Edited by John Goodwin.
(Harper & Row. $25.) The 1973-79 diaries of Sir Peter Hall, who succeeded
Laurence Olivier as head of Britain's National Theater, offer all the
traditional ingredients of drama - ''ambition, paranoia and hatred, intrigue and
betrayal, and a protagonist who, by his own confession, was driven to the brink
of madness by all the pressures.''



A SLOT MACHINE, A BROKEN TEST TUBE.  By S. E. Luria. (Harper & Row. $17.95.) The
autobiography of the man who won the Nobel Prize for ''ground-breaking work in
molecular biology'' is an ''uneven'' but ''good yarn'' by a scientist who was
also a ''committed socialist, political activist and sometime depressive.''



STENGEL: His Life and Times.  By Robert W. Creamer. (Simon & Schuster. $16.95.)
This ''excellent'' biography of the great Yankee manager ''makes us realize just
how much we miss him . . . throughout the world of sports and indeed in public
life generally.''



THE TRUE ADVENTURES OF JOHN STEINBECK, WRITER.  By Jackson L. Benson. (Viking.
$35.) A biography that chronicles ''in total detail and accessible, solid prose
the life and times of a writer who, as Mr. Benson emphasizes, never (until the
end) lost faith in writing as his all-compelling calling.''



WINSTON S. CHURCHILL: Volume Six. Finest Hour 1939-1941.  By Martin Gilbert.
(Houghton Mifflin. $40.) The Oxford historian Martin Gilbert continues the
monumental biography begun by Churchill's son Randolph. This is the most
exciting volume to date.  Children's Books

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK.  By Dr. Seuss. (Random House. $6.95.) A bleak picture
and verse vision of the mounting battle between the Yooks and the Zooks that
resembles the international arms race.



I WALK AND READ.  By Tana Hoban. (Greenwillow. $10.50.) A stunning book of color
photography showing language in urban situations - key words like WALK, WET
PAINT, PHONE.



THE IRON LION.  By Peter Dickinson. Illustrated by Pauline Baynes.
(Bedrick/Blackie. $10.95.) A lighthearted fable about an impoverished prince,
Mustapha, who woos the emperor's daughter, Yasmin. The witty illustrations are a
cross between medieval illumination and Persian miniatures.



JONAH AND THE GREAT FISH.  Written and illustrated by Warwick Hutton. (Atheneum.
$12.95.) A haunting retelling of the story of Jonah with a spare text and 15
watercolor illustrations of ''startling resonance, texture and conviction.''



MEMO: TO MYSELF WHEN I HAVE A TEENAGE KID.  By Carol Snyder. (Coward-McCann.
$10.95.) A novel about a 13-year-old girl who reads with surprise the diary her
mother kept at the same age.



NOBODY'S BABY NOW.  By Carol Lea Benjamin. (Macmillan. $10.95.) A persuasive and
often moving novel about a 15-year old girl whose grandmother moves in with her
family en route to a nursing home.



WORSE THAN WILLY.  Written and illustrated by James Stevenson. (Greenwillow.
$10.50.) Another hilarious tall tale Grandpa tells Louie and Mary Ann, this one
about his sibling rivalry with his little brother.  Crime

ALWAYS A BODY TO TRADE.  By K. C. Constantine. (Godine. $12.95.) An innocent new
mayor interferes with Mario Balzic, the no-nonsense police chief of K. C.
Constantine's fictional coal town of Rockport, Pa.



THE DIRTY DUCK.  By Martha Grimes. (Little, Brown. $14.95.) Murder in
Stratford-on-Avon, with an explanation of the death of Christopher Marlowe, by
an author who ''may come to be regarded as the Dorothy Sayers of the 1980's.''



HURRICANE SEASON.  By Mickey Friedman. (Dutton. $13.95.) A gritty love affair
and a war between moonshiners in an unlovely Florida town, handled with
Faulkneresque realism.



METZGER'S DOG.  By Thomas Perry. (Scribners.  $14.95.) The very funny, sharply
written story of Chinese Gordon, who in stealing $1 million worth of cocaine
from a university laboratory also walks off with some C.I.A.  information.



TEXAS STATION.  By Christopher Leach. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.) An
evangelist who wants a wooden cross to carry and the carpenter of a small Texas
town join investigative forces in a virtuoso work with religious implications.
Current Affairs & Social Comment

ABORTION AND THE POLITICS OF MOTHERHOOD.  By Kristin Luker. (University of
California. $14.95.) A ''lucid, fair-minded and convincing'' analysis of the
abortion debate by a sociologist who traces its origins in the medical community
and explores the differences between the two classes of women now ranged on
opposite sides.



CITIES AND THE WEALTH OF NATIONS: Principles of Economic Life.  By Jane Jacobs.
(Random House. $17.95.) A ''learned, iconoclastic and exciting study'' arguing
that national policies everywhere distort the growth of cities and that
''nation-states, whatever their ideology, are incompetent vehicles for creating
wealth or distributing it fairly.''



FEMININITY.  By Susan Brownmiller. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) In
this ''illuminating and informative'' book, the author of ''Against Our Will''
traces ''the understanding of gender difference to its origins in childhood.''



THE FILE.  By Penn Kimball. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $14.95.) Penn Kimball's
chance discovery that he was considered ''a definite security risk'' prompted
this ''eloquent and troubling book'' about Governmental security checks and
their effect on the lives and careers of loyal citizens.



IN THE FREUD ARCHIVES.  By Janet Malcolm. (Knopf. $11.95.) An exuberant and
insightful account of the battle between Freudian traditionalists and two
eccentric outriders in the world of psychoanalysis over access to and control of
the Freud archives.



O ALBANY! Improbable City of Political Wizards, Fearless Ethnics, Spectacular
Aristocrats, Splendid Nobodies, and Underrated Scoundrels.  By William Kennedy.
(Washington Park Press/Viking. $25.) In this nonfiction work, the novelist
William Kennedy proves that ''his native city is 'centered squarely in the
American and human continuum.' ''

RELIGION IN THE SECULAR CITY: Toward a Postmodern Theology.  By Harvey Cox.
(Simon & Schuster. $16.95.) The theologian who in ''The Secular City'' (1965)
saw the modern world as a vehicle of God's grace, now sees the resurgence of
traditional religions as a revolt against that world.



RUSSIA: Broken Idols, Solemn Dreams.  By David K. Shipler. (Times Books.
$17.95.) This ''observant and beautifully written journalistic account'' of the
author's tour of duty in Moscow as correspondent for The New York Times focuses
on the widespread loss of hope and faith among Russians.



WEAPONS AND HOPE.  By Freeman Dyson. (Harper & Row. $17.95.) ''An excellent
laymen's guide to the problems and concepts of nuclear deterrence (that) talks a
good deal of sense about that most misunderstood and complicated problem, 'arms
races,' '' written by a physicist.  Essays & Criticism

AN AMERICAN PROCESSION.  By Alfred Kazin. (Knopf. $18.95.) An assessment of
those authors between 1830 and 1930, from Emerson to F. Scott Fitzgerald, who
created the notion of American selfhood - ''individualism carried nearly to an
ultimate.''



DAWN TO THE WEST: Japanese Literature in the Modern Era.  By Donald Keene.
(Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Two Volumes. $100) The first complete account in
English of modern Japanese fiction, poetry, drama and criticism, a masterly
survey that should change our view of Japan and its writers completely.



WALT WHITMAN: The Making of the Poet.  By Paul Zweig. (Basic Books. $18.95.) The
first book ''to take imaginative possession of the whole body of evidence in
Whitman's stories, letters, notebooks, poems in draft'' and of the surrounding
culture to reveal what made him a great poet.  Fiction

THE BALLAD OF TYPHOID MARY.  By J. F. Federspiel. (Dutton. $12.95.) The Swiss
author's ironic re-creation of the life and times of Typhoid Mary (1854?-1938),
the notorious real-life carrier of typhoid fever.



THE BEST OF MODERN HUMOR.  Edited by Mordecai Richler. (Knopf. $17.95.) ''The
most definitive-looking roundup of literary American humor since'' E. B. and
Katherine S. White's ''Subtreasury of American Humor'' which was published in
1941.



CATHERINE, HER BOOK.  By John Wheatcroft. (Cornwall Books. $13.95.) An ingenious
and impassioned retelling, with the Gothic coloring deepened, of Emily Bront"e's
''Wuthering Heights.''



A CERTAIN LUCAS.  By Julio Cortazar. Translated by Gregory Rabassa. (Knopf.
$12.95.) ''A sampler of narrative ideas, a playful anthology of form,'' the last
work of the late Latin master.



CIVIL WARS.  By Rosellen Brown. (Knopf. $16.95.) A husband and wife, she a New
York civil rights activist and he a Southern convert to the cause who are the
last whites left in a Jackson, Miss., neighborhood in 1978, have to face the
fact that the movement has moved beyond them.



THE COLLECTED PROSE.  By Elizabeth Bishop. Edited and introduced by Robert
Giroux. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $17.50.) ''Lively, rueful, endlessly
observant'' memoirs and stories by ''one of our greatest poets,'' who died in
1979.



THE COLLECTED STORIES OF COLETTE.  Edited and introduced by Robert Phelps.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $19.95.) One hundred stories by the French writer and
actress, 25 of which have never appeared in English before.



DEMOCRACY.  By Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster. $13.95.) A ''murder without a
mystery,'' this novel is ''deeply mysterious, cryptic, enigmatic, like a tarot
pack or most of Joan Didion's work.''



EDISTO.  By Padgett Powell. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $11.95.) A ''sparkling''
first novel told by a 12-year-old South Carolina boy who is ''dying'' into a new
life of pubescence, has questions ''about the life to come - values, politics,
economics, race relations, sex.''



ENDERBY'S DARK LADY: Or No End to Enderby.  By Anthony Burgess. (McGraw-Hill.
$14.95.) The fourth novel about ''a fat and frequently dislocated minor British
poet,'' who is ''still undecided as to whether he's more nearly Falstaff or
Silenus,'' takes place in Tangier, Rome, New York, Indiana and ''various
time-warps.''



FLY AWAY HOME.  By Marge Piercy (Summit. $16.95.) ''A romance with a social
conscience, a tale of love, betrayal and revenge set against a backdrop of
sterile suburbs, confrontational politics, the evils of gentrification and . . .
arson as a slum-clearance tool.''



FLYING TO NOWHERE.  By John Fuller. (Braziller. $10.95.) An amazingly compact,
rich and disturbing murder mystery, set in a medieval monastery.



FRAGMENTS.  By Jack Fuller. (Morrow. $12.95.) A deeply reflective novel about
the Vietnam War and the friendship of two soldiers facing death.

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES.  By Saul Bellow. (Harper &
Row. $15.95.) ''Five ravishing stories'' by the Nobel laureate which, taken
together, make up a kind of ''concordance, so to speak'' of all of Bellow's
work.



HOLY PICTURES.  By Claire Boylan. (Summit. $13.95.) ''A tale of farewell to
innocence, of sad, inevitable change'' among Dublin youths. This first novel is
dense with startling juxtapositions of the good and the ''perverse and the
shockingly haphazard.''



A HOUSE IN THE COUNTRY.  By Jose Donoso. (Knopf. $16.95.) The Chilean novelist's
lush, surreal tale, set in an unnamed South American country, about a wealthy,
decadent family on a rural estate, surrounded by man-eating people.



A LATE DIVORCE.  By A. B. Yehoshua. (Doubleday. $16.95.) The Israeli writer's
family saga of marital calamity, generational estrangement and sexual malaise in
a society either at war or between wars.



LEAVING THE LAND.  By Douglas Unger. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) ''At its best, this
fine first novel,'' which is about ''family farming giving way to corporate
farming and agribusiness,'' ''courts comparison with Willa Cather's 'O
Pioneers!' ''



LIFE & TIMES OF MICHAEL K.  By J. M. Coetzee. (Viking. $13.95.) Through the eyes
of his wandering hero - ''an original soul . . . untouched by doctrine,
untouched by history'' - the South African novelist discloses ''the wild and
merciless power of inanity.''



MYSTERIES OF WINTERTHURN.  By Joyce Carol Oates. (Dutton. $16.95.) On the one
hand, a pastiche of the 19th-century thriller, complete with hellish spectacles
and romantic hero; on the other, a philosophical investigation into the nature
of mystery.



PITCH DARK.  By Renata Adler. (Knopf. $12.95.) An old-fashioned love story
involving an affair between a journalist and a married man, told in the
fragmented, ''discontinuous first-person narrative'' established in the author's
previous novel.



SHAME.  By Salman Rushdie. (Knopf. $13.95.) The Indian Moslem author's ''modern
fairy tale'' or political allegory, set in a country that is ''not quite
Pakistan,'' explores the nature of shame and honor.



SLOW LEARNER: Early Stories.  By Thomas Pynchon. (Little, Brown. $14.95.) Five
early works, four written while the writer was a student at Cornell, the fifth
in 1964 after the publication of his first novel, ''V.'' His valuable
introduction contains ''the reflections of a writer looking back over ground
traveled, and a very engaging, informal history'' of the 1950's.



STONES FOR IBARRA.  By Harriet Doerr. (Viking. $14.95.) First novel by a
73-year-old woman about an American couple living in a remote Mexican village.



THE SUCCESSION. A Novel of Elizabeth and James.  By George Garrett. (Doubleday,
$17.95.) Mr. Garrett has created a ''subtle, complex meditation on the poetry of
time'' in what is much more than merely a historical novel.



TESTING THE CURRENT.  By William McPherson. (Simon & Schuster. $15.95.) An
intelligent and powerful story of family, childhood and memory, set in the
Midwest just before World War II.



THE TWO OF US.  By Nora Johnson. (Simon & Schuster. $15.95.) A tale of identical
twin girls who grow up to lead very different lives, become alienated from one
another and are eventually reconciled.



THE UNBEARABLE LIGHTNESS OF BEING.  By Milan Kundera. (Harper & Row. $15.95.)
The characters in this emigre's novel live ''under two tyrannies, the tyranny of
contemporary Czechoslovakia and the tyrannny of Mr. Kundera's despair.'' Mr.
Kundera works with ''cunning and wit and elegiac sadness to express 'the trap
the world has become.' ''



WATERLAND.  By Graham Swift. (Poseidon. $15.95.) What enchants in this novel set
in a ''fairy-tale place,'' the fens of England, is its ''core of feelings
touched through the juxtaposition of modern conveniences with those yellow ears
of barley and that journey to Wash Fen.''



WHITE JAZZ.  By Charles Newman. (Dial/Doubleday. $7.95.) Not much happens in
this expressionistic novel about a man whose ''job is manning a video display
terminal'' and who spends his nights ''cruising for women'' at a disco. But
''this emptiness, this pointlessness is part of Mr. Newman's point.''



THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK.  By John Updike. (Knopf. $15.95.) Three modern witches,
all divorcees, in this quirky and charming novel give John Updike a chance to
explore ''that persistent American male fantasy'' - being a woman - but he also
plumbs a much deeper pool of human puzzlement and obsession.  History

THE BLOOD OF HIS SERVANTS.  By Malcolm C. MacPherson. (Times Books. $16.95.)
From the literature of the Holocaust, this is ''a bona-fide thriller'' - the
''real-life, detailed drama of the obsessive pursuit of one man by another.''

THE BOURGEOIS EXPERIENCE: Victoria to Freud.

Volume One. Education of the Senses.  By Peter Gay. (Oxford. $25.) A ''history
informed by psychoanalysis'' of ''Victorian sexuality in all its steamy
diversity'' that demonstrates ''how different was the reality of Victorian
female sexuality from that propounded by the Victorian moral code.''



CHANGES IN THE LAND: Indians, Colonists, and the

Ecology of New England.  By William Cronon. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $15.95.)
Winner of the Francis Parkman Prize in American history, this is a ''fresh,
ingenious, compelling and altogether important'' account of how native Americans
and European colonists changed the ecology of a region forever.



THE DISCOVERERS.  By Daniel Boorstin. (Random House. $25.) A sweeping narrative
of major discoveries in science, geography, medicine and thought, among other
areas, that becomes an inspiring essay on ''the collective mind of man at
work.''



THE GREAT CAT MASSACRE: And Other Episodes

in French Cultural History.  By Robert Darnton. (Basic Books. $17.95.) A
collection of six essays on the ''ways of thinking in 18th-century France - not
what people thought, but how they thought.''



THE GREAT DEPRESSION: America, 1929-1941.  By Robert S. McElvaine. (Times Books.
$19.95.) Although the author ''covers familiar ground, this eclectic book is
still the handiest one-volume survey of the Depression since William E.
Leuchtenburg's incisive 'Franklin D. Roosevelt and the New Deal.' ''



THE HEYDAY OF AMERICAN COMMUNISM: The

Depression Decade.  By Harvey Klehr. (Basic Books. $26.50.) Although this
''tightly written and neatly organized'' book is ''about Communists in the
1930's, it is in a broader sense the recurrent story of the self-righteous
sectarian who confuses his faith with his church and the church with the
priesthood.''



THE HIGH WALLS OF JERUSALEM: A History of

the Balfour Declaration and the British Mandate for Pales

tine.  By Ronald Sanders. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $24.95.) The ''dramatic and
moving'' story, ''with a wonderfully rich cast of characters,'' of the Balfour
Declaration (1917), which declared Britain's support for a Jewish national home
in Palestine.



HISTORICAL ATLAS OF WORLD MYTHOLOGY:

Volume One. The Way of Animal Powers.  By Joseph Campbell. (Harper & Row, $75.)
The first volume of the renowned mythologist's projected four-part atlas of
world myths traces archetypes from the animal mythologies of earliest
paleolithic hunters and gatherers. ''To see the universe of myths through Mr.
Campbell's eyes is an exhilarating experience.''



THE IDEA OF POVERTY: England in the Early In

dustrial Age.  By Gertrude Himmelfarb. (Knopf. $25.) In this first of two
volumes, the author's ''history of the idea of poverty is a search to extract
that idea from the social milieus and the entire literature of the period - from
popular movements, economic treatises, novels, legislative controversies and
more.''



ISRAEL IN THE MIND OF AMERICA.  By Peter Grose. (Knopf. $17.95.) A lively
history of more than three centuries of Jewish-American politics and diplomacy
by the director of Middle Eastern Studies for the Council on Foreign Relations.



THE MARCH OF FOLLY: From Troy to Vietnam.  By Barbara W. Tuchman. (Knopf.
$18.95.) ''A moral essay on the crimes and follies of governments and the
misfortunes the governed suffer in consequence'' by the author of ''The Guns of
August.''



METROPOLITAN CORRIDOR. Railroads and the

American Scene.  By John R. Stilgoe. (Yale. $29.95.) ''An impressive study'' of
the transformation of the landscape by the railroads and their place in American
culture from 1880 to 1930.



MONTE CASSINO.  By David Hapgood and David Richardson. (Congdon & Weed. $17.95.)
The story, carefully reconstructed from the testimony of survivors, of ''the
bitter fight for the key German defensive position south of Rome'' and the
American bombing of the ancient Benedictine abbey on Monte Cassino in 1944.



PASSAGE THROUGH EL DORADO: Traveling the

World's Last Great Wilderness.  By Jonathan Kandell. (Morrow. $15.95.) A history
of the various attempts, past and present, to exploit and develop the Amazon
Valley, the earth's largest and biologically most complex wilderness.  Poetry

THE BEST HOUR OF THE NIGHT.  By Louis Simpson. (Ticknor & Fields. $12.95.)
Compassionate poems filled with ''difficult, equalizing wisdom'' and ''healing
insights'' into lives of ordinary, discontented people.



THE DEAD AND THE LIVING.  By Sharon Olds. (Knopf. $13.95.) ''A family album
prefaced by snapshots of the century's agonies,'' and filled with wonderful
visions of the poet's family. ''It is not the agony we are likely to remember
but the persistent comedy of human love.''

HISTORY OF MY HEART.  By Robert Pinsky. (Ecco. $12.50.) This new volume of poems
tends to narrative and portraits of the poet's friends and family. ''Mr. Pinsky
has a rare gift for action, character and atmosphere clearly and buoyantly
proportioned.''



THE LIGHT HOLDS.  By Harvey Shapiro. (Wesleyan University Press. $16.) New poems
of ''an urban poet'' whose ''tone is one of leveling with the reader, or merely
talking to the self, with a candor that conveys the blunt truths of the interior
life as well as the world observed.''



MAKING CERTAIN IT GOES ON: The Collected Poems of Richard Hugo.  (Norton. $25.)
The poems of the ''preeminent poet of western America,'' who died two years ago,
''tell the tale of the American search for identity from the underbelly. . . .
(He) earned the right to look any man in the face.''



THE POEMS: A New Edition.  By W. B. Yeats. Edited by Richard J. Finnernan.
(Macmillan. $19.95.) A new standard edition, containing significant changes and
additions and correcting the chronology of the previous editions.



SWEENEY ASTRAY: A Version From the Irish.  By Seamus Heaney. (Farrar, Straus &
Giroux. $13.95.) ''An exhilarating version of this most unusual story poem,'' a
medieval prose and verse work in which the legendary Sweeney, driven mad by a
curse, makes magnificent poems of personal pain and of praise for the wonders of
nature and the beauty of Ireland.  Science Fiction

HELLICONIA SPRING.  By Brian W. Aldiss. (Berkley. Paper, $6.95.) The first
volume in the most ambitious sf series in years. Mr. Aldiss writes of a clash
between two sentient species for dominance in an odd but brilliantly realized
evolutionary setting.



HELLICONIA SUMMER.  By Brian W. Aldiss. (Atheneum.  6.95.) The evolutionary pace
quickens as Helliconia, the planet with the very long seasons, spins into its
''dog days'' and the battle for dominance moves to the cultural arena.



THE CRUCIBLE OF TIME.  By John Brunner. (Del Rey/Ballantine.  2.95.) Mr. Brunner
is interested in science and technology as survival tactics. By inventing a
planetary ecology which periodically self-destructs, he finds drama - and
melodrama - in the struggle of intelligent beings to master their environment.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              355 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'GREAT BOOKS' WE NEVER FINISHED READING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2661 words


Most readers at one time or another have felt guilty about not having been able
to finish a book recognized as ''important.'' The Book Review asked a number of
writers to tell of such experiences.


John Updike Author of ''The Witches of Eastwick.'' Like many an autodidact, I
have taken simple-minded pride in finishing a book once I began it. With
considerable pleasure I devoted a youthful summer to reading through ''Don
Quixote''; in my early 20's I made my blissful way, over several years, through
all of ''Remembrance of Things Past.'' ''War and Peace,'' ''The Portrait of a
Lady,'' ''Ulysses,'' the ''Iliad'' and the ''Odyssey'' all in their season fell
to the buzz saw of my reading. I had every expectation of relishing and
finishing ''Tristram Shandy'' by Laurence Sterne. My taste ran to prankish
books, British books and books of pivotal importance in the history of Western
thought. ''Tristram Shandy,'' modernism's first masterpiece, triply qualified.
Had I not, furthermore, read through Nabokov's ''Ada'' and Boswell's ''Life of
Johnson,'' thus somewhat straddling the case?

I remember well more than one summery occasion when my increasingly
tired-looking Modern Library edition of Sterne's facetious, mind-addling classic
was hauled down from its shelf into the sun and shade; once I took it with me
for a week alone on Martha's Vineyard, thinking to force the issue. Alas, even
the boredom of utter solitude was no match for the boredom that poured in waves
off the chirping pages of this particular great book. I made it as far as page
428, a half-faded bookmark tells me; but, like Scott on his return from the
South Pole, I did not quite have the stuff to complete the job. I should have
eaten the sledge dogs, like Amundsen.

Jean Strouse Author of ''Alice James: A Biography.'' The book I've often hauled
along to beaches and mountains and have never managed to make much headway in is
James Joyce's ''Finnegans Wake.'' I can't even say something clever about it now
because I haven't ever got past page 20. I do remember the first time I heard
its name, though: I was 15. My family lived in West Los Angeles, and I spent a
lot of time that year browsing in local bookstores with a friend who seemed very
sophisticated - he knew about John Coltrane and one-act plays, and he said
things like ''n'est-ce pas?'' every once in a while. In those bookstores I was
drawn as if by pheromone to New Directions paperbacks - they had about them
irresistible intimations of New York coffeehouses, French cigarettes, bare
mattresses on cold floors and major depression - while the sunlight splashed
away outside on Wilshire Boulevard. Anyway, one day my learned friend pulled a
volume called ''Finnegans Wake'' off the shelf and asked if I'd read it. I tried
to look knowing as I shook my head and temporized - ''Not yet'' - wondering why
he of all people would be interested in a fat book about sailing.


Eudora Welty Author of ''One Writer's Beginnings.'' It doesn't enter my mind not
to finish reading a book I've once started, whether it's a classic or any other
kind. I persist and might do so out of habit alone, but the act of reading is
itself vital to me and carries me along - it sparks its own hope and curiosity.
Certainly disappointment comes along in the course of reading many a book, but
this isn't fatal - if I may limit this to the reading of fiction. And then I
should add that contemporary fiction keeps its hold on me till the end because
of my sympathy as a writer for another writer's welfare. I once literally threw
away a new novel I'd brought along to read on a voyage to Europe, but not
without finishing it first. Had I chucked that novel into the Atlantic without
having read the whole of it through, I could have thought, ''There but for the
grace of God go I.''

Thus the classics are welcome thrice over. I always believed the scrolled motto
on the endpapers of my old Everyman's Library books: ''Everyman, I will go with
thee, and be thy guide, / In thy most need to go by thy side.''


Peter De Vries Author of ''Slouching Towards Kalamazoo.'' I have been unable to
enjoy anything in Henry James' Late Great Phase except ''The Ambassadors,''
which still leaves a hundred man- hours of ''The Golden Bowl'' and ''The Wings
of the Dove.'' Oh, I have ''got through'' them all, but continually muttering,
''Good God, all that upholstery!'' Lest I be counted a clod and philistine, let
Henry's brother William speak for me, for I have him in my corner. ''You know
how opposed your whole 'third manner' of execution is to the literary ideals
which animate my crude and Orson-like breast,'' he wrote to Henry, ''mine being
to say a thing in one sentence as straight and explicit as it can be made, and
then to drop it forever; yours being to avoid naming it straight, but by dint of
breathing and sighing all round and round it, to arouse in the reader who may
have had a similar perception already . . . the illusion of a solid object, made
(like the 'ghost' at the Polytechnic) wholly out of impalpable materials, air,
and the prismatic interferences of light, ingeniously focused by mirrors upon
empty space. But you do it, that's the queerness.''

Jacques Barzun, who loves both geniuses, stresses in his splendid ''Stroll With
William James'' (to which I am indebted for the bolstering quote) the positive
note with which William softens the stricture, observing, as learned referee,
that William ''admired without enjoying.'' How often we do that!

So it would take a court order to make me pick up again either of the two
above-named masterpieces, I who am ready at any time to reread ''Washington
Square,'' ''The Portrait of a Lady'' and ''The Reverberator,'' an admirably
unupholstered early novella in which the Master uncannily predicted the gossip
columnists that coarsen our own day.  I've met professed Jamesians who have
never heard of it.


Daniel J. Boorstin Author of ''The Discoverers.'' My favorite unreadable author
is Henry James, whose ''Portrait of a Lady,'' among other copious works, I can
never penetrate and have been very far from finishing. Perhaps I don't know him
well enough to have other good reasons for disliking him.  Oscar Wilde again hit
the nail on the head when he said Henry James ''writes fiction as if it were a
painful duty.'' That's not why I read!


Diana Trilling Author of ''Mrs. Harris: The Death of the Scarsdale Diet
Doctor.'' I have never been able to read through the whole of Melville's
''Moby-Dick,'' though I have often begun it. Before women's liberation, I would
have accounted for this on the ground that, after all, it wasn't a woman's book
- women weren't given to seeking the Grail. Now, more cautious, I simply explain
that just as the fact that a book is boring cannot be taken to mean that it is
not a good book, so the fact that a book is good cannot be taken to mean that it
is not boring.


Wendy Wasserstein Author of the play ''Isn't It Romantic.'' I recall the trouble
I had in college completing ''Tristram Shandy'' - the hours spent staring at the
hilarity of the blank pages - and similarly my annual search for the water
imagery in ''The Faerie Queene.'' But nothing compares to the impossibility of
repeatedly trying to get through the first 10 pages of the Bobbsey Twins. And it
was a more public humiliation. At least all of my friends in college weren't
happily reading ''Tristram Shandy'' and anticipating the sequel. In fact, most
of them devoted more effort to pursuing the Cliff Notes. However, in elementary
school everyone was reading the Bobbsey Twins. Now, my difficulty could have
been that I grew up in a city and couldn't understand the world of Lakeport,
with its lawns and shutters. But my friends grew up in the city too. Moreover, I
always enjoyed reading about the adventures of Robin Hood, though I never lived
in a forest.

Perhaps it was the symmetry of those twins. Freddie and Blond Flossie and the
older Nan and Bert. Or maybe it was because Mr. Bobbsey insisted on calling
Flossie ''My Fat Fairy.'' And the way I saw it, even though those twins got into
trouble, you knew there were at least 40 more books for them to work everything
out in. Furthermore, the Bobbsey Twins were not discriminating in their sense of
adventure - consider ''The Bobbsey Twins in Tulip Land'' or ''The Bobbsey Twins
on a Bicycle Trip.''

But perhaps I'm being too harsh. My favorite classic as a child was
''Pollyanna.'' And I've spent years as an adult trying to rid my psyche of ''the
glad game.''


Walter Abish Author of ''How German Is It.'' By now, not completing a novel I
have started is no longer a singular event. My first failed reading, albeit an
involuntary one, was at the ripe age of 9, in China, when I received from my
uncle Volume One of Dumas's ''Count of Monte Cristo,'' which I read with great
elation, only to despair when Volume Two at the time proved unavailable. I
didn't know the fate of the poor sequestered count until years later, when I saw
a filmed version of the book.

At 19, then living in Tel Aviv, I discovered ''The Idiot'' by Dostoyevsky, a
book that more than any other I had previously read illuminated - or so I
believed - the conditions of life. Yet despite my exhilaration, the closer I
came to the ending, the greater became my resistance to the inevitability of
Prince Myshkin's ending. Finally, spiritually depleted, I put the unfinished
book aside.

I must admit that my resistance to certain endings - this does not preclude also
a strong resistance to boredom - has in fact entered my reading or misreading of
literature. In curtailing the ending of a book I have, so to speak, permitted a
resistance to completion and to explanation (for what is a fictional ending if
not explanation?) to uncover for me another, perhaps even more fruitful text.
Recently, on rereading Sartre's ''Nausea,'' I carefully read the ending I had
previously omitted. It is a disappointingly pedestrian ending to an otherwise
brilliantly conceived novel. As a result, I have had to revise somewhat my high
esteem for it.

It is, I suppose, a novel way to read.


Russell Banks Author of ''The Relation of My Imprisonment.'' Lists of books we
reread and books we can't finish tell more about us than about the relative
worth of the books themselves. Wherever such lists are kept, then, let it be
noted that while I may never have got beyond page 112 of Melville's ''Pierre, or
The Ambiguities,'' I have read at least seven times all of an equally clotted,
tedious and unintentionally funny novel, Hawthorne's ''Marble Faun.''

I think we read with joy the bad books of good writers whose lives we happen to
love for all the eccentric, surely self-interested reasons that attach us to the
lives of certain friends. And while Melville's life has never interested me much
- despite my belief that ''Moby-Dick'' and ''The Confidence Man'' are two of the
half-dozen best novels ever written by Americans - Hawthorne's life fascinates
me nearly as much as my own. For a book by Melville to please me, it has to be a
work of genius, which ''Pierre,'' though written by a genius, is not. As for
Hawthorne, I'll happily read and reread his lists of things to do around the
Customhouse today.


Nora Johnson Author of ''The Two of Us.'' I have always found Virginia Woolf's
novels a struggle to read, and I could not finish ''To the Lighthouse.'' Her
style is involuted, and her characters are distant and at times mysteriously
motivated. There is, besides, something claustrophobic about the atmosphere she
creates.  Her rooms and houses, with their endlessly ruminating occupants, seem
small and airless; it is as though she had fallen victim to the same malady she
warned women writers of in her brilliant book-length essay, ''A Room of One's
Own'' - the damaging effect of a very limited life on the creative spirit.


Norman Podhoretz Author of ''Why We Were in Vietnam.'' The last time I tried to
read Dickens's ''Little Dorrit,'' I reached the halfway point (page 500 or
thereabouts) before finding myself unable to go on. In addition to feeling
guilty about this, I was also a little puzzled.  For even as I was losing
patience with ''Little Dorrit'' as a novel, I continued marveling at the truly
Shakespearean richness of Dickens as a writer. Yet after a while not even the
pleasures yielded by Dickens's language could prevail over my mounting
exasperation with his sentimentality and predictability.

Nowadays, of course, the best critical opinion forbids us to complain about
those things in Dickens. For example, F. R. Leavis, who once declared that ''the
adult mind'' was not sufficiently challenged by Dickens, later came around to
the view (already held by critics like Lionel Trilling) that Dickens was ''one
of the greatest of creative writers''; as for ''Little Dorrit'' in particular,
it was now ''one of the very greatest novels.'' I used to disagree with Leavis's
original position, but today I see in it as good an explanation as any of why I,
for one, am now unable to read ''Little Dorrit'' through to the end.


Paule Marshall Author of ''Praisesong for the Widow.'' Back in 1968, 10 highly
respected black writers and scholars publicly expressed their outrage at William
Styron's ''Confessions of Nat Turner.'' I had wanted to be one of them but could
not, because while they had read and, I'm sure, reread the novel, I had not been
able to complete it. Despite any number of attempts, I simply couldn't push
through to the end. First of all, there was the blatant racism of the thing. Nat
Turner, the prophet, the visionary, the great 19th-century religious rebel, the
revolutionary, Nat the Marcus Garvey, Malcolm X and Martin Luther King Jr. of
his time, had been reduced in Mr. Styron's fictionalized account to a cowardly,
irresolute, neurasthenic celibate obsessed with the thought of white female
flesh. A portrayal in clear contradiction to established historical fact. I saw
blood. Then there was the matter of art. Mr. Styron's Nat Turner speaks in the
voice of an Emersonian schoolmaster. And the writing throughout, even the
descriptive passages at which Mr. Styron usually excels, has the formal tone of
an essay rather than the excitement and sense of lived experience of fiction. I
got as far as the scene of Nat and his friend Will tumbling amorously in the
grass and called it quits.


Harvey Fierstein Author of the play ''Torch Song Trilogy.'' The only Ernest
Hemingway book I was ever able to get through was ''The Old Man and the Sea.''
I've tried every one of his novels. From the age of 10 until just about three
months ago, I've tried reading Hemingway books. Somehow I can't manage to pull
them off. There is something about the machismo in them that just doesn't allow
me room to move around. I know I should read them - I know they have a lot to to
say about his time and about his world and that particular male point of view
that I don't seem to have within me. Reading his books should open those kinds
of horizons for the reader, but I just can't manage to get through them. I have
the same problem with Sam Shepard.B

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              356 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IF YOU'RE THINKING OF LIVING IN THROGS NECK

BYLINE: By DOLORES DOLAN

SECTION: Section 8; Page 9, Column 1; Real Estate Desk

LENGTH: 1524 words


On cold, rainy days in late spring, motorboats, cabin cruisers and sailboats
huddle together in the Locust Point Marina, waiting, like their owners, for
warmer weather. Nearby, the white-shingled one- and two-family houses and the
tidy streets of Throgs Neck provide a serene backdrop to the windswept waters of
Eastchester Bay.

To a visitor, this isolated area of the southeast Bronx seems like a well-kept
suburb. ''But on a summer day, you'd think you were in Florida or California,''
said Gene Holtzman, who has lived with his wife, Mary, for five years in a two-
bedroom condominium on Shore Drive.

From the private beach a few steps from their living room, City Island is
visible two miles to the east; to the south is a view of what the area is best
known for, the Throgs Neck Bridge. ''Friends come to visit,'' Mr. Holtzman said,
''and can't believe we live in the Bronx.''

Throgs Neck, a community of about 30,000 residents, mostly of Italian, Irish and
German ancestry, is bounded by Westchester Creek on the west, Eastchester Bay
and Long Island Sound on the east, the East River on the south and Bruckner
Boulevard and Layton Avenue on the north.

History has it that it was named after John Throgmorton, who settled there in
1643. A source of pique, however, to Peggy Vega, president of the Throggs Neck
Homeowners Association, is that two g's were the norm until 1955, when the
bridge was completed, and the city now uses only one ''g'' for the community
name on maps and official documents.

Another complaint, Mrs. Vega said, is that funds ran out when the city was
paving the streets some years ago and many were paved only in the center, which
causes curb flooding in heavy rains.

Ferry Point Park, a largely undeveloped tract of 298 acres in the southwestern
corner of the community, until last year was just a dumping ground for junked
cars. But then the cars were cleaned out and the park now provides playing areas
for team sports. A couple of miles to the east, on a peninsula stretching under
the Throgs Neck Bridge, is the 1,200-cadet Maritime College of the State
University of New York.

Few Throgs Neck homes, including three rental apartment buildings and Throgs
Neck Houses, one of the Bronx's first low-income city projects, are more than
seven blocks from a bay, creek, inlet or river. Because the waterfront is so
accessible, many families belong to one or more of the small beach and fishing
clubs along Shore Drive and Clarence Avenue.

Some of the clubs are more than 75 years old and, as one member said, if they
were not so steadfast in their determination ''to hold fast,'' condominium
developers would be buying every inch of waterfront property.

Waterfront condominiums have changed the face of Throgs Neck and, according to
developer-builders like Bill Procida and the Ruffalo brothers, changed it for
the better. ''We believe in this area - it's a beautiful part of the Bronx,''
said Peter Ruffalo, who lives with his wife and children in Country Club
Estates, one of the condominiums built by him and his brother, George.

In 1979, the 12 units in Country Club Estates, at Shore Drive and Layton Avenue,
were sold for $74,900 to $99,000. The Ruffalos's most recent condominium
project, built almost on the shoreline and affording a dramatic view of the bay,
is Bay View Estates. The one- and two-bedroom apartments have fireplaces, decks
and mooring facilities and sell for $150,000 to $225,000.

Later this year, the Ruffalos will begin construction on Beach Cove Estates, a
four-story, 28-unit town-house condominium project on Weir Creek.

White Beaches, a planned 52-unit condominium with a 25-slip marina at Schurz
Avenue on the East River, is the project of Mr. Procida, a 21-year-old developer
and scion of a three-generation construction family. Situated on the waterfront
between the Whitestone and Throgs Neck Bridges, the two-bedroom apartments cost
$120,000 to $225,000 and three-bedrooms go for $190,000 to $230,000. The slips
sell for $12,000.

''We hope to bring back the upper middle class - people, for example, who will
spend more money on East Tremont Avenue,'' Mr. Procida said as he stood near an
Italian-marble fireplace in the carpeted living room of one of the 16 units in
the first phase of White Beaches. ''This is one of the last strongholds of the
Bronx. If this area goes, then Country Club and Pelham Bay Park will go.'' He
was referring to the two upper-middle-class areas adjacent to Throgs Neck.

''Throgs Neck is a very stable community,'' said Joseph Limongelli of Better
Homes Realty on East Tremont Avenue. Excluding Edgewater Park and Silver Beach,
he said, typical one-family homes go for $75,000 to $80,000, two-families
$90,000 to $100,000.

According to Mrs. Vega, houses are often sold within a few weeks. ''A person
planning to retire to Florida, for example, might tell his neighbor,'' she said.
''The next day he gets a phone call or a knock on the door from a relative of
his neighbor and a sale is made.''

AN unusual area within Throgs Neck

is Edgewater Park on Eastchester

Bay. Starting in the 1920's, it was a summer community of more than 600 cottages
for Manhattanites. Later, after renovation and winterizing, the cottages became
permanent homes owned by their tenants. But because all the land was owned by
one family, the Shaws, the owners could only lease their lots.

Edgewater Park homeowners believe they will soon be able to buy the land in a
cooperative arrangement similar to one made in Silver Beach, another waterfront
community in Throgs Neck. There, a decade ago, residents formed a cooperative
and paid $1.6 million for the 83 acres on which their homes were built. The one-
and two-family homes now sell for $45,000 to $50,000, subject to approval by the
co-op board.

Residents can find most necessities in the small, family-owned stores on East
Tremont Avenue, the main thoroughfare. One store, Benny and Joe Mondello's
Delicious Kold Kuts, which specializes in homemade sausages and cheeses and
salads, boasts that it is the home of the original ''Salami Bread,'' a rounded
loaf of Italian bread with Genoa salami slices baked into it.

For major clothing and household purchases, many residents get in their cars and
go to shopping malls. Joan Payne of Silver Beach, points out that the malls in
Paramus, N.J., are only a half hour away.

Throgs Neck residents who work in Manhattan say transportation is convenient.
One route is by city bus to the Westchester Square IRT station, an hour's ride
from midtown. Express buses leave every five minutes in rush hours and make
several stops along East Tremont Avenue; the 50-minute ride to midtown costs
$2.50.

According to James Vacca, district manager of Community Board 10, reading and
math scores in the two public and two parochial elementary schools are above
average. And Robert Leder, principal of the neighborhood Herbert H. Lehman High
School on East Tremont Avenue, said that 82 percent of the graduates go on to
higher education.

Among the many residents who have lived a lifetime in Throgs Neck is Anna
Randazzo, owner of the Marina Del Rey, one of the Bronx's most popular catering
establishments. Bookings in the three lavishly decorated dining rooms
overlooking the East River are made more than a year in advance.

Mrs. Randazzo, a small, energetic woman who refuses to divulge her age, puts in
a seven-day week supervising her large staff. She shows off her enormous kitchen
to visitors and says she is most proud of a separate kitchen she had built for
Hasidic weddings.

''On Monday, Tuesdays and Wednesdays they come from Brooklyn and upstate and
they bring their own food and music,'' she said. ''Because they have to get
married under the sky, I had a skylight made in the main dining room.

''And in good weather, they get married outside with the view of the bridge and
the water.''

Veterans' Campaign to Revive a Park

In the 1970's, Patrick Devine, the Bronx County American Legion Commander, and
other Vietnam veterans asked the Parks Department to redesign Throgs Neck's
underutilized 19-acre Weir Creek Park on Eastchester Bay into an open-space and
wildlife preserve. They also wanted to rename it Veterans Memorial Park and to
plant a tree for each of New York City's 1,344 Vietnam fatalities.

It took several years, Mr. Devine said, not only to get Parks Department
approval and guarantees from the city of more than $1 million in two phases, but
also to overcome opposition from some residents.

The community has been reassured, Mr. Devine said, that there will be an open
area to play ball in but not a regulation baseball diamond (which teams from all
over the city would have been allowed to use). He added that the community would
help to care for the park and be able to develop projects in connection with the
department.

The park is expected to be completed in 1985 or 1986, Mr. Devine said.
''There'll be benches along the water, playing areas for the Throgs Neck Sea
Cadets, the Girl Scouts, the American Legion Judo Team and, we hope, a skating
rink,'' he added. ''And 370 trees have been planted.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map and photos of dwellings

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              357 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BACK-TO-BACK GOLF EVENTS IN THE COUNTY

BYLINE: By MICHAEL STRAUSS

SECTION: Section 11WC; Page 18, Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


THE county, a golfing stronghold since the sport's early days, will be the
center of attention during the next two weeks as the Manufacturers Hanover
Westchester Classic and the United States Open are held back to back at two
county clubs.

The Classic, offering $500,000 in prize money, will open next Thursday for the
18th time at the Westchester Country Club in Harrison. The Open, also a four-day
event, will be held on the Winged Foot Golf Club's west course in Mamaroneck,
starting June 14.

If the weather is favorable, the two star-studded events are expected to draw
record golf crowds for the county.

''Never have Westchester's devotees had the opportunity to see two events of
this importance held on successive weeks,'' said Noel Griffin, the Classic's
tournament director. The county was the site of both events in 1974, she noted,
but they ''were not held back to back.''

The double bill means that virtually all of America's top professionals be in
the area for the better part of two weeks. The Classic, a regular stop on the
Professional Golf Association tour, will start with a field of 156. Such
outstanding international performers as Steve Ballesteros of Spain, Isao Aokim
of Japan and Gary Player of South Africa are among those who have filed entries.

For the Open, the United States Golf Association received 5,195 entry
applications, surpassing the 5,000 mark for the first time. The job paring down
the Open's field began May 17, when local qualifying rounds bgan at 63 sites
across the country. Advancing directly to the sectional qualifying rounds,
however, were Arnold Palmer and Mr. Player, former United States Open champions;
John Mahaffey, Bobby Nichols and Dave Stockton, past P.G.A. title holders; and
Nathaniel Crosby and Fred Ridley, one-time United States amateur champions.

In addition, 54 golfers were exempt from last month's qualifying rounds as well
as this month's sectional elimination. They include such former United States
Open champions as Jack Nicklaus, Tom Watson, Lee Trevino, Hale Irwin, David
Graham, Lou Graham, Hubert Green, Johnny Miller, Andy North and Jerry Pate. Also
exempt were Hal Sutton, last year's P.G.A. title holder; Bob Crenshaw, this
year's Masters' victor; and Jay Sigel, two-time United States amateur champion.
Two exempt players - Billy Casper and Bruce Lietzle - did not file entries.

Also exempt was Larry Nelson, the defending United States Open champion. A high
school letterman in basketball and baseball before attending Southern Tech on an
athletic scholarship, he has taken an unusual route to golf stardom.

While serving with the Army in Vietnam, Mr. Nelson was regaled by one of his
Army buddies with golf stories. He decided to try the game when he returned home
and bought his first set of clubs at the age of 22. Three years later, his game
was considered strong enough for him to join the professional ranks.

He scored his United States Open triumph last June at the Oakmont Country Club
near Pittsburgh, in a tournament in which he posted a four- round total of 280.
The score was far from a record for the tournament but scores of 65 and 67 in
his last two rounds were the factors that brought him the title.

This month's Open at Winged Foot will be the fourth held at that club, all on
its west course. The great Bobbie Jones triumphed there in 1929. Billy Casper
was the winner 30 years later and Hale Irwin in 1974.

At the Westchester Country Club, fans following the progress of the Classic will
also be helping in a charity event that has raised, since its start in 1967,
more than $5 million for participating hospitals in the county.

Mr. Nicklaus has been the event's only double winner. The blond-haired star
triumphed in 1967 and 1972, his total score of 270 in 1972 tying the record
previously set by Arnold Palmer%in 1971.

''Last year the tournament raised more than $1 million for charity,'' Mrs.
Griffin said. ''We see no reason why we will not be exceeding that figure for
this week's competition. The greenskeeper, Ted Horton, has done a fine job in
getting our championship course ready and, given favorable weather, we expect
that spectators will enjoy golf at its best.''

For the Westchester Classic, admission to the sports house and ground facilities
for all seven days is $60 and admission to the grounds only for all seven days
is $45. Tickets for practice rounds tomorrow and Tuesday are $5 per day.
Admission for the pro-amateur tournament Wednesday is $10. Admission for regular
tournament play (Thursday through Sunday) is $18 each day. For information, call
967-5356.

For the United States Open, tickets only to watch the matches are $95. These
tickets are transferrable and are good for three practice days, four tournament
days and for a possible playoff. Each ticket includes parking privileges and a
copy of souvenir program. Admission for the three practice days (June 11, 12 and
13) are $14. Admission for each of the four subsequent tournament days (June 14,
15 beginning at 7:30 A.M. and June 16, 17 at 9:30 A.M.) are $24 each. All
tickets include parking. For information, call 381-4653.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              358 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

EX-MINISTER, FACING PRISON, 'AT PEACE'

BYLINE: By PATRICE COURTNEY

SECTION: Section 11NJ; Page 1, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1225 words


SYRACUSE, N.Y. AS THE first trial of antinuclear protesters on Federal charges
of sabotage wound up its second week here, a former Montclair minister who is a
defendant said he was ''at peace'' with the possibility that he might go to
prison for as long as 25 years.

Vern Rossman, 56 years old, who was a minister of the Christian Church
(Disciples of Christ) and who is now a Quaker, was arrested in the early morning
hours last Thanksgiving Day, Nov. 24.

With two other men and four women, he had slipped into a hangar at Griffiss Air
Force Base in Rome, N.Y., and hammered on the bomb bay doors of a B-52, four
unmounted engines and other aircraft parts.

In addition to causing damages estimated at $113,000, the group poured bottles
filled with their blood onto the military hardware, posted a document that
indicted the military for violations of international peace accords and
festooned the plane with peace banners and photographs of women and children.

They then waited an hour outside the hangar before military personnel discovered
and arrested them.

The protesters contend that the bomber was one of 172 being refitted at Griffiss
to carry Cruise missiles, the nuclear warheads that have been the objects of
protest by European antinuclear activists because of their deployment at United
States bases there as so-called ''first-strike'' weapons.

(First-strike weapons can reach their targets with greater accuracy and speed
than any other previously developed nuclear warheads. Thus, in theory, a country
that used them would devastate its enemy before any counterstrike was possible.)

''Our opposition is not to national defense, but to its expansion into nuclear
weapons,'' Mr. Rossman said in an interview outside the Federal District Court
here where he and the six others are on trial on charges of sabotage,
destruction of Government property and conspiracy.

''In addition to opposing the Cruise because it is a first-strike weapon,'' he
said, ''we wanted to show just how destablizing the missile is. If we were able
to walk onto the base unnoticed, a terrorist group could do the same.''

A jury of eight women and five men is hearing the case. The destruction and
sabotage charges carry penalties of up to 10 years; the conspiracy charge, a
five-year sentence. The three counts also carry fines of $10,000 each.

In the first week of the trial, the prosecution called 14 witnesses, most of
them military personnel from Griffiss and Federal Bureau of Investigation agents
summoned to the base to arrest the group and collect evidence.

United States Attorney Frederick J. Scullin used their testimony primarily to
establish the extent of the damage. When it was their turn to cross-examine, the
defendants tried to confirm the presence of Cruise missiles at the base, but
were unsuccessful.

Under questioning by a co-defendant, Elizabeth McAlister, 44, a former nun who
is now married to the antiwar activist Philip Berrigan, Sgt. Paul Sassenberry
said that he could ''neither confirm nor deny'' the presence of Cruise missiles
at Griffiss.

''No, ma'am, I am not aware of what the Cruise missile is,'' he testified.

Calling themselves the Plowshares 7, after the biblical injunction to turn
''swords into plowshares,'' the group is the first to have conducted an
antinuclear protest inside a military base. As such, Mr. Scullin urged that the
jury, to discourage future actions at military installations, consider
more-severe sentences than those given to previous antinuclear protesters.

''This case has added importance because the defendants went beyond the accepted
norms of protest,'' Mr. Scullin said. ''There is a concern that if the situation
is not dealt with promptly, we could see more problems like it across the
country.''

Countering statements by the defendants that the damage was symbolic and done
with good intentions, Mr. Scullin said:

''Sabotage requires proof of intent to damage the national defense. Their stated
intent was to disarm the Cruise missile; it doesn't matter if they could have
done more damage and chose not to.''

Mr. Rossman lived in Montclair from 1970 to 1981, working as a program director
for the National Council of Churches in New York City. He also started a prison
visitation program at the Essex County Corrections Center, he said.

The father of four grown children, Mr. Rossman also served as a missionary in
Japan in the 1940's and as executive director of Accountants for the Public
Interest from 1980 to 1982.  ''No one could look forward to going to prison,''
Mr. Rossman said, ''but I hope to conduct an informal prison ministry, and to do
a lot of reading and writing.''

The other defendants are Dean Hammer, 29, a recent gradute of the Yale Divinity
School; Kathleen Rumpf, 32, of Marlboro, N.Y., a member of the Catholic Worker,
a religious movement; Jacqueline Allen

, 22, a nursery school teacher from Hartford;, Clare Grady, 25, a potter from
Ithaca, and Carl Smith, 28, a peace activist from Baltimore.

Advised by four lawyers who previously represented activists at the Women's
Peace Encampment at Seneca Falls, the seven plan to use a defense based on the
legal principle of ''justification of necessity.''

They will argue that they acted illegally to prevent a greater harm - nuclear
war - and the violation of international laws, such as the Nuremberg Principles,
the Treaty on Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons and Act 51 of the United
Nations Charter.

Ramsey Clark, a former United States Attorney General, is serving as a
consultant to the defense.

On Wednesday, District Judge Howard G. Munson denied a motion by the Government
to prohibit the use of the justification-of-necessity defense. However, he
cautioned the defendants not to interject political and religious views into
their defense.

The first defense witness, Paul Walker, a national security consultant to both
the Government and peace groups, said that the real extent of the damage done to
the B-52 was about $2,500 and that the Government's estimate of $113,000 was an
example of gross military cost overruns.

The second witness, Dr. Henry Abraham, a founder of Physicians for Social
Responsibility, testified on the psychological stress experienced by those who
live in fear of nuclear war.

He described the development of first-strike weapons as akin to two men with
guns at each other's temples; to have even a chance of survival, he said, each
knows he will have to pull the trigger.

Other defense witnesses will include the defendants themselves; their legal
counsel, Mr. Clark, and Richard Falk, a Princeton University professor and the
author of some 20 books on international law.

The Plowshares 7 action was the sixth such protest undertaken since 1980 by a
loose coalition of groups calling themselves the Atlantic Life Community.

Among those participating in the first Plowshares action at the General Electic
plant in King of Prussia, Pa., were Philip Berrigan and his brother Daniel,
known for his antiwar activism during the Vietnam War.

On April 22 eight activists calling themselves the Pershing Plowshares were
arrested for dousing a missile launcher with blood and destroying other military
hardware at the Martin Marietta plant in Orlando, Fla.

The eight are now free without bond and awaiting trial.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of protesters in Syracuse

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              359 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 3, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE GENERAL VS. THE NETWORK

BYLINE: By Arthur R. Miller

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1296 words


Arthur R. Miller is a professor at Harvard Law School and the host of the
nationally syndicated television program ''Miller's Court.'' A MATTER OF HONOR

By Don Kowet.  317 pp. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co. $16.95.

JOURNALISTIC ethics is one of the hot topics

of the 1980's. The reasons are not hard to find.

Since the Vietnam and Watergate periods,

when the denizens of the Fourth Estate covered themselves with glory through
tenacious, often brilliant reporting, there has been a growing aggressiveness
among the nation's journalists. ''Investigative reporters'' and ''Eye'' and
''Spotlight'' teams have sprung up everywhere. But has the post-Vietnam
-and-Watergate aggressiveness gone too far? Some believe the news media have
become too powerful and that Pulitzer fever is running rampant among the
country's press corps. Journalists, they say, are more interested in making news
than reporting it. The media, it is asserted, have become both arrogant and
unaccountable and should be cut down to size.

Although the evidence is spotty, this unflattering perception of journalism may
account for the very high percentage of jury verdicts in favor of plaintiffs and
against media organizations in libel cases in recent years. Ironically, the vast
majority of those verdicts are overturned by appellate judges, who seem to have
greater concern for First Amendment values than the average citizen does. Media
behavior is now treated as news. Many newspapers have ombudsman columns, The
Wall Street Journal recently published an extraordinary mea culpa concerning a
writer of its ''Heard in the Street'' column, and the networks periodically
scrutinize themselves.

''A Matter of Honor'' by Don Kowet adds to this genre by detailing the
background of what may become one of the most celebrated libel cases of our
time. The plaintiff is Gen. William C.Westmoreland, our military commander
during much of the Vietnam imbroglio. The defendant is CBS, a network with a
proud news tradition. They have entered the litigation ring to square off over
the CBS documentary ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' the thesis of
which was that there was a conspiracy within the military establishment in
Vietnam to understate the size of the enemy forces and convey a false picture of
a winning situation - that there was no ''light at the end of the tunnel.''

The lawsuit is interesting not only because it probes deeply into the practices
and ethics of television journalism but also because the adversaries are
heavyweights who seem prepared to go the distance. The proceedings have been
marked by legal infighting over whether the trial should be in the general's
home state or CBS's hometown (it will be in the latter), whether CBS must turn
over the results of its confidential in-house investigation (yes), whether the
documentary's producer secretly taped off-the-record telephone conversations
with such people as former Secretary of Defense Robert M. McNamara, former Under
Secretary of State George Ball and former Army Chief of Staff Gen. Matthew B.
Ridgway (yes) and what happened to those tapes (they apparently were erased). So
as the trial nears, we find the adversaries standing in their corners,
shadowboxing, waiting for the bell to sound.

The documentary became a news event after it was aired in January 1982.
Initially, the press accepted the program's theory, lending credence to the
notion that we are so mesmerized by the tube that its offerings are treated as
gospel. Doubts arose following a press conference by General Westmoreland and a
highly critical article in TV Guide (of which Mr. Kowet was the co-author).

If anything, ''A Matter of Honor'' escalates the controversy by presenting a
devastating portrayal, if the author is to be believed, of a network documentary
unit apparently more interested in proving a conspiracy theory than in finding
out what the facts were. Mr. Kowet accuses in consistently harsh terms George
Crile, the producer, of violating CBS's own internal regulations by shaping the
broadcast to establish the conspiracy, by not including interviews with people
who would not support the program's thesis, by rehearsing certain ''witnesses''
and by using questionable editing and hostile interviewing techniques. CBS has
reacted vigorously by retaining a public relations firm to act as a ''truth
squad'' monitoring commentary on the book and ''correcting'' its inaccuracies.
CBS appears to have scored some points by debunking a Kowet anecdote concerning
a Mike Wallace telephone call to A. M. Rosenthal, the executive editor of The
New York Times, that supposedly influenced the paper's commentary about the
controversy. Both Mr. Wallace and Mr. Rosenthal deny that the call was made, and
Mr. Kowet has said he never checked the matter with either of them.

There is irony in all this, since many of the accusations Mr. Kowet levels at
CBS regarding its techniques, fairness and motivation are echoed in CBS's
reactions to his book. The publisher has now entered the fray by charging CBS
with trying to ''chill'' the book. Mr. Kowet, in turn, has turned over to
General Westmoreland's attorneys off-the- record tape recordings of telephone
interviews with CBS officials, an astonishing move by a reporter when other
journalists have resisted such demands by going to prison. The case has all the
makings of a very long-running legal soap opera.

''A Matter of Honor'' makes fascinating reading for anyone interested in the
Vietnam period or journalism. It proves to be a detailed and none too flattering
anatomy of the making of a television documentary, giving the reader
considerable insight into how subjects are selected and the product put
together. Unfortunately, the book is flawed by considerable repetition and a
harsh, accusatory tone that occasionally seems gratuitous.


BUT beyond the story and without regard to questions about the accuracy of Mr.
Kowet's assertions, the book's value is to force us to think about television
journalism and its mores. For example, ''A Matter of Honor'' suggests that
competition among television producers for resources and air time forces them to
hype their pet projects to executives. The process sounds more like a group of
street vendors hawking their wares than balanced, rational decision making by
the guardians of our First Amendment. Once the brass has been sold, the producer
must make good on the sales pitch.

If Mr. Kowet is to be believed, ''The Uncounted Enemy'' came about because an
ambitious producer, eager to build program credits, bought - literally and
figuratively - a conspiracy theory from a paid consultant, enlisted the support
of Mike Wallace's considerable talents and star value, sold the package to CBS
News and patched together a plot line from bits and pieces of selected
interviews and file footage. According to Mr. Kowet, no one in the network's
chain of command probed questions of a larger dimension; CBS's field of vision
apparently was limited by the telescope the program's producer had them look
through. Since television increasingly serves as our eyes and ears on the world,
we are entitled to ask, who is watching those who are watching for us?

Perhaps we will know more about the accuracy of Mr. Kowet's charges and CBS's
countercharges by the time the trial ends in Westmoreland v. CBS Inc. I say
''perhaps'' because although a trial is a search for truth, that doesn't mean
truth actually will be found. For those who plan to follow the upcoming legal
fisticuffs, ''A Matter of Honor'' offers a profile of the fighters and a wealth
of background on the television industry. But reader beware - this may be a
situation in which the book is no more accurate than the television set.B


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              360 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 4, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FEW INJURIES COULD BE TREATED IN WAR, U.S. SAYS

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 634 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 3


The Defense Department's senior medical officer has told Congress that American
military forces could care for only 20 percent of the estimated casualties in a
large-scale battle, a situation that could force the United States to surrender
in conventional warfare.

The official, Dr. William Mayer, said in recent testimony: ''Our wartime
scenarios have predicted that, if a full- scale, conventional conflict broke out
in Europe tomorrow, we would have sufficient medical capability to provide
initial surgery for only 20 percent of the estimated casualties.''

''In other words, large numbers of casualties could die on the battlefield for
lack of immediate surgical care,'' said Dr. Mayer, the Assistant Secretary of
Defense for Health Affairs.

''Military commanders have called this situation a 'war-stopper,' '' he said.
''Our forces would be unable to sustain action for an extended period of time.''

Other officials said the same would apply not only in Europe but also to a war
in Korea or the Persian Gulf.

Swift Evacuation in Vietnam


Over the nine years that United States forces fought in Vietnam, 153,000 were
wounded in action. In most cases, a wounded soldier was flown out of Vietnam and
was being treated in a fully equipped hospital in the Philippines or Japan less
than 24 hours after he had been hit.

Today, that would be possible for only two of every 10 wounded soliers,
according to Dr. Mayer's testimony, because of shortages in medical facilities
and personnel.

Moreover, Reagan Administration officials and military leaders alike have
repeatedly asserted that any full-scale conflict in the future is likely to
provide little time to prepare for intensive combat.

Dr. Mayer declined to be interviewed on reasons for deficiencies in medical
readiness or on the Defense Department's plans for overcoming them.

But he said the Defense Department is conducting surveys in the European and
Pacific Commands to assess capacities for evacuation, communications, use of
hospitals in allied nations and medical response to terrorist attack.

Other officials said budgets for medical readiness had risen from $45 million in
1981 to $189 million this year in a budget of $258 billion.

'Old and Obsolete' Equipment


In testimony before the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Defense last
month, Dr. Mayer said the armed forces were ''woefully short'' of medical
facilities, such as mobile army hospitals, that could be deployed to
battlefields.

''Much of the deployable equipment and materiel that we have is old and
obsolete,'' he said.

In addition, Dr. Mayer said, ''we are still faced with critical shortages of key
medical personnel who would be needed in wartime, most notably surgeons and
nurses.''

''Our reserve medical strength is far below what would be required during a
mobilization, as a majority of our wartime medical force would come from reserve
units,'' Dr. Mayer said.

The Surgeon General of the Army, Lieut. Gen. Bernhard T. Mittemeyer, testified
that the Army, which would suffer about 80 percent of the wartime casualties,
still has ''shortfalls in meeting our wartime medical support requirements.''

The Navy has on order two hospital ships, each with 1,000 beds, one to be put
into service in late 1986 and the other in mid-1987. With one stationed on each
coast, they are intended to be ready to deploy within five days' notice.

Another 1,000 bed hospital is aboard a ship in the Indian Ocean to be deployed
if American ground forces are sent into the Persian Gulf region.

In the United States, the Pentagon has arranged with civilian hospitals to
accommodate 61,000 casualties in the event of a large war overseas. But aircraft
to transport the wounded from the combat zone are in short supply.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              361 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 719 words


NEW YORK


Baseball Isn't for Nihilists

By Sydney H. Schanberg


Wallace Stevens, an insurance man from Hartford who composed poetry on his walks
to and from his office, once wrote of the season of renewal: And as he came he
saw that it was

spring, A time abhorrent to the nihilist.

To be touched by spring is not, I insist, to be corny. It does not require the
reading of scholarly socio- climatological studies to know that changes in the
weather and the seasons do affect us. The gloom index in this region - if one
existed - would have shot up noticeably during our just-ended week of rain.

Now the sun has breached the cloud wall and is baking life into old bones and
stirring restlessness and frolic in younger ones.

I had a dear uncle - Charlie - who loved the spring for all its reaffirmations
and viewed the turning of the trees' leaves in the fall as a negative tolling, a
reminder of mortality.  Charlie was a scrapper, a life force, never a complainer
even when complaining would have been thoroughly justified. He was a stockbroker
from Boston who, though he did not write it, passed poetry on to others.

Every spring, Charlie's thoughts turned to golf - and the Red Sox. You've got to
be a true believer in possibilities to see hope annually in the Red Sox. I sort
of expect that one of these days, the dictionary will add a new entry to the
definitions of optimist: a Red Sox fan. Charlie passed on that poetry to me.

It would be easier to despair about the Boston baseball team. In 65 years, they
have won but three pennants - and no World Series. But that's the beauty of each
spring: the mind comes to life with the thought that maybe this year will be
different.

The reality of this year does not encourage the pragmatist. Going into last
night's contest, the Red Sox were 14 1/2 games behind the American League
leaders, the Detroit Tigers; hopelessness would be the easy emotion. But they've
just won five straight and they're three games ahead of their archrival, the
Yankees.

And the weather has changed to bright and the Red Sox are in town for a series
with those very Yankees. Anything can happen in baseball's poetry.

Baseball is one of the symbols of those things constant in American life - as
witnessed by the people standing in long movie lines these days to see ''The
Natural,'' lines not explained by the attraction of Robert Redford alone.

Not even the toxic intrusion of artificial grass and megabuck contracts can
spoil the na"ivete and optimism that is baseball. Millions of Americans continue
to look to it for a nonviolent escape from the weariness that exists in the
world beyond the center field wall.

The worldly headlines outside of the park speak of missile races, military
involvement in Central America, the 40th anniversary of the Allied invasion at
Normandy and the interment of our unknown soldier from a more recent war,
Vietnam (where many Americans are still missing).

Lives are at stake in the globe's conflicts, people will die. So why is one
writing about baseball, instead of ''serious'' concerns? Perhaps as an escape
from burdensome thoughts. And perhaps also as a way to talk about the need to
see rebirth and opportunity even amid news reports about small wars and the
potential for larger ones.

Baseball is constant; no matter how bad things get, there is always next year.
Americans who have gone to war have, in the middle of ruin, clung to baseball,
scrounged for an old Stars & Stripes to get the scores, pined for a radio to put
their ears to. Silly, perhaps. Childlike, too. But positive, hopeful.

As Emily Dickinson put it: A little Madness in the Spring Is wholesome even for
a King.

I'm willing to bet that a lot of people still recovering from the ravages of
last week's flooding in Connecticut are going to be taking respite this week by
watching the Red Sox play the Yankees on television.

I'm luckier. I'm going to the stadium tonight for the second game of the series.
I look at the cheery side. Not only are we in front of the Yankees, but in any
other division of the major leagues except the American League East, we'd be
just four or five games out of first place, instead of 14 1/2.

It's not a pursuit for nihilists. For they do not understand this madness of the
spring.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              362 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS;
PICK A NUMBER, ANY POLITCALLY POWERFUL NUMBER

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1165 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 4


Numbers. Capitol Hill feeds on numbers, some authoritative, some spurious, to
buttress arguments and gain votes. Even when the numbers are conflicting, they
often become the focus of a debate in Congress, setting its perimeters and
sometimes determining the outcome.

Some of the numbers loom larger than life: the $1.52 million million national
debt, for example. Others seem rooted in the principle of majority rule, such as
the 1,967 delegates needed to win the Democratic Party's nomination for
President. But many are simply manufactured and convey ''an aura of spurious
exactitude,'' in the words of Alice M. Rivlin, former director of the
Congressional Budget Office, now director of economic studies at the Brookings
Institution.

''You can go to a dinner party in Washington and if somebody says, 'Did you know
that there are 27 percent more something than last year?' he dominates the
discussion, even though he's probably wrong,'' Mrs. Rivlin said.

Nevertheless, from body counts in Vietnam to economic forecasts, the power of
numbers in political debates has been noted by bureaucrats and lobbyists,
members of Congress and Presidents, all of whom struggle to come up with the
best numbers to make their cases.

'How Slippery Most Are'


''The members of this institution are very skillful at using numbers, but they
recognize how slippery most of them are,'' said Representative Lee H. Hamilton,
an Indiana Democrat. ''I don't think we are fooled by the numbers. We use them
as tools to buttress our views.''

Even when the numbers are highly suspect, or reflect volatile conditions that
may have changed before the ink was dry, the person with the numbers is ''King
of the Hill,'' according to Kirk O'Donnell, counsel to the Speaker of the House,
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr. The person with the numbers sets the tone of the
discussion, and his figures have to be debunked before his argument can be
refuted.

For example, there was the infamous case of David A. Stockman, the budget
director, who acknowledged in a magazine interview that he had fabricated the
economic forecast that was the basis for the Reagan Administration's first
budget plan.

A conflict over numbers dominated the recent House debate on military policy. On
one side were those who supported the Administration's contention that a 13 1/2
percent increase in military spending was needed to provide an adequate
deterrent against the Soviet Union. They were pitted against those who argued
that a mere 3 1/2 percent increase would do the job.

To Mr. Hamilton and others who criticize Congress's penchant for focusing more
on numbers than on substance, this was a classic case. In the end, the House
agreed to a 7 percent solution.

The Poor and the Not-So-Poor


Similarly, Congressional Democrats have used numbers to support their contention
that the Administration's tax and budget policies have helped the rich at the
expense of the poor. Their campaign literature contends that the changes will
amount to a net loss of $280 this year for those earning less than $10,000 but
result in a net gain of $17,600 for those earning $80,000 and above.

White House officials argue the reverse: that the poor have been most helped by
the economic programs. They argue that the President's policies helped reduce
the inflation rate from 12.4 percent in 1980 to the current 4 1/2 percent and
therefore assisted the poor because the poor spend most of their money on
consumption instead of savings.

In either case, it is the numbers that invest an argument with authority.
Stephen Hess, a political scientist, recalled that when he served in the Nixon
White House, the Pentagon won most battles against the State Department because
''the Pentagon came in with the numbers, while the State Department was more
amorphous, less given to exactitude.''

The influence of numbers in political campaigns sometimes allows pollsters to
set the political agenda. It was a series of Louis Harris surveys, for example,
that led the Democrats in Congress to focus on what they called the ''fairness''
issue involving the Reagan tax and budget policies.

The 'Gender Gap' Concept


Similarly, the concept of the ''gender gap,'' which holds that women are more
likely than men to vote for a Democratic Presidential candidate, is rooted in
polling data. Acknowledgment of a gender gap is widely believed to have been a
factor in the Administration's appointment of women to highly visible positions
on the Supreme Court and in the Cabinet.

But politicians occasionally defy polling numbers. The Senate recently rejected
a proposed Constitutional amendment to permit voluntary school prayer, although
polls showed overwhelming support by the majority of the American people.

''We use the numbers when they serve our purpose and discard them when they
don't,'' Mr. Hamilton said.

Cost-Benefit Analyses


The use of numbers to achieve political ends was honed to a fine art by the Army
Corps of Engineers, perhaps the most political branch of all the services, which
came up with the concept of cost-benefit analysis to justify construction of
dams and other projects.

Cost-benefit analyses are now used to weigh proposed regulations. A study by the
Congressional Research Service concluded that the single greatest determinant of
the outcome of a cost-benefit analysis was who conducted the analysis.

''A person who has control of numbers, whether accurate or not, will carry the
day,'' said Herbert Kaufman, a political scientist who retired this year from
the Brookings Institution. ''There is a fallacy of misplaced concreteness. Run
another variable, and the whole equation changes.''

Mr. Kaufman recalled that Senator Joseph McCarthy's accusations against reputed
Communists in the State Department were widely discounted until the Senator came
up with a set of specific, if spurious, numbers.

Some of the emphasis on numbers results from the persistence of news outlets.
Senators Alan K. Simpson, a Wyoming Republican, and Alan Cranston, Democrat of
California, were pressed by reporters to place a price tag on their legislation
to provide the groundwork for veterans' claims involving Agent Orange. Such a
price tag would indicate the dimensions of a new program. But the Senators said
they had no idea of the costs and could not estimate the number of people who
would benefit.

Congressional committees also press for exactitude, sometimes when none can
exist. Mr. Kaufman recalled that a former Cabinet Secretary, asked to estimate
the cost of a proposed change in Social Security, put the figure at $600 million
to $700 million. The committee chairman asked for a more specific figure, and
the witness promised to return with one the next day. The former Secretary left
the hearing room, had lunch, saw a movie, enjoyed dinner, watched television and
came in the next morning with a precise figure: $627.3 million. The chairman was
pleased.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: cartoon

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              363 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE CITY;
 A Suit Is Blocked On Agent Orange

SECTION: Section B; Page 20, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 191 words


A Federal judge yesterday dismissed a suit seeking to compel the Veterans
Administration to provide a ''uniform system'' of ''complete medical care'' for
veterans and their families who said they had suffered harm from the use by the
United States of Agent Orange in Vietnam.

Chief Judge Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn said another
judge, George C. Pratt, had determined in 1982 that Federal law barred such
claims against the Veterans Administration. Victor John Yannacone Jr., one of
the lawyers who filed the class- action suit, said Judge Weinstein's ruling
would be appealed.

The suit was filed after another suit stemming from the use of Agent Orange in
Vietnam ended in a tentative settlement calling for seven companies that made
the herbicide to create a $180 million fund to pay veterans and their families
for medical treatment and pain and suffering.

A new schedule of public hearings was announced yesterday on that proposed
settlement: Aug. 8, 9 and 10, Federal District Court in Brooklyn; Aug. 13 and
14, Chicago; Aug. 16 and 17, Houston; Aug. 20 and 21, Atlanta; Aug. 23 and 24,
San Francisco.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              364 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A MONK WHO GAINED INFLUENCE FROM WRITINGS

BYLINE: By KENNETH A. BRIGGS

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 473 words


PORTRAYING a writer on film is a formidable task even in the drama-filled life
of an author such as Hemingway. When the subject is a monk who remained in
silent seclusion most of his adult life, the challenge is far greater.

Thomas Merton, the focus of an hourlong PBS documentary to be shown tonight at
10 on Channel 13, died in 1969 after 27 years as a member of the Trappist order.
At the time of his death at the age of 53, he had gained a wide following as a
religious thinker and a herald of social protest.


The figure drawn by the producer, Paul Wilkes, moves through a dramatic series
of transitions. The story begins with young Merton, a confirmed nonbeliever
raised in Europe by artist parents who died by the time he was 16. As a student,
he was brilliant but was fond of drinking, carousing and women. His American
grandfather finally pulled Merton out of Cambridge after learning that he had
made a young woman pregnant. The documentary suggests that the rascal in him
never became smothered by piety.

In the United States, Merton attended Columbia University, where he experienced
a religious conversion. The viewer, however, is given too little insight into
this pivotal moment in Merton's life. Once embarked on his spiritual journey,
Merton encountered further difficulties as the Franciscans rejected him as a fit
candidate for their order. But the Trappists took him in and Gethsemani Abbey in
Kentucky became his home for life. There he wrote superbly, prayed ardently and
gladly followed the rigorous discipline.

In his early years in the abbey, Merton's writings were highly spiritual. Later,
he became a voice insisting that the church apply its moral principles to the
fight against war, specifically the one in Vietnam, and the cause of
disarmament. All the while, he was deepening his grasp of Eastern religions.

Because Merton stayed within Gethsemani's seclusion most of his life, words were
his only vehicle of expression. Only very brief fragments of Merton himself on
film are in the documentary. Mr. Wilkes relies on a somewhat curious assortment
of Merton admirers to assess him. Among those who testify are Joan Baez (we are
not told whether she ever met him); Ernesto Cardenal, Nicaragua's Minister of
Culture, who is a priest, and the poet Lawrence Ferlinghetti.

The outcome of the documentary is not terribly absorbing. Merton is respectfully
honored but not examined in depth. He remains elusive and beyond the more
tough-minded treatment he probably would have favored himself.

As Mr. Wilkse's film shows, Merton was a harbinger of Roman Catholic social
activism. Unfortunately, the individuals who were witness to Merton's life do
not present a coherent picture of the man. The connection between his spiritual
insight and his social commitment remains largely undeveloped.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              365 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 5, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEWS;
'EISENHOWER AND D-DAY

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 533 words

DATELINE: D


-DAY, the Allied invasion of Nazi-occupied France, took place 40 years ago
tomorrow. It is commemorated tonight on ''D-Day and Eisenhower,'' a rebroadcast,
slightly edited, of a CBS program first shown in 1964. It was a fine piece of
television then; 20 years have given it a new patina. It will be shown on CBS-TV
at 8 tonight.

The vehicle for the one-hour program is an extended interview by Walter Cronkite
of former President Dwight D. Eisenhower, who, as General Eisenhower, commanded
the invasion. The interview, mostly a peripatetic monologue by Mr. Eisenhower,
is conducted in places associated with D-Day. Among them are Omaha Beach, the
cliffs of Pointe du Hoc, the hedgerow country behind the beaches and the
military cemetery at St. Laurent-on-the-Sea.


What emerges is a solemn tribute, a history lesson and an almost wistful look at
our past. Mr. Eisenhower was a consensus President; World War II was a consensus
war. Interspersed with the interview, meanwhile, is old film from D-Day.
Everything, fittingly, is in black and white. Vietnam was the first
color-television war.

Mr. Eisenhower appears eager to talk to Mr. Cronkite. Although the invasion is
20 years in the past, he seems to have perfect recall. Moreover, the interview
takes place only six months after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy
- the first great trauma of the 60's. At the same time, Vietnam was
intensifying; the Senate was only two months away from the Tonkin Gulf
Resolution. It is almost as if Mr. Eisenhower wanted to remind us that the
United States had sustained itself, even at high cost, through crises before.

Thus, many of his recollections are of details - the name of the ordnance
sergeant who devised steel plows for the tanks in the hedgerows, a meteorologist
who was ''a fine man,'' the number of casualties in three Ranger companies.
D-Day was a mosaic: a huge effort made up of many small parts. Mr. Eisenhower is
saying that blood and treasure were expended by a great many people.

''Everything had gone wrong that could go wrong,'' he says, referring to the
first hours of the invasion, ''and as I say, finally, the thing that pulled this
out was the bravery and the courage and the initiative of the American G.I.
That's what did it.''

Meanwhile, there is a curious corollary to watching a program 20 years old; it
is a suggestion that we no longer trust television the way we once did. While
Mr. Eisenhower stands on Omaha Beach, a nun and small children walk by. ''Look,
here comes a little nun,'' Mr. Eisenhower says. ''I think that's something,
isn't it? How do, Sister? How do you do?''


In 1984, we are unlikely to think the nun's passage was accidental. We are
certain that she and the children were planted; we are too sophisticated now to
accept what we see. There is something to be mourned here. We are skeptical, and
skepticism destroys consensus.

Nonetheless, ''D-Day and Eisenhower'' is still fine television. ''When I think
about that day 20 years ago,'' Mr. Eisenhower concludes, ''I say once more we
must find some way to work to peace, and really to gain an eternal peace for the
world.'' It is a sad but moving peroration.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Walter Cronkite interviewing President Eisenhower

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              366 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

2 IRANIAN FIGHTERS REPORTED DOWNED BY SAUDI AIR FORCE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN , Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


Two Saudi Arabian fighter pilots shot down two American-built Iranian F-4
fighters today, Saudi and United States officials said.

The Saudi pilots were flying American-built F-15's and had help from United
States aerial tanker planes and surveillance planes, they said.

In London, President Reagan was said to be concerned that the Saudi air action
could intensify the fighting.

In Kuwait, Western and Arab officials described the aerial fight as a widening
of the conflict. Iran said 600 people were killed in an Iraqi air raid on the
town of Baneh, but did not make any immediate comment on the aerial clash with
the Saudis. (Page A3.)

Three More Radar Planes on Way

At the same time, the Defense Department announced that three additional
surveillance planes were being sent to Saudi Arabia. One such plane was sent out
last weekend.

The Saudi Ambassador, Prince Bandar bin Sultan, who is a fighter pilot himself,
said at his embassy here: ''Our sovereignty was violated and we reacted, as we
said we would all along, in a defensive manner.''

In the aerial engagement today, F-15's, the United States Air Force's most
powerful fighters, were used by the Saudis against Iran's F-4's, fighter-
bombers of Vietnam War vintage, and fired American-made air-to-air missiles to
bring down the Iranian planes.

Saudi Position Is Stated

Prince Bandar, who is a son of the Saudi Defense Minister, said:

''We think it is a pity we had to be dragged into this conflict. We are
determined to defend our country. People should not mix up moderation with
consent. We do not consent, nor do we find it amusing to be attacked or for our
interests to be attacked.''

He was apparently alluding to Saudi diplomatic efforts to persuade Iran to cease
its attacks on shipping in the Persian Gulf.

A Middle Eastern diplomat said the aerial fight occurred in Saudi airspace near
an islet named Al Arabiyah, about 60 miles northeast of Jubail. The Saudi planes
jumped the Iranian planes as they prepared to attack two ships and shot them
down with missiles, he said.

Shortly after, Iran sent up 11 more F-4's that were picked up on radar, he said.
In response, Saudi Arabia put 11 more F-15's into the air. After a brief
standoff, the Iranian fighters broke off, and the Saudis returned, the diplomat
said.  American officials and Middle Eastern diplomats said a United States
flying tanker had refueled the two Saudi planes while they were on patrol before
the aerial fight while an American radar plane provided the information that
enabled the Saudi fighters to find the Iranian planes.

In a related development, the Defense Department's chief spokesman, Michael I.
Burch, said at a briefing that United States warships would fire at planes or
ships that threatened American oilers carrying fuel from the gulf to Navy ships
in the Arabian Sea.

''We will do everything possible to protect U.S. vessels,'' he said.

Mr. Burch, in response to questions, denied that American warships were
escorting Kuwaiti or American merchant ships in the Persian Gulf. But he said
the four warships in the gulf were keeping the Navy's oilers under surveillance.



The Middle Eastern diplomat said the Saudi Air Force, which has 61 F-15's, began
flying continuous daylight air patrols after a United States Air Force KC-10
aerial tanker arrived early last week.

Intermittent Night Patrols

He said the Saudis were also flying intermittent patrols at night. The KC- 10
tanker, along with three KC-135 tankers already in Saudi Arabia, make possible
longer patrols by refueling planes in flight.  Saudi Arabia claims airspace
extending 12 miles from its shores. Since the island of Al Arabiyah is
considered Saudi territory, the country also claims the airspace in the 12 miles
surrounding the island.

As recounted by the diplomat, the two Saudi planes were on patrol when they were
alerted that two Iranian F-4's, flying from a base at Bushire, were streaking
toward two ships.

The Saudi fighters headed for the Iranian jets, which turned away and flew just
above the water. The Saudis pursued and, with one missile each, shot down the
Iranian planes. Initial radar reports showed only one Iranian plane destroyed,
but videotapes from the Saudi planes later showed two.

About 30 minutes later, the Saudi air defense system, into which information
from the American radar planes is fed, reported that 11 more jets had taken off
from Bushire and were flying across the gulf. The Saudis responded by putting up
their 11 jets, but no fight ensued.

The Pentagon spokesman, Mr. Burch, indicated that American radar planes were not
in danger of being attacked since they remain over Saudi Arabia and out of
Iranian fighter range. Moreover, the radar planes can spot potential attackers
200 miles away and fly out of their range.

The dispatch of four United States radar planes equipped with maritime detection
devices began last weekend when the first was sent to Saudi Arabia to replace
one of the four older models on duty there.

 Newer Models More Advanced

The newer radar planes, of which the United States has 10 in a fleet of 34, can
monitor surface ships, both moving and still, and distinguish between a large
tanker and a small warship.

The older versions are unable to spot ships. Neither version can spot vehicles
on land unless they are moving more than 80 miles an hour.

The radar information is fed into computers for collation and transmitted to a
ground station. In Saudi Arabia, the radar planes send their data to an American
ground station, which relay it to a Saudi operations center. So far, officials
said, the radar planes have not communicated directly with Saudi fighters.

Mr. Burch declined to discuss the effect of the Saudi deployment on United
States military operations elsewhere. One or two of the maritime versions are
used in training, according to Pentagon officials, while others are on duty in
Iceland to watch the North Atlantic and still others in Okinawa to watch the
Western Pacific.



Reagan Reported Concerned

LONDON, June 5 - President Reagan was described today as concerned that the
downing of Iranian jets by Saudi fighters, with the assistance of a United
States radar plane, could widen the war in the Persian Gulf.

A senior Administration official said at a briefing that the Saudi action had
been in legitimate self-defense.

''The President was concerned to the extent that it represented an escalation in
tension and in violence,'' the official said. He added that Mr. Reagan was
''conscious that there was no apparent requirement for U.S. assistance of any
kind, or involvement, other than to caution restraint on both sides.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Iran (page A4)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              367 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 6, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

SELLARS HEADS ANTA AND KENNEDY

BYLINE: By IRVIN MOLOTSKY

SECTION: Section C; Page 19, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


Peter Sellars, the precocious 26-year-old theater and opera director who because
of his controversial productions has been known as the enfant terrible of
American theater since graduating from Harvard in 1980, was named today as the
artistic director and chief operating officer for plays to be produced jointly
by the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and the American National Theater
Academy.

His immediate goal, Mr. Sellars said today, is to direct his first, as yet
undecided, Kennedy Center production next spring. But his long-range goal, he
said, is to create at Kennedy Center the perennially discussed American national
theater company.

''It's down the pike,'' Mr. Sellars said of the national theater after closing
the deal with Roger L. Stevens, chairman of the Kennedy Center.

In a statement issued this evening, the Kennedy Center also said that today's
action represented ''the first steps toward the foundation and development of an
American national theater company.'' It said that Mr. Sellars would be in charge
of the development, production and presentation of a wide range of plays in the
Kennedy Center's Eisenhower Theater and in two smaller houses in the complex.



New Playwrights Sought

Both classical and new plays by American and foreign writers will be produced,
the Kennedy Center said, and one of the project's goals will be the development
of new playwrights.

Mr. Sellars said he wanted to bring under one roof of the Kennedy Center ''both
the avant-garde of Soho and the traditional stage of Broadway.''

Mr. Stevens declined to say what Mr. Sellars's salary would be. He said that his
hiring had been approved by the boards of both organizations involved, the
Kennedy Center and ANTA.

The Kennedy Center chairman said that it was too early to say whether Mr.
Sellars would in time assume responsibility for all plays at the center. Outside
productions could be brought in, such as the Royal Shakespeare Company, with
which Mr. Stevens said he was now conducting negotiations.



Praise From Stevens

''I look forward to Peter Sellars taking charge of our theater program,'' Mr.
Stevens said after returning to Washington from his New York meeting with the
director. ''I think he is very inventive and has a great deal of initiative and
imagination.''

When asked if Mr. Sellars might be regarded as somewhat too avant- garde for
Washington audiences, Mr. Stevens answered: ''We'll find out, won't we? I think
he'll shake things up a bit, and that's all for the best. It should be that way
at a national cultural center. We should try to be a leader.''

In turn, the young man praised the 74-year-old Mr. Stevens for having decided to
take a chance on him, saying: ''It's pretty outrageous that one of the senior
citizens of American theater would engage a young Turk like myself. More power
to him. That's what keeps the theater alive.''

In recent years, with Mr. Stevens making most of the important decisions, the
Kennedy Center has had theatrical successes with its more traditional
productions that later did well on Broadway, such as ''On Your Toes,'' ''You
Can't Take It With You,'' ''Death of a Salesman'' and ''Noises Off.''



Loan Interest in Question

Still, Mr. Sellars's appointment comes a at a difficult financial time for the
Kennedy Center, which has never paid the interest on a $20 million loan from the
Federal Government that it had to take out in order to open in 1971. It has
asked Congress to forego the past interest of $29 million plus future interest,
in return promising to pay off the loan ahead of schedule.

On the other hand, the center's presence has generally been credited with having
sparked broadened interest in the arts in Washington. The Kennedy Center has
several members of Congress on its board and many more in its audiences.

It is this establishment that Mr. Sellars is entering, bringing with him a large
bag of tricks. By the time he made his New York debut in 1980, the young
director's reputation for unorthodox productions of the classics at Harvard had
already made him a well known figure in the theater.

Since then, his output has been prodigious and wide-ranging - starting with
Mozart's ''Don Giovanni,'' which Mr. Sellars transposed to the 1920's,
converting the swordfight to a switchblade knife duel, changing champagne
drinking to using drugs and having the Don eat a McDonald's hamburger in the
banquet scene.



Handel Moved to Mars

His other productions have included the Haydn opera ''Armida,'' about the
Crusades, which Mr. Sellars set during the Vietnam war, and the Handel opera
''Orlando'' at the American Repertory Theater in Cambridge, Mass., whose action
was moved from the Renaissance to today's Kennedy Space Center in Florida and to
Mars.

Mr. Sellars, who is the artistic director of the Boston Shakespeare Company,
said he would relinquish the post to devote most of his time to the Kennedy
Center job. ''I will be doing some opera, but my major commitment is to the
Kennedy Center,'' he said.

Martin Feinstein, general director of the Washington Opera, which is also in the
Kennedy Center, also raised the possibility that Mr. Sellars might soon have two
shows running at the same time.

''We've already talked to Peter,'' Mr. Feinstein said. ''I saw his 'Mikado' last
year and we had discussions of his doing it here. We are deciding on the
financing and whether to take the risk. He is very gifted. While this 'Mikado'
was far out, it didn't violate the spirit of the libretto at all. Usually I'm a
traditionalist, but I liked it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Peter Sellars

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              368 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Soviet Issues Warning On China Arms Deals

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 123 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 6


Yuri Dergachev, a commentator of the Novosti press agency, a feature syndicate,
said today that the Soviet Union would have to respond to any military
cooperation between the United States and China.

Mr. Dergachev said Defense Minister Zhang Aiping of China was going to
Washington next week to sign a deal for military technology from the United
States. Mr. Zhang was in France today on a similar mission.

The Novosti commentator said the Kremlin would retaliate if it saw its security
or that of its allies such as Vietnam in greater danger.

''If American-Chinese military cooperation poses a threat to the Soviet Union,
its friends and allies,'' he wrote, ''Moscow will undoubtedly find an adequate
answer to any menace.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              369 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Accuses China Of Killing Hundreds

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 131 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 6


Chinese forces have killed hundreds of civilians in cross-border artillery
bombardments and raids on Vietnamese territory in the last two months, Vietnam
charged today.

The Hanoi radio said that more than 130,000 artillery and mortar rounds had been
fired by China but that Vietnamese border guards and civilians had repulsed the
cross-border attacks, ''putting out of action'' more than 5,500 Chinese troops.

The Vietnamese broadcast, monitored in Bangkok, was the latest in a radio
propaganda war waged by Vietnam and China, each accusing the other of acts of
war along their border.

The Hanoi radio has carried almost daily accounts of what it calls ''Chinese
aggression'' along the rugged Chinese- Vietnamese border, where the two nations
fought a brief war in early 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              370 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

USE OF U.S. ARMS IN MIDEAST RAISES CONCERNS IN CONGRESS

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 6


Tuesday's air battle over the Persian Gulf between Saudi Arabian and Iranian jet
fighters featured American weapons on both sides, raising questions in Congress
about United States arms policy in the region.

''It's a constantly rising lake of arms,'' said Senator Larry Pressler,
Republican of South Dakota, who is chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee's arms control subcommittee and a member of the committee's panel on
Near Eastern affairs. He called for a freeze on all weapon supplies to the
Middle East.

''Exclusively American weapons on both sides of the dogfight raise questions
about fueling an arms race in the region,'' said Representative Mel Levine, a
California Democrat who sits on the House Foreign Affairs Committee's Middle
East subcommittee.

On Tuesday, two Saudi pilots flying F-15 Eagle fighters built by the McDonnell
Douglas Corporation engaged Iranian F-4 Phantom jets, also built by McDonnell
Douglas. The Saudi planes were armed with Sidewinder heat-seeking missiles and
Sparrow radar-guided missiles, both manufactured by the Raytheon Corporation. A
Raytheon official said Sparrows were used against the Iranians.

New $131 Million Sale to Saudis

The Pentagon announced today that it planned to sell spare parts and other
equipment worth $131 million to Saudi Arabia for military aircraft, including
the F-15's.

American equipment also figured in supporting the immediate battle. An Airborne
Warning and Control System, or Awacs, plane built by Boeing Aerospace Company,
which carries a Westinghouse radar system, spotted the Iranian attack. The Saudi
aircraft were refueled by either a McDonnell Douglas KC-10 or Boeing KC-135
tanker, according to reports from the gulf.

The Iranians used F-14 Tomcat jets, built by the Grumman Aerospace Corporation,
in a capacity similar to the Awacs aircraft to direct their assault. The F-14
carries an advanced radar system made by the Hughes Corporation that can detect
and track targets more than 100 nautical miles away.

Besides delivering the combat equipment to both sides, the United States also
trained the Saudi and Iranian pilots. Supply of American weapons to Saudi Arabia
has accelerated in recent years, along with training of Saudi military personnel
by American instructors. United States military relations with Iran ended when
Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi was deposed in 1979, after successive American
Presidents had overseen a vast weapons buildup there.

Iran Received 209 F-4's

A spokesman for McDonnell Douglas said the company delivered 62 F-15's to Saudi
Arabia between 1981 and 1983. The aircraft is considered the United States Air
Force's premier jet fighter, valued at about $27 million each, including support
equipment. Forty F-15's were supplied to Israel between 1977 and 1982, the
spokesman added.  The F-4, which is more than a decade older than the F-15, was
one of the most ubiquitous export fighters before deliveries abroad ended in
1979. Besides seeing extensive action with United States forces in Vietnam, it
was supplied to 10 foreign countries, including Iran, Israel and Egypt.
According to Pentagon and McDonnell Douglas spokesmen, Iran received 209 F-4's
between 1968 and 1977. But the number has been sharply reduced by combat losses
and poor maintenance, with some estimates placing the number now available at
not much more than a dozen.

A McDonnell Douglas spokesman called the F-15 ''one large generation of
technology better than the F-4.''

The Shah's Government purchased about 80 F-14's, which are contemporary to the
F-15, but many were reported to have been sabotaged after his exile. Fewer than
12 are believed serviceable, carefully reserved for reconnaissance missions
because of their valuable radar.

According to a recent report from the Library of Congress, the United States was
involved in $30.4 billion in arms transfer agreements with countries in the Near
East and South Asia between 1980 and 1983. Major Western European nations,
including France, Great Britain, West Germany and Italy, agreed to supply an
additional $27.3 billion in weapons during the same period.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              371 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

50 FIREFIGHTERS ARE DECORATED FOR BOLD RESCUES FROM BURNING BUILDINGS

BYLINE: By DAVID W. DUNLAP

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 644 words


When Hernando Figuero came to, he was dangling high above the street, draped
over a firefighter's shoulder. With cinders showering his body, he grabbed the
aerial ladder and would not let go.

''He got a breath of fresh air and saw where he was,'' said the fireman, Robert
Merkel of Ladder Company 42 in the South Bronx. ''He doesn't want to go down
because he sees it's five floors. And he doesn't speak English.''

With the Fire Department's highest honor, the James Gordon Bennett Medal,
hanging from a red sash around his neck, Mr. Merkel recalled the successful
rescue yesterday after he and 49 other firefighters were decorated with medals
for valor.

Medal Day is always rich in pageantry, but this year's ceremony was also
punctuated by a vivid reminder of the job. While Mayor Koch spoke, fire trucks
raced down Park Row and Broadway to a blaze. It was confined to a storage room
at 21 West Street. There were no injuries.

''Heroes of world status have been applauded throughout the years here in City
Hall Plaza,'' the Mayor said as sirens and air horns bounced off surrounding
towers. ''You, whom we honor today, rank with the greatest of them all. You are
not outclassed. You are not surpassed. You are New York City firefighters and
you are the bravest of the brave.''

Together, those decorated saved 85 lives last year.

For Mr. Merkel, the story began before dawn on March 29 after He drove the
ladder truck to a fire at 761 East 158th Street in the South Bronx. He thought
the building was vacant until a neighbor told him there might be someone
upstairs.

''Usually, the chauffeur stays with the apparatus,'' he said. But this time, the
''roof man'' was working elsewhere. ''I was by myself,'' he said. ''I didn't
think I needed him. You just do what you have to do.''

So he scaled the aerial ladder to the top of the building, passing the fourth
floor, which was in flames. On his first search of the apartment there, he could
not find anyone. But on his second, he found Mr. Figuero, unconscious on the
floor.

Mr. Figuero revived once he was outside. Panicking, he clung to the ladder. Mr.
Merkel tried vainly to carry him down.

''Let's go,'' the fireman shouted. ''I don't want to stay here.''

But Mr. Figuero apparently did not understand English. Finally, with sparks
showering down, the firefighter managed to carry the man to th ground. Within
moments, the roof, fourth and fifth floors collapsed.

To further complicate the rescue, Mr. Merkel's helmet - marked ''42'' (his
company number) and ''6683'' (his shield number) - had been knocked to the
street. Seeing that, other firefighters thought Mr. Merkel was trapped.

''They started looking for me,'' Mr. Merkel said. ''The South Bronx has a good
bunch of guys. If you were in the Army, you wanted to go to Vietnam. If you're
in the Fire Department, you want to go to the South Bronx.''

Mr. Merkel, a 10-year veteran, also received the State Honorary Fire Chiefs
Medal. He is 36 years old and lives in Central Islip, L.I. His father and
brother are also firefighters.

Mayor Koch apologized for not mentioning every award winner before singling out
these three:

Kenneth Connelly of Ladder Company 111 in Brooklyn, winner of the Dr. Harry M.
Archer Medal, awarded once every three years to a Bennett medalist. Mr. Connelly
saved four people at 258 Albany Avenue on Feb. 3, 1982.

Guy Warren of Ladder Company 175 in Brooklyn, winner of the Brooklyn Citizens
Medal for rescuing three people at 440 New Jersey Avenue on Oct. 23, 1983.

William P. Howley of Engine Company 233 in Brooklyn, winner of the Dr. J. W.
Goldenkranz Medal for saving a family of seven at 152 Watkins Street on May 8,
1983 - one week after completing his probationary year.

''He went back into the flames again and again,'' the Mayor said, ''and didn't
quit until he had also rescued the dog.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              372 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 7, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

GOING OUT GUIDE;

BYLINE: By Richard F. Shepard

SECTION: Section C; Page 32, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 552 words


IN CHURCH The arts flourish in New York's houses of worship, from imposing
cathedrals, such as St. John the Divine, where the very architecture may serve
as backdrop for an exhibition or an avant-garde musical, to side-street churches
that contribute a room for a theater group. One has a jazz ministry, another a
poet's center, another a gallery. They are found in all boroughs and include St.
Ann's, in Brooklyn Heights, at 157 Montague Street, corner of Clinton
(834-8794), the arts are very much a way of life.

Tonight at 8 o'clock the Arts at St. Ann's and the American Music Theater
Festival launch a new chamber opera, ''Trio,'' composed by Noa Ain, winner of an
Obie for ''Metamorphosis in Miniature.'' This melange of classical, jazz, rock
and avant-garde styles is scored for four jazz musicians and three
singer-actresses, who are Val Eley (''One Mo' Time''), Phyllis Bash and Karla
Burns. Its 30 songs explore conflict and resolution among a grandmother, mother
and daughter. Maya Lin, creator of the the Vietnam War Memorial in Washington,
designed the set.

Through June 15, after which it opens in Philadelphia as part of the Music
Theater Festival's first concert season. At 8 P.M. today through Saturday and
Sunday at 4 P.M. Then June 15 and 16 at 8 and June 17 at 4. Admission: $10;
students, over-65's and unemployed with identification, $5.

PROTEIN PERFORMANCE Overweight has never quite been the stuff for heavy drama in
the way that alcoholism is. Excess poundage, waiting for its Eugene O'Neill to
elevate it to serious theater, continues to be taken lightly onstage. What may
be a start in this direction is ''Oh! Oh! Obesity,'' by Gerald W. Deas, which
starts performances tonight at 7:30 at the Henry Street Settlement's New Federal
Theater, 466 Grand Street (598-0400).

Thursdays through Sundays at 7:30 P.M. and Sundays at 3. Admission: $5.

ANOTHER BEAT The house, usually full, jumps to different thumps at S.O.B.'s, the
restaurant-club downtown at 204 Varick Street (243-4940). The beat is usually
Brazilian, but from tonight through Saturday this Brazilian enclave is giving
itself over to an ''African Music Festival,'' a beat that traveled to the New
World, later incorporated into a variety of music, from samba to jazz, and has
gone back home for even further modification.

At 9:30 and midnight today, Sonny Okosun leads his 15-piece Ozziddi band through
a repertory of sound described as a blend of politically charged highlife,
reggae, Afro-pop and funk. Mr. Okosun, who hails from Nigeria, has had his band
for more than 10 years and now sings lyrics in English as well as Yoruba. His
group, with two backup singers, plays guitar, bass guitar, horns, drums, congas,
talking drum and traditional African percussion, and keyboards.

Admission tonight is $12. At tables, there is also a two-drink minimum. Drinks,
$2.50 up. Main courses, $10.95 to $15.95.

Tomorrow the seven-piece African Connection, with roots in Sierra Leone, takes
over. On Saturday, things wind up with The Flamingoes, a.k.a. The Sweet Talks,
eight visitors from Ghana, who sing in English and in their own dialects, Twi
and Fanti. On these nights, admission is $10 ($6 if you're having dinner at the
tables).


Entertainment Events is on page C17. Thursday Sports is on B18.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              373 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PAPERS TELL OF '53 POLICY TO USE A-BOMB IN KOREA

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1276 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


Documents released today give details on a decision by President Dwight D.
Eisenhower's Administration in 1953 to use atomic bombs in North Korea and
Communist China, if necessary, to end the Korean War.

Once the armistice was achieved, on July 27, 1953, the Eisenhower Administration
continued to define plans to use nuclear weapons if the Communists renewed the
war, which the North Koreans started in 1950.

President Eisenhower took office in January 1953 after talks for a cease-fire
had dragged on for two years and the war had settled into a standoff, with
casualties being incurred but with no change in the front line, which today
still separates North and South Korea.

The fact that the Eisenhower Administration was ready to use nuclear weapons is
not new. President Eisenhower, in his memoirs, said he came into office prepared
to use them, if necessary, to break the deadlock. What is new in the 2,000 pages
of documents now made public is the high level of planning and the detail of
discussion on possible use of these weapons, and Mr. Eisenhower's interest in
overcoming reluctance to use them.

Truman Against Using the Bomb His predecessor, Harry S. Truman, ruled out their
use when the subject came up at two news conferences during his Administration.

Mr. Eisenhower, however, indicated readiness to use the weapons rather than face
another debilitating war in Korea, according to a report of a National Security
Council meeting on Dec. 3, 1953.

''The President expressed with great emphasis the opinion that if the Chinese
Communists attacked us again, we should certainly respond by hitting them hard
and wherever it would hurt most, including Peiping itself,'' the record of the
meeting says, using the former name of Peking.

''This, said the President, would mean all-out war against Communist China,''
the document continues.

It is one of hundreds of papers, most of them originally classified as top
secret, included in the State Department's latest volume in the series called
''Foreign Relations of the United States.'' The volume, in two books, covers
Korea from 1952 to 1954. The series is a source of primary material on American
foreign policy.

Differences Between Aides Shown

The latest volume, in addition to discussing readiness to use nuclear weapons,
discloses differences in approach between officials.

The discussion about the possible use of nuclear weapons in Korea was followed
by a policy of threatening to use such weapons in case of a large-scale attack
by the Soviet Union. There was also discussion in 1954 of possible American
nuclear support to aid French forces besieged at Dienbienphu in the war that
ended French rule in North Vietnam.

On Korea, President Eisenhower asked Adm. Arthur W. Radford, the Chairman of the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, at the December 1953 meeting whether he agreed that there
would be a war with China if South Korea were attacked anew.

Admiral Radford said he did and added, ''We would have to strike against the
Communist Chinese in the air, from Shanghai all the way north.''

Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, who agreed that the United States should
not shrink from using atomic weapons, nevertheless was alarmed at the
recommendation.

Dulles Favored Limited Use

According to the record of the meeting, Mr. Dulles felt that ''Admiral Radford's
course of action contemplated general war with China and probably also with the
Soviet Union because of the Sino-Soviet alliance.''

Mr. Dulles said the State Department preferred to limit a nuclear attack to
North Korea and to nearby troop concentrations. He also said he could accept a
naval blockade of China and seizure of offshore islands.

His concern, he said, was not just that the Russians might enter the war, but
that American allies would not support the United States.

Eventually, on Jan. 7, 1954, the State Department and the Joint Chiefs
compromised by saying that in case of a resumption of hostilities, the United
States should undertake ''offensive air operations employing atomic weapons
against military targets in Korea, and against those military targets in
Manchuria and China which are being used by the Communists in direct support of
their operations in Korea.''

Nuclear Issue Came Up Twice

The nuclear issue arose twice in the Eisenhower Administration, the documents
show. The first time was when Mr. Eisenhower, elected in 1952 on a pledge of
ending the Korean War, expressed frustration at the drawn-out negotiations over
a prisoner exchange, which, in turn, had delayed agreement on an armistice.

At a National Security Council meeting on Feb. 11, 1953, the record shows, Mr.
Eisenhower, then in office less than a month, agreed with Mr. Dulles that ''we
could not go on the way we were indefinitely.''

On March 27, 1953, at a subsquent meeting, they agreed ''that somehow or other
the taboo which surrounds the use of atomic weapons would have to be
destroyed,'' the record says.

''While Secretary Dulles admitted that in the present state of world opinion, we
could not use an A-bomb, we should make every effort now to dissipate this
feeling,'' it says.

By May 13, 1953, the National Security Council was discussing a memorandum,
designated NSC 147, which outlined six choices for ending military restraints,
several of which involved ending the ban on bombing raids against China and
increasing air attacks on North Korea.

Tactical Value Is Doubted

Several military men said they saw no particular tactical value in using atomic
weapons in North Korea.

Gen. J. Lawton Collins, the Army Chief of Staff, said:

''Personally, I am very skeptical about the value of using atomic weapons
tactically in Korea. The Communists are dug into positions in depth over a front
of 150 miles.''

He added that nuclear tests ''proved that men can be very close to the explosion
and not be hurt if they are well dug in.''

President Eisenhower said he ''thought it might be cheaper, dollarwise, to use
atomic weapons in Korea than to continue to use conventional weapons against the
dugouts which honeycombed the hills along which the enemy forces were presently
deployed.''

On May 21, 1953, Mr. Dulles met in New Delhi with Prime Minister Jawaharlal
Nehru and told him that, if the armistice negotiations failed, ''the United
States would probably make a stronger, rather than a lesser military exertion,
and that this might well extend the area of conflict.''

In a memorandum, Mr. Dulles said he assumed this would be relayed to the
Chinese, with whom the Indians then had good relations.

Syngman Rhee Opposed Truce

By the summer of 1953, the terms for the armistice and return of prisoners were
worked out, over the objections of President Syngman Rhee of South Korea, who
opposed a truce. Mr. Rhee so antagonized American leaders that a plan called
''Ever Ready'' was drawn up to arrest him if he started trouble. But the
problems were ironed out.

After the armistice went into effect, in July, American planners began to study
a response to a possible resumption of hostilities.

There was concern, extending into the 1960's, that if a war was going to break
out, it was likely to occur in the Far East involving China. The United States
was drawn into Vietnam in part to contain China.

Although planning has changed through the years, the United States still
maintains 40,000 troops in South Korea, and they have nuclear arms. American
officials have said that in case of an all-out attack from North Korea, the
United States retains the right to use nuclear weapons in defense.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Dwight D. Eisenhower

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              374 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

JUDGE CRITIZES U.S. AGENCY ON DENIAL OF BENEFITS

BYLINE: By ALFONSO A. NARVAEZ

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 505 words

DATELINE: NEWARK, June 7


A Federal judge today denounced the Department of Health and Human Services as
''a heartless and indifferent bureaucratic monster destroying the lives of
disabled citizens'' by denying them benefits to which they are entitled.

The judge, H. Lee Sarokin of the Federal District Court here, said courts had
reversed so many of the Federal department's decisions denying Social Security
disability benefits that judicial notice had to be taken.

He said that in 56 percent of the appeals received in the court here in the six
months ended last December from individuals who had been denied benefits, the
Government's declaration of ineligibility was either reversed or remanded. He
added that in the 91 judicial districts in the United States, the reversal rate
was 49 percent.

''Such a rate of reversal throughout the land is staggering and paints an
undeniable picture of a heartless and indifferent bureaucratic monster
destroying the lives of disabled citizens and creating years of agony and
anxiety by ignoring both facts and legal precedent,'' Judge Sarokin wrote in a
12-page opinion.

The opinion concerned the case of a Vietnam veteran for whom Judge Sarokin had
earlier reversed a denial of Social Security disability benefits. The judge in
his ruling today ordered the Government to pay the veteran's legal fees for his
appeal.  Clara Del Real, deputy assistant secretary for the department, said the
agency had not seen a copy of the opinion and therefore would not comment.

Vincent E. Gentile, the assistant United States Attorney who handled the case,
also said he would have no comment.

The veteran, Bruce Merli, 41 years old, of Newton, had been shot in the head and
discharged with 100 percent disability. Mr. Merli was awarded disability
benefits in 1968 because of injuries that left him with brain damage, an
inability to understand and use language, memory impairment and defective
vision.

Improvement Found


The department reviewed the case in 1981 and determined that Mr. Merli showed
improvement, was no longer disabled and was not entitled to benefits. Mr. Merli
appealed, and Judge Sarokin ruled last February that his disabled condition had
not changed.

The judge said today that the Government usually had nothing to lose by putting
people denied benefits ''through the agony of the appellate process'' but that
''hopefully, by imposing counsel fees on the Government, this cruel and inhumane
policy and the blatant contempt for judicial decisions will end.''

Two months ago, the Reagan Administration reversed itself and suspended its
eligibility review of the disabled. More than 40,000 people who had challenged
rulings of ineligibility were restored to the rolls, but this did not affect
those who had filed lawsuits in Federal courts.

About 30,650 cases involving more than 100,000 people are being heard by the
courts.

Judge Sarokin said appeals of ineligibility had risen by 400 percent and
constituted 14.6 percent of pending Federal cases in New Jersey.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              375 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 8, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Donald Q. Coster, 76, Former A.I.D. Official

SECTION: Section D; Page 19, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 277 words


Donald Q. Coster, a former official of the Agency for International Development,
died last Thursday at the American Hospital of Paris. He was 76 years old and
lived in Paris and Washington.

Mr. Coster headed the agency's activities in Algeria in the early 1960's. When
the mission in Algiers was downgraded in 1963, he was named to the faculty of
the Foreign Service Institute.

Mr. Coster, who had a part in the D-day landings in World War II, won the Legion
of Merit and the North African-European Campaign Medal with five battle stars
and two arrowheads. In 1940, while serving as a volunteer ambulance driver with
the American Field Service, Mr. Coster was captured by German troops and held
for six weeks.

After the war France awarded him three medals and Belgium awarded him two.

Mr. Coster, who graduated from Princeton University in 1929, was a vice consul
in Casablanca in 1941-42. Later in the war he was assigned to the Office of
Strategic Services with the ranks of lieutenant colonel and colonel.

After the war he was an advertising executive in New York and Paris. In 1959 he
joined the International Cooperation Administration, forerunner to the A.I.D.,
as deputy director of its mission to Vietnam, where he worked until his
reassignment to Algiers.

Mr. Coster was an adviser at the Army's John F. Kennedy Center for Military
Assistance at Fort Bragg, N.C., for several years until 1970, and was an
executive at at the American Hospital of Paris from 1971 to 1975.

He is survived by his wife, Ruth, and a son, Michael David Coster of Manhattan.

He will be buried Monday with full military honors at Arlington National
Cemetery.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              376 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 9, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
BRITAIN's LOGISTICAL RINGMASTER: NICHOLAS JOHN BARRINGTON

BYLINE: By R. W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1000 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 8


One night last month, Nicholas Barrington threw up his hands in exasperation.
The British bureacracy, he concluded, was never going to produce a map of the
area around Lancaster House, the site of this year's economic summit conference,
that anyone could be expected to understand.  Mr. Barrington, the man in charge
of the arrangements for the conference, thrust the maps aside, grabbed a
notebook and walked out of his office. He went into the streets around the
19th-century mansion, made a sketch and went home to draw the clean, uncluttered
diagram that appears in the handbook issued to each of the delegates this week.

It was a performance typical of the career diplomat, who will be 50 years old
next month. A friend who served with him in the Middle East describes him as
''highly industrious, a man who likes things done properly, but a man of real
flair rather than an orthodox plodder.''



'Sherpas' Prepared Agenda His job was not the preparation of the agenda for the
conference; the substantive work was the responsibility of the ''sherpas,'' a
group of civil servants from each of the seven participating countries. What
confronted Mr. Barrington was the complex logistics of an event that brings
together hundreds of officials and thousands of journalists. The Times of London
called him the circus ringmaster.

This afternoon, with the conference in full flow, he took off a half-hour for a
stroll through nearby St. James's Park. It must have been one of the busiest
days in his life, but he was completely unflustered, and his diplomat's uniform
- black pin-stripe suit, discreet polka-dot tie, black shoes - looked as fresh
as if he had dressed only an hour before.

''You have to check every detail,'' he said, ''the menus, the hotel rooms, the
placement at dinners, the flowers, the communications, the police arrangements,
the sound systems, the observation of protocol, the official cars, the music and
a thousand other bits and pieces.''



Scrutinized Everything

The job was made harder, he continued, by the ''sharp eye'' of Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher, who scrutinized everything.

Mr. Barrington found and arranged for the use of some unusual rooms for
tonight's formal dinners. Looking for places that were simultaneously elegant,
intimate, convenient and interesting, he chose the Tudor Room at the National
Portrait Gallery for the leaders themselves, the Royal Society of Arts for the
foreign ministers and the Bank of England, appropriately enough, for the finance
ministers.

Last Christmas, when he and his initial staff of 20 - which grew considerably
over the next few months - were starting to plan the conference, someone gave
him a book about London during the Regency. In it he saw a picture by a
little-known French artist, Eugene Lami, depicting a glittering social occasion
at Lancaster House in 1849.

Mr. Barrington set his staff to tracking down the original, which they found in
the collection of the Countess of Sutherland at Dunrobin Castle in the Scottish
Highlands. She agreed to lend it for the conference, and he put it on an easel
at the foot of the stairs - almost exactly the spot the artist had chosen as a
vantage point.



New Ceremonial for Arrivals

He also worked out a new ceremonial, ''to give a bit of color and an
appropriately dignified atmosphere,'' for the official arrivals of the seven
most prominent visitors - three prime ministers, two presidents, one chancellor
and the head of the European Economic Community. There was special music for
each as he inspected the honor guard at the Orangery at Kensington Palace:
something from Verdi's ''Nabucco'' for Prime Minister Bettino Craxi of Italy,
for example.

The biggest headache, Mr. Barrington conceded, was the press, or as he put it,
''reconciling the fact that the leaders want to be off by themselves, without
being harassed by reporters, and the fact that, for the first two days, at
least, that means that 3,000 press people are milling around London with not a
great deal solid to write about.''

His solution was to build an elaborate press center in the Connaught Rooms,
halfway across central London, stuff it with electronic equipment largely
contributed by British industry, and plan many photographic sessions to keep the
camera people reasonably happy.

Mr. Barrington knows something about dealing with the news media; from 1976 to
1978, he was head of Guidance and Information Policy at the Foreign Office, and
from 1981 until last year, as Minister in Teheran, and therefore one of the few
senior Western diplomats in town, he was a prime source of information for
visiting foreign correspondents.



Entered Diplomatic Service

Born on July 23, 1934, Nicholas John Barrington was educated at Clare College,
Cambridge, and went straight into the diplomatic service. In addition to various
spells at home, including one as assistant private secretary to Sir Alec
Douglas-Home, then the Foreign Secretary, he has worked mostly in Asia, with
stints in Iran, Afghanistan, Japan, North Vietnam, Egypt and Pakistan. He was
named last year as Ambassador to Beirut, which would have been his first post of
that rank, but signals were switched and he found himself at the United Nations
for three months, then on summit meeting duty.

Mr. Barrington is a bachelor. In a donnish touch, he lists ''prosopography'' -
the study of ''a person's appearance, personality, social and family
connections,'' according to the Oxford dictionary - as one of his hobbies.

Beginning Saturday night, he said, he plans to take a month's vacation to move
into a new house in Canterbury. With almost boyish cheerfulness, he said of the
job that he has just about completed: ''If all goes well, no doubt someone else
will get the credit, and if not, then I shall no doubt get the blame.'' He does
not expect to be asked to repeat his performance in 1991, the next time the
conference is scheduled to be held in London.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Nicholas Barrington

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              377 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 9, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

OIL COMPANIES NAMED IN SUIT ON TOXIC WASTE

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, June 8


A group of environmental lawyers filed a lawsuit today against 26 companies,
including some of the nation's largest oil and petrochemical concerns,
maintaining that reckless handling of toxic waste materials exposed many
residents of Harris County to severe health hazards.

The suit was brought on behalf of at least 39 plaintiffs in southeastern Harris
County, where several toxic waste dumps are situated. It was filed by a group of
lawyers previously instrumental in suits over the effects of the herbicide Agent
Orange on Vietnam veterans, the dioxin and toxic waste contamination in Times
Beach, Mo., and Love Canal, N.Y., and other cases involving hazardous
substances.

Other plaintiffs are expected to join the suit, according to Benton Musslewhite,
one of the lawyers who filed the suit today.

Cases of Cancer Cited


Although the suit does not allege specific instances of health damage to
specific individuals, Mr. Musslewhite said that 39 plaintiffs did cite
''specific injuries,'' in related individual civil suits, including nine cases
of cancer, several who suffer from seizures, and ''four or five'' children with
birth defects the plaintiffs allege were caused by exposure to toxic wastes.

Named as defendants in the suit are the Exxon Company and its chemical division,
the United States Steel Corportion, the Arco Chemical Corporation, the Shell Oil
Company, the Houston Lighting and Power Company, other oil and chemical
companies and companies operating toxic waste disposal services.

The suit charges that the companies had used four dump sites in Harris County,
where toxic materials from various sources were mixed together. Mr. Musselwhite
argued that under a fairly new legal concept it was unnecessary for the
plaintiffs to prove that the waste of any particular corporation was the cause
of the alleged injuries.

The suit alleges that the companies stored, used and disposed of what Mr.
Musslewhite referred to as a ''witches brew'' of toxic chemicals and wastes in a
manner that was negligent, ''reckless and wanton.''

The suit lists more than a score of toxic and hazardous chemicals and materials
incuding PCB's, dioxin, pesticides, herbicides, fungicides, biological sludges,
contaminated oils and plastics and similar substances.

List of Remedies Sought


The suit, filed in Federal District Court here, does not ask a specific amount
of monetary damages. It says legitimate plaintiffs would include everyone living
near any of five or more toxic waste dumpsites and incinerators which the suit
maintains could mean ''hundreds or thousands'' of potential plaintiffs.

However, the suit asks for a number of other remedies, including a halt to
further contamination, the buying of homes in situations where cleanup is deemed
impossible, epidemiological and toxic studies, and longterm monitoring of
individuals exposed to wastes in the air or water. The suit also asks punitive
as well as actual damages.

Mr. Musslewhite said that consideration was being given to bringing suit against
regulatory agencies for alleged laxity in enforcing pollution laws.

An Exxon Spokesman, Blue Beathard, said, ''We beleive the suit against Exxon is
without merit.'' He confirmed that Exxon had used two of the dumps cited in the
suit, the Liberty waste disposal site at Highland, now closed and the Rollins
Environmental Services site at Deer Park. However, he said, ''use of these sites
has been in compliance with all state and Federal environmental regulations.''

Jack Dougherty, spokesman for Shell Oil Company, said the company had not yet
had chance to study the suit thoroughly. But he said: ''It is Shell's policy to
properly handle waste and abide by all waste disposal laws and regulations.
Therefore we believe allegations of unsafe and illegal disposal have no validity
with respect to Shell.''

Toxic waste seepage and air pollution in areas along the Houston Ship Channel,
where a number of waste dumpsites are situated, including parts of Harris
County, have been of concern for nearly a decade among some scientists and
residents that live near the 40- mile-long channel.

Residents have worried that the dead birds that are seen with some frequency in
areas along the channel, an apparent scarcity of bees and some other insect
life, and occasional curiousities that have been reported like rabbits with
their fur missing, point to hazardous air and ground pollution from toxic
wastes.

Complaints About Regulators


Although local, state and Federal enforcement agencies say specified standards
are maintained, there have been complaints that enforcement is lax.

Beyond the problem of safely disposing of toxic wastes, some scientists and have
shown concern that the concentration of chemical and petrochemical plants in
South Texas may have a more general adverse effect on health.

Early last year, Dr. Patricia A. Buffler, an associate professor of epidemiology
at the University of Texas School of Health at Houston, in conjunction with
researchers in Lousiana, undertook a study to determine if occupational exposure
in the chemical and petrochemical industries increases the risk of brain cancer.
It is to be completed next spring,

Existing data, she said, show ''somewhat higher'' incidences of brain cancer in
the areas under study, where chemical and petrochemical installations are
heavily concentrated.

In Texas, the study focuses on six counties in South Texas, including the area
where attention is now also centered on the health liabilities of toxic waste
dumps.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              378 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Space Programs Supported

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 30, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 58 words

DATELINE: DALLAS, June 9


Public support for space spending, which dropped in the Vietnam War era, has
rebounded, a researcher says. Everett C. Ladd, executive director of the Roper
Center for Public Opinion Research, said Friday at a space symposium that in
1982 about 68 percent of Americans favored maintaining or increasing space
expenditures.







LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              379 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TV VIEW;
SOMETHING ABOUT 'STAR TREK' TALKS TO EVERYMAN

BYLINE: By John Corry

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 987 words


''Star Trek'' lives, refusing to fade away or to go wherever it is that old
television series are interred. It was born on Sept. 8, 1966, and seemed to die,
78 one-hour episodes later, on Sept. 2, 1969. Its audience apparently was in
decline, with teen-agers and small children making up a disproportionate number
of viewers, and hope of an afterlife was slim. In fact, ''Star Trek'' has been
reborn any number of times since then - in syndicated re-runs, as an animated
cartoon, in three feature-length movies, and in the hearts and minds of
''trekkies'' everywhere. ''Star Trek'' was, and still is, a notable piece of
television programming, and even now in midnight re-runs on WPIX/ Channel 11 it
is as captivating as it was in prime time on NBC.

And the question, of course, is why is this so? What possesses students at the
better Eastern universities who pride themselves on being able to give the
Vulcan hand salute? What, in fact, drives their parents to watch an episode
called ''The Devil in the Dark'' for, say, the third time simply to watch Mr.
Spock practice a mind probe on what appears to be an animated rock? A simple
answer does not suffice; nostalgia has nothing to do with it. Something about
''Star Trek'' speaks to our souls.



A wayward school of cultural and political exegesis holds that ''Star Trek'' was
a network success in 1966 because it complemented other television images. On
television in 1966, Vietnam did not yet look sour. The previous year, the
Marines had swept through Danang. Before ''Star Trek'' left prime time, however,
the television image changed. Television had given us the Tet Offensive, scenes
of violence that looked like an American defeat. Vietnam was exotic; so was
outer space. Meanwhile, the ''Star Trek'' crew looked unmistakably American.
Therefore, as viewers grew disenchanted with Vietnam, they grew disenchanted
with ''Star Trek,'' too. The subsequent resuscitations of the series, the
theorists say, reflect the waxing and waning of United States foreign policy.

The theory, however, is spurious; ''Star Trek'' has always been better than
that. For one thing, it follows the rules of all great imaginative fiction that
wants to sustain itself past a single book or a single episode. Like J. R. R.
Tolkien's ''Lord of the Rings'' or C. S. Lewis's ''The Chronicles of Narnia,''
it is true to itself, faithful to the world it has created. In the final scene
of the movie ''Return of the Jedi,'' one suspected that George Lucas had lost
interest in making the epic ''Star Wars'' series he once had planned. In that
final scene, Billy Dee Williams was gyrating to disco music in an Ewok tree
house. There was nothing epic about that; the dancing was brief but it was
discordant, and it suggested that the film's creators had lost the old vision.
In 78 episodes, ''Star Trek'' never loses its vision. No one ever strays out of
character.



At the same time, ''Star Trek'' has a moral dimension. This is also in the
tradition of great imaginative fiction. Discount it and you discount the history
of Western art. The great questions on ''Star Trek'' have nothing to do with the
dilithium crystals on the starship Enterprise, the efficacy of phaser beams or
even the foreign policy of the Klingons. The great questions have to do with
duty, honor and responsibility.

Thus, Captain Kirk (played by William Shatner) may strike you as an obdurate
man, too whitebread and prissy by far. On the other hand, although duty and
responsibility weigh heavily on his mind, he is sensitive to the fact that duty
and responsibility may be at war with good sense and tender feelings. Mr. Spock
(Leonard Nimoy) is driven by logic. Dr. McCoy (DeForest Kelley) has swallowed
the Hippocratic Oath. Kirk, an existential man, allows himself to be torn. In
one episode he finds himself in 1930's New York, where he falls in love with
Joan Collins. Duty demands that he allow her to die. The episode, incidentally,
appears to be the only in the series in which anyone uses profanity. ''Let's get
the hell out of here,'' Kirk says when he leaves New York.



For the most part, television's other forays into space and the future, even its
nonfiction forays, are exercises largely in technology and gimcracks. Paramount
Pictures is now preparing a five-part, 13-hour CBS mini- series based on James
Michener's novel ''Space.'' Which image will predominate in the mini-series, man
or Mercury space capsule? After all, who now misses ''Battlestar Galactica,''
the mile-wide spaceship commanded by Lorne Greene, even if each episode in the
series did cost $1 million? For that matter, ''Captain Video and His Video
Rangers,'' arguably the most successful space series ever seen on television,
ran from 1949 to 1955 on what seemed to be a weekly props budget of $1.98. The
controls on Captain Video's spaceship, the Galaxy, were painted on.

One large reason ''Captain Video'' survived so long was that the Captain was
always delivering little moral homilies to his video rangers. They were corny,
but they made the children in the audience feel good. They introduced a sense of
order. ''Star Trek,'' with far more literate and imaginative scripts (in the
beginning, NBC feared the series might be too cerebral) does the same.

Therefore, other galaxies in the universe may have new and unspeakable horrors,
but the human response remains unchanged. Most episodes of ''Star Trek'' end
with Kirk sitting in the captain's chair, Spock and Dr. McCoy standing on either
side. And granted that Spock is only half-human, the message is clear: Humanity,
though tested and battered, has not just survived; it has triumphed. There is
order. Machines and technology will not get the best of us. They are adjuncts,
never in command, and we zip through the galaxies, going where we choose. Our
universe is a splendid place. ''Star Trek'' gives us reassurance.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              380 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE CRAZY DEMOCRATS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 9


Just when most observers here thought things couldn't possibly get worse for the
Democratic Party, Senator Gary Hart and the Rev. Jesse Jackson proved they
could. The state primary elections brought out not the best but the worst side
of Messrs. Mondale, Hart and Jackson, and now the question is whether the
Democrats can control the damage.

Mr. Hart and Mr. Jackson are behaving very badly. Failure seems to have gone to
their heads. Apparently they have visions of a spectacular confrontation with
Mr. Mondale in San Francisco, with Mr. Hart challenging the credentials of Mr.
Mondale's delegates, and Mr. Jackson calling for ''justice before unity.'' This
will be good television but bad politics, for they know it will produce neither
justice nor unity, and nobody will cheer but the Republicans.

The longer the Democrats concentrate on their differences with one another, the
less time they'll have to concentrate on their common differences with President
Reagan.  Never mind, they say: We'll get to Mr. Reagan and his record later. But
they already are in danger of the one thing they should fear the most: a growing
feeling in the country that the Democratic campaign is a struggle of personal
ambitions, and that Mr. Reagan's victory is inevitable.  These self-destructive
impulses within the Democratic Party are reminiscent of the divisions that
contributed to its defeat in the Nixon- Humphrey Presidential contest of 1968.
Then, many liberal Democrats abandoned Vice President Humphrey, Mr. Mondale's
old buddy, on the grounds that Mr. Humphrey wouldn't break openly with President
Johnson on the continuation of the Vietnam War, and said that maybe after all
there was not that much difference between Mr. Humphrey and Mr. Nixon.  We know
better now, after Vietnam and Watergate. Mr. Nixon won that election with a
popular vote of 31,710,470 to Mr. Humphrey's 30,898,055, and the disenchanted
liberal no-shows made a difference in the big electoral states.

But many of the Hart and Jackson supporters have forgotten to remember, and are
now saying that if their guys can't win, they don't care who does. If this
attitude prevails with the Hart and Jackson supporters, the chances are that the
Democrats will lose in November and deserve to lose. For the voters are bound to
ask, if the Democrats can't govern themselves how can they unify and govern the
country?  The chances are that Gary Hart will see the danger of fighting a
losing battle against Mr. Mondale and pull out. He is an intelligent man. He can
add up Mr. Mondale's delegates and subtract his own, and with the help of a
little calculator, is bound to conclude that he can't win in San Francisco - and
also that if he fights and loses, he may wreck the party and spoil his chances
of being nominated and elected in 1988.  Jesse Jackson is different. He will
undoubtedly carry his battle to the floor of the convention. He is fighting for
justice for the blacks, he says, which is his right, but if he divides the
Democrats along racial lines, he's not likey to get what he wants on his own or
from Mr. Mondale or from Mr. Reagan in a second term.

Even if the Democrats get together behind Mr. Mondale at the San Francisco
convention, the chances are that he couldn't beat President Reagan in a
one-on-one television campaign. He has to come forward with a vision of the
future, and make clear where he intends to go and who's going with him in the
Vice Presidency and the Cabinet, and compare that ticket with Mr. Reagan's inner
staff of California friends.

The coming problems are so serious that they are not likely to be handled
effectively by the past ideologies of either party, but only by the best talents
of both parties. But there is no evidence so far from either Mr. Reagan or Mr.
Mondale that they are thinking in national rather than partisan terms.

We are already beginning to hear the cries of ''Four more years,'' but four more
years of what? Show business and Ronald Reagan? Four more years of his foreign
policy and the prospect that he would have the power to appoint a majority of
the members of the Supreme Court in the last years of the 80's?

But we're not talking about such things. We're talking about political illusions
- about numbers and delegates, about whether Mr. Hart or Mr. Jackson could stun
the Democratic Convention, and overturn Mr. Mondale's narrow margin in the state
primaries and caucuses.

There's no way this can be done. The Democrats either have to unite or lose.
Never since the Presidential election of 1932, when Franklin Roosevelt defeated
Herbert Hoover, have they had such a chance on domestic and foreign policy to
win, but that's not the way they're going. The Democratic Party is being run by
its selfish candidates, and will either have to take control or suffer the
consequences.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              381 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SURE LOSERS IN THE WESTMORELAND CBS 'WAR'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 199 words


To the Editor:


Hard-fought contests have drama, and those between two good lawyers, mixing
craft and craftiness, can be especially riveting. If the battle will also decide
the reputation of an old soldier, famous for conflicts of a different kind,
there is the promise of great spectacle. We may this way explain the interest in
General Westmoreland's case against CBS, as detailed in David Margolick's lively
portrait of the lawyers and their strategies (news article May 31).

But wait. This production could cost more than $20 million. And since the
general is represented by a foundation and CBS is a corporation, the tab for the
slugfest is entirely taxdeductible, as is any sum CBS may eventually pay.  Now a
good novel about Vietnam costs $14.95, a ticket to a fine war movie goes for $5.
Though fictions, each is calculated to tell us something true. It is in the
nature of courtroom truth, however, that Westmoreland v. CBS, though quite real,
is likely to leave its audience little wiser. Whoever may win this war over war,
taxpayers, silent partners of both sides, have already lost.

STEPHEN GILLERS Professor of Law, New York University New York, June 1, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              382 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Verbatim: Bureaucracy and Justice

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6, Column 5; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 158 words


''The Department of Health and Human Services has apparently determined to
effect economies by systematically denying disability benefits to those persons
entitled to them. In the six months ending in December 1983, of the appeals
taken to this United States District Court from such denials, 56 percent were
reversed or remanded. In a survey of 91 districts in the nation the percentage
reversed or remanded during this same period was 49 percent. Such a rate of
reversal throughout the land is staggering and paints an undeniable picture of a
heartless and indifferent bureaucratic monster destroying the lives of disabled
citizens and creating years of agony and anxiety by ignoring both facts and
legal precedent.'' Judge H. Lee Sarokin, of Federal District Court, Newark, in
an opinion ordering the Government to pay legal fees for a Vietnam veteran who
had successfully appealed a denial of Social Security disability payments.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: text

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              383 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 24, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3645 words


FICTION

MEN WITH DEBTS. By Anthony Giardina. (Knopf, $13.95.) The protagonist of this
first novel by the Off Broadway playwright Anthony Giardina is Jack Henna - a
43-year-old insurance salesman with a house in the suburbs, a wife of 18 years,
two sons and a life that, except for his older son's lack of interest or talent
in sports, has epitomized the American dream at its most prosaic. Henna wants it
that way, has ''worked hard to keep his life small.'' But when he learns that a
colleague is having an affair, something is apparently triggered in his mind. He
sees flaws in his life, and the first woman he meets thereafter becomes an
object of exotic possibility and rampant fantasy. She is a ''beneficiary,'' the
widow of a man who has committed suicide and left her on an isolated, unworked
farm with a young, athletic son and few skills with which to confront the ''real
world.'' Through Mr. Giardina's clever imagery, the reader understands long
before Henna does that the woman and the boy and the farm are uncharted
territory, waiting to become his ''garden,'' just as his own family has been.
That the woman and her son may wish to clip and shape their own lives does not
occur to him for some time. Mr. Giardina's experience as a playwright is evident
in his scene-like approach to this psychological drama. He has an exquisite
sense of the nuances of gesture and voice, the clamor of things unsaid.
Unfortunately, Jack Henna as portrayed here does not always seem capable of the
insights allowed him; one hopes that in Mr. Giardina's next novel character and
consciousness will fit more comfortably. - Jim Haskins

* COMPRADOR. By David R. Cudlip. (Dutton, $16.95.) This sardonic, sophisticated
tale of international intrigue is set in a not-too-distant future when the
United States, with 20-million unemployed and widespread food riots, teeters on
the brink of anarchy. Worse, the Kremlin is plotting an economic power play that
will flatten the dollar and finish off what's left of America's economy. A
befuddled President summons the one man who can save us, Rushton Culhane,
world-class trader (or ''comprador'' in centuries past) and sole American member
of Shang-Magan, the powerful and top-secret international trade syndicate.
Culhane, whose price is three tons of gold, begins to wheel and deal - oil here,
grain there, dollars elsewhere - as various spies, politicians and crooks try to
scuttle his mission. He also juggles a complicated love life that includes a
troubled wife, a Chinese mistress and a formidable American beauty who is in
cahoots with the C.I.A. This high-spirited tale is told with style, wit and
economy; David Cudlip's prose is a joy. The problem is his plot, which turns on
an international trade gambit that will remain inscrutable to most mortals. The
plot, finally, must be accepted as a necessary ''McGuffin,'' the engine that
keeps the merry-go-round spinning, and a fine ride it is. -Patrick Anderson

* MACHINE. By Denis Hamill. (Delacorte, $16.95.) When Be Be Gonzago, boss of the
Brooklyn Democratic machine, is murdered, his alienated son, Joseph, leaves his
job as a political science instructor in a Los Angeles college and returns to
find out what happened. Joseph learns from his father's diaries that Be Be was
not just the hack Joseph thought he was - he opposed the Vietnam War, fought
bigotry, used his power to do good for people and was supporting the reform
candidate in the gubernatorial primary. Joseph decides to avenge his father's
death. Even though the aura of ''The Godfather'' (with its sense of mob
influence and control) hangs over this novel, there is no grappling with - or
even mention of - how Be Be avoided getting involved with organized crime. The
son, deciding the old mob ways weren't so bad after all, drops his New Left
scruples as fast as he projected them onto his father. Joseph defeats his
father's enemies with immoral tactics (blackmailing the mayor and scores of
other politicos) and assumes the mantle of machine boss. He also deflects
attempts on his life by such types as a ''lesbian feminist'' stewardess and a
homosexual politician and wards off other attempts to undermine his power. Denis
Hamill keeps events moving at a fast tempo and his knowledgeable rendering of
the surface of urban politics is colorful. But his stereotyped characters and
implausible situations do not convince the reader that this is anything but
fantasy. Besides, the novel's moral obtuseness presents an addtional problem.
Mr. Hamill has it both ways. Joseph's change of heart comes after discovering
that his father held the principles he cherished; yet this discovery frees him
to become a blackmailer. Ultimately, ''Machine'' lacks a clear point of view
about the use of unscrupulous power, and there is little irony in Mr. Hamill's
writing. - David Evanier

* GIDEON'S HOUSE. By Joan Brody (Putnam's $13.95.) Jean Brody's first novel is a
soap opera told in retrospect, a Gothic within a Gothic, structured by the
familiar device of pitting two envious sisters against each other. Kate envies
Susannah's fame as a journalist and talk-show host. More to the point, Kate has
always believed that Susannah was really the better loved, not just by a mother
who left them when their father died, but by the grandparents who brought them
up. Susannah, of course, is convinced of just the opposite. It was Kate who
inherited grandpa Gideon's land, house, barns and stock (Susannah just got the
money); Kate also got Jason, the man Susannah was in love with. But Kate
believes that Jason really loved Susannah, and that he only married her for
Gideon's land. It all comes to a nice juicy head when their mother dies and
Susannah visits long enough to discover the illegitimacy of one of perfect
Kate's four children and to have a pass made at her by Jason. Finally. it takes
a tornado to blow away the steam rising from the past. Nothing in ''Gideon's
House'' will take anyone by surprise except, perhaps, the enjoyment of watching
the predictable unfold. Despite writing that is often as tawdry and shameless as
the plot - Susannah thinks like a woman's magazine and talks like Scarlett
O'Hara, and Hollywood is ''the land of mink and money'' - or maybe, what the
hell, because of it, this is a satisfying little read if there's nothing on
television. - Anna Shapiro

* HERETICS OF DUNE. By Frank Herbert. (Putnam's. $16.95.) The latest ''Dune''
book is as much a marvel as its four predecessors - perhaps even greater, since
few would have believed that Frank Herbert could sustain the magic of his epic
tale of the inhabitants of the planet Dune at this length. Readers unfamiliar
with the first four books will have dificulty with ''Heretics of Dune,'' I
suspect. But for those already enthralled, it is clear that, in science fiction,
Mr. Herbert's series ranks with Isaac Asimov's ''Foundation'' books in depth and
intensity of impact. Like Mr. Asimov's characters, the conspiratorial characters
of Dune deal only with issues of transcendent importance - the fate of mankind,
the possibility of free will, the existence of evil. (Mr. Herbert, unlike Mr.
Asimov, also deals with sex as a force in molding an ideal society.) The
strength of his series comes from its utter seriousness. There is not a trace of
irony, not a whiff of self-mocking doubt. And, surprisingly for books sometimes
labeled as ''space opera,'' there is very little action. Characters continually
argue about motives, meditate on the relationship of cause and effect to their
lives. Their conclusions and explanations lead not to understanding, however,
but to more questions, which provide the basis for further discussions. Why,
then, are the ''Dune'' books so hard to put down? Because they are (like those
all-night philosophical debates undergraduates used to call ''bull sessions'')
impelled by a powerful ''need to know.'' Whether or not one agrees with Mr.
Herbert's conclusions, he pays his readers the rare compliment of assuming that
they find speculation about truth as entertaining as he obviously does.-Gerald
Jonas

NONFICTION

TRUMAN: A Centenary Remembrance. By Robert H. Fenell. (Viking, $25.) The
publisher calls this book a ''biographical remembrance'' of President Harry S.
Truman, and that is an apt description. The 250-page volume is designed to
commemorate the 100th anniversary this year of Truman's birth, and it does so in
a straightforward, informed and affectionate manner. While not pretending to
break new ground or to offer the insights of a full-scale biography, ''Truman''
will be useful for those seeking a brisk, well-illustrated overview of the man,
his life and his Presidency. Robert H. Ferrell, a professor at Indiana
University, is a prolific chronicler of Truman, having edited the recent volume
of Truman's letters to his wife, Bess, and here he finds his subject to be ''an
ideal public man'' who ''accomplished a great deal during nearly eight years in
the Presidency.'' The book traces Truman's rise from the Pendergast political
machine's fourth choice for a Senate candidacy in 1934 (a connection that won
him the sobriquet ''The Senator from Pendergast''), through efforts by President
Roosevelt to displace him in the 1940 Senate race and his selection by big-city
bosses as the 1944 Democratic Vice-Presidential candidate, to his sudden
accession to the White House on F.D.R.'s death in 1945. It deals in summary with
his family life and the major events of his Presidency - the decision to drop
the atomic bomb on Japan, the onset of the cold war, the Berlin airlift, the
Truman Doctrine, the Korean War, his dismissal of Gen. Douglas MacArthur, his
election victory over Thomas Dewey, his unsuccessful seizure of the steel mills,
his decline in popularity during a disappointing second term and his decision
not to run again in 1952. Throughout, Mr. Ferrell stresses the positive about
Truman - his humanity, candor, decisiveness, courage - over any faults. Truman's
pioneering creation of the Commission on Civil Rights in 1946 is given
attention, for instance, but not the ethnic prejudices that appear throughout
his letters in the book Mr. Ferrell edited; nor is there an explanation of
whether Truman experienced a change of attitude as he matured and how it might
have evolved. The decision to drop the atomic bomb was ''understandable,''
although in retrospect there ''should have been an explicit advance warning.''
His tolerance of the deeds of some aides, such as Gen. Harry H. Vaughan,
represents loyalty to friends. This volume lends support to the growing public
esteem acccorded Truman in recent years. - David R. Jones

* NATALIE: A Memoir by Her Sister. By Lana Wood. (Putnam's, $15.95.) If they
hand out Oscars in heaven, Lana Wood will be eligible for Best Performance in a
Supporting Role by the Younger Sister of a Big Star. Her travails as a pale
shadow of the late Natalie Wood are recorded in a melancholy memoir tinged with
adulation and understanding. Despite Miss Wood's warm reminiscences of giddy
sessions before the makeup mirror and gossipy lunches at La Scala, the dominant
impression left by ''Natalie'' is of two lives grotesquely marred by the
unremitting fact of Natalie's fairy tale movie career. When Lana was born in
1946, her sister was already a child star, with an entourage and a trust fund
and a hothouse existence controlled by her doting, manipulative
Russian-immigrant mother, Marie Gurdin. Natalie would shortly captivate all
America with her performance as the skeptical little girl in ''Miracle on 34th
Street'' and, in a rarely accomplished transition, go on to starring teen roles,
starring ingenue roles and leading-lady parts. Little wonder, then, that the
baby grew up in awe of her confident, dazzling older sister - and stayed awed
even after the big parts stopped coming and nothing much replaced them. For
Lana, Natalie was always ''the person . . . most important to me in my life,
more important than either our mother or father.'' And it wasn't until the
author was a grown woman with several marriages and careers behind her that she
began coming to terms with her feelings of inadequacy. Natalie Wood fans will
scour this book - despite a not always lovable portrait of their favorite and a
not always lovable style - for the many glimpses of Natalie's clothes,
marriages, parties, children; those with a taste for the morbid will zero in on
her 1966 suicide attempt and her bizarre drowning in 1981. Even Lana may have
fans who have followed her less than stellar exploits in B movies and television
series and who will want to know about Lana's clothes, marriages, etc. But this
memoir isn't really about Natalie or Lana; it's about the two of them, sometimes
friends and sometimes enemies, marching in pathetic lock step to the drumbeat of
Hollywood stardom. - Sylviane Gold

* THE UNWELCOME INTRUDER: Freud's Struggle With Cancer. By Sharon Wood.
(Praeger, $19.95.) ''Seventy years have taught me to accept life with cheerful
humility. . . . I prefer my mechanical jaw to no jaw at all. I prefer existence
to extinction.'' This is how Sigmund Freud summed up his acceptance of cancer.
Freud endured chronic pain for 16 years. During that time, he underwent several
operations and X-ray and radium treatments; he was even subjected to a
vasectomy, which some doctors then believed reversed the aging process and the
growth of cancer. We have, of course, heard this story before. But in ''The
Unwelcome Intruder,'' Sharon Romm, a plastic surgeon who teaches at the
University of Kentucky, recounts it from a medical historian's perspective,
relying on the notes of Hans Pichler, Freud's steadfast surgeon, and also
diligently tracking other leads. Dr. Romm supplies detailed explications of the
clinical facts. She describes the type of malignancy Freud had, graphically
reconstructs the medical procedures he underwent and contrasts them to those of
today. Yet she manages to humanize her narrative by painting a vivid portrait of
Vienna's medical world and offering colorful sketches of Freud's distinguished
doctors. She also includes his wry observations on his ordeal, along with
amusing sidelights on people and events in his life (for example, his less than
enthusiastic meeting with Salvador Dali and his friendships with Stefan Zweig
and H.D.). ''The Unwelcome Intruder'' is both illuminating and engrossing. - Leo
Goldberger

* THE FIRE FROM WITHIN. By Carlos Castaneda. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Carlos
Castaneda has doggedly gone on writing his guidebooks to the mystical wisdom of
Don Juan - ''The Fire From Within'' is the seventh - but probably few people
recall any titles after ''The Teachings of Don Juan'' and ''A Separate
Reality.'' By now it has come to seem merely ludicrous that a middle- aged man
should subject himself to the indignities Mr. Castaneda undergoes in his efforts
to become a ''nagual.'' Good books have been written about spiritual
apprenticeship (Christopher Isherwood's ''My Guru and His Disciple,'' for
instance), but this is not one of them. A certain amount of obtuseness is
apparently central to Mr. Castaneda's search - ''In heightened awareness one is
minimally conscious of the surroundings'' - and this becomes particularly
evident in his portrayal of himself and his master. One can never be sure who is
kidding whom, because Mr. Castaneda is so unremittingly deadpan and Don Juan so
inscrutable. At best he's inscrutable; at his worst, Don Juan is an embodiment
of sadistic cruelty, a cross between Synanon's ''stew'' leaders and Thomas
Mann's Mussolini-like Cavaliere Cipolla. ''The Fire From Within'' unwittingly
emphasizes the connection between mysticism and authoritarianism - both tend to
require the same yours- is-not-to-reason-why allegiance from their adherents.
Thus Don Juan has Mr. Castenda graduate into sorcery by jumping off a
mountaintop into a rocky gorge. (He lives to tell the tale, as this narrative
proves.) Even the more routine meetings between the seer and his disciple
contain a sadistic element - ''As was customary with him, he suddenly hit me on
my back when I least expected it, and the blow shifted me into a state of
heightened awareness.'' In the hands of a black humorist like Evelyn Waugh or
Nathanael West, this could have been a hilarious book. - Wendy Lesser

* THE BOOK-PEDDLING PARSON: An Account of the Life and Works of Mason Locke
Weems, Patriot, Pitchman, Author and Purveyor of Morality to the Citizenry of
the Early United States of America.  By Lewis Leary. (Algonquin Books, $15.95.)
Parson Weems, the self-appointed moral shepherd of the early Republic, has
generally been regarded as a well-intentioned crank. Traveling the back roads
from Pennsylvania to Georgia for roughly 34 years before his death in 1825,
Weems peddled thousands of uplifting pamphlets and ''such books as may do good
in society.'' Along the way, he wrote a number of books himself, including
tracts condemning drunkenness and dueling. Most widely remembered is his
''History of the Life and Death, Virtues and Exploits of General George
Washington'' (1800), one of the few books of its time still in print. This
longevity, however, is hardly due to the excellence of the biography, which one
reviewer termed ''as entertaining and edifying (a one) as can be found in the
annals of fanaticism and absurdity.'' The book's fame rests on the charm of its
moralistic anecdotes, such as Weems's account of Washington and the cherry tree.
An ordained Episcopal minister, Weems believed that literature should provide
instruction for Christian living, and his high-toned zeal made him a celebrity
in rural America. As Lewis Leary, the William Rand Kenan Jr. emeritus Professor
of English at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, asserts, ''He
stood, not always sturdily, at the threshold of literature in the new United
States.'' Unfortunately, Mr. Leary never places Weems solidly in this context.
Rarely do we glimpse him through his contemporaries' eyes, and there is little
attempt to evoke the milieu in which he wrote. The lengthy quotations of his
swollen, antique prose only distance a modern audience and fail to convey his
impact. Mr. Leary's ''Book-Peddling Parson'' will expose even more readers to
Parson Weems's exhortations, but it seems unlikely to win him fresh converts. -
Richard Nalley

NONFICTION

THE ROSES OF NO MAN'S LAND. By Lyn Macdonald (Merrimack Publishers', $19.95.)
''Half of the youth of half the world'' was consumed by World War I, the British
journalist Lyn Macdonald recalls. No one knows exactly how many millions of
casualties it claimed, but according to what she considers a conservative
official estimate, more than two million British soldiers alone were wounded.
''The Roses of No Man's Land'' chronicles the medical struggle to save them. It
is a remarkable collection of the wartime letters, journals and reminiscences of
nurses, doctors and their patients, framed wisely in an unobtrusive narrative of
events. This straightforward, often matter-of-fact catalogue of unprecedented
injuries and diseases speaks for itself. It highlights the experiences of
British volunteer nurses, young, leisure-class women ''who walked straight out
of Edwardian drawing rooms into the manifold horrors of the First World War.''
For many women in the theater of war, it seemed a noble romantic adventure at
first. The thrill was soon gone, especially for nurses in makeshift hospitals at
the front, working round-the-clock sometimes ''to keep pace'' with the dying and
wounded. When the armistice was finally declared, in the midst of a murderous
influenza pandemic, at least one war-weary nurse had trouble rejoicing - ''Here
we are at the end of the war - but we're not at the end of the grief.'' - Wendy
Kaminer

The Brush and the Sword Cultural attitudes toward war have changed radically
through the ages, and so have the pictures used to describe them. Warriors in
ancient Greece were pictured as heroic figures, as were the soldiers in early
Christian art who fought in the Crusades. It was not until the 17th century,
with the close of the Thirty Years' War, that war was widely denounced for the
first time. The long, macabre tradition of antiwar art had begun.

ART AGAINST WAR by D. J. R. Bruckner, Seymour Chwast and Steven Heller
(Abbeville, Paper, $16.95) is a concise pictorial survey of four centuries of
antiwar imagery, though its emphasis is on Western art produced over the last
100 years. The book opens with an exceptionally lucid essay by D. J. R.
Bruckner, an editor of The New York Times Book Review, tracing the iconography
of war back to its sources in early Greek, Hebrew, Roman and Christian texts.
Mr. Bruckner touches on symbols from the Bible, as well as those found in
medieval illuminated manuscripts, Romanesque church murals and Renaissance
wood-block engravings.  To illustrate the steady evolution in the vocabulary of
art against war, the authors have included a broad range of illustrations, from
classic paintings, contemporary sculpture and 19th-century English prints to
posters from the 1920's and stills from modern films, plays and dance. If some
of these examples - Picasso's ''Guernica,'' George Grosz's sardonic political
cartoons - are familiar, there are many fresh and surprising illustrations .
''The art in this book is vulgar,'' Mr. Bruckner observes, because its intention
is always to exhort against war, as well as to shock in a pictorial language
that is universally understood. ''Art Against War'' is an eerie reminder of how
often war has been the subject of art and a timely exhortation too. For as
Steven Heller, the art director of The Book Review, writes, ''if there is
another war there will be no art.'' - Andrea Barnet

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing; photo of Natalie Wood

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              384 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS June 10, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 34, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1331 words


Fiction1

13

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a mother
and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  2

214

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  3

4

9

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  4

3

3

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  5

6

2

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  6

5

13

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  7

6

10

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  8

9

2

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  8

10

6

DESCENT FROM XANADU, by Harold Robbins.  (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A man who
has everything - power, money, women - seeks to obtain immortality.  10

14

2

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  11

14

7

WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W.  Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What follows
the first nuclear war in 1988.  12

8

11

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.  12

12

18

SMART WOMEN, by Judy Blume. (Putnam, $15.95.) Three divorcees, their love
affairs and their kids in trendy Boulder, Colo.  14

12

4

DEMOCRACY, by Joan Didion. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) Love, ambition and murder
in Honolulu.  14

11

32

PET SEMATARY, by Stephen King. (Doubleday, $15.95.) The new family in town
discovers the horrors that lie in a neighboring cemetery.





































  Nonfiction1

138

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  2

35

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  3

2

7

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' TV series.  4

4

14

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  5

5

13

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  6

7

6

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  7

6

4

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  7

7

17

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world. 9

9

6

CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Secretary of State gives his views on foreign policy.  10

10

6

KNOCK WOOD, by Candice Bergen. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the actress, daughter of Edgar Bergen.  11

11

89

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.  11

13

3

NATALIE, by Lana Wood. (Putnam, $15.95.) A sister's memoir of the actress
Natalie Wood.  13

14

22

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin.  (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  13



1

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent. 15

15

9

FURTHER UP THE ORGANIZATION, by Robert Townsend. (Knopf, $15.95.) Business
strategies for the 1980's.






















 And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)


CITIES AND THE WEALTH OF NATIONS: Principles of Economic

Life, by Jane Jacobs. (Random House, $17.95.) A vigorously

argued thesis that national policies around the world stunt the

organic growth of cities, where most wealth is produced.

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES, by

Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row, $15.95.) A novella and four short

stories by the Nobel Prize winner, all with his characteristically

wily predicaments and brainy language.

HOME SWEET HOME: My Canadian Album, by Mordecai Richler.

(Knopf, $16.95.) A collection of sometimes funny, essentially

affectionate pieces by the one Canadian able to conjure foreigners

into reading about the Great Blank North.

IN THE FREUD ARCHIVES, by Janet Malcolm. (Knopf, $11.95.)

Superb reportage of the struggles between two Freudians of Now,

Jeffrey Masson and Peter Swales, and two orthodox

psychoanalytic patricians, Kurt Eissler and Anna Freud, over

Freudian theory and the Freud Archives in London.

LINCOLN: A Novel, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) A

massive work that is likely to be controversial, presenting

Abraham Lincoln as ambitious for greatness - whether at the

expense of ''emancipating slaves or enslaving free men.''

SWEENEY ASTRAY: A Version From the Irish, by Seamus

Heaney. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $13.95.) An exhilarating

translation of a medieval story poem of a paranoid outcast named

Sweeney who in his mad agony writes incomparable lyrics.

WEAKNESS AND DECEIT: U.S. Policy and El Salvador, by

Raymond Bonner. (Times Books, $16.95.) A significant attempt by

a New York Times reporter who covered El Salvador from 1980 to

1982 to explain our deep involvement in that troubled Central

American country.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

112

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

212

WEBSTER'S NINTH COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard
work updated in 1983.  3

32

RANDOM HOUSE COLLEGE DICTIONARY.  (Random House, $14.95.) New revised edition.
4

77

NOTHING DOWN , by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95)

How to buy real estate with little or no money. 5

1

THE PRITIKIN PROMISE , by Nathan Pritikin. (Simon & Schuster $17.95) A regimen
described as ''28 days to a longer healthier life.'' The listings above are
based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region
of the United States, statistically adjusted to represent sales in all
bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that
point, sales in this category are not generally large enough to make a longer
list statistically reliable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              385 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 10, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NOVEL REFLECTS GLEN COVE DISPUTE

BYLINE: By CONRAD WESSELHOEFT

SECTION: Section 11LI; Page 16, Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1024 words


EARLY in Nelson De Mille's newest novel, ''The Talbot Odyssey,'' a Glen Cove
High School student named Stanley Kuchik breaks into Killenworth, the baronial
retreat of the Soviet Mission to the United Nations in Glen Cove.

Stanley's goal is to obtain proof that he has penetrated enemy territory (he
steals the Russian flag off the estate's flagpole) and to rendezvous with his
buddies at a pizza parlor.

What begins as an adolescent prank quickly escalates into a lethal confrontation
between the United States and the Soviet Union, with the fate of both nations
hanging on events at the Glen Cove estate.

''The Talbot Odyssey,'' which Delacorte Press chose as one of its lead books for
the spring season, is Mr. De Mille's third major novel. Like its predecessors,
which dealt with an Entebbe-like raid and an attack by a band of Irish
Republican Army terrorists, it has the ring of recent headlines.

Mr. De Mille, who is 40, grew up on Long Island and now lives in Port
Washington. His interest in espionage stems from a year in Vietnam, where, as a
lieutenant in the Army, he spent most of his time in command of a 40-man
infantry unit. When he was not in the field, where he estimates that 50 percent
of his men were killed or wounded, he did what he describes as low-level
intelligence work. This involved interviewing captured prisoners through
interpreters and checking their field gear. ''There was nothing cloak and dagger
about it,'' he said.

''The Talbot Odyssey'' brings to mind the recent dispute between Glen Cove and
Moscow in which local beaches were closed to Soviet diplomats on charges that
Killenworth harbored eavesdropping equipment to spy on the Island's defense
industry.

One character who makes several appearances in the large cast is Glen Cove's
fictional Mayor Dominic Parioli. Holding a huge bullhorn and wearing an Uncle
Sam top hat as he pickets the Soviet estate, Parioli is less an effort to
caricature former Mayor Alan M. Parente than a dash of humor in a plot spiced
mostly with intrigue.

In the main, ''The Talbot Odyssey'' follows the convoluted path of a few
remaining members of the Office of Strategic Services - the elite corps of World
War II spies - as they try to uncover the double agent Talbot. Talbot, who is
steering the Soviet Union into a position to defeat the United States, is so
expertly disguised that he may be any of a number of highly placed government
officials.

The activities in Glen Cove have something to do with ''the Stroke,'' which is
what the Russians call their plan to defuse every computer in the United States.

Mr. De Mille's Vietnam experiences - his unit participated in the 30-day battle
of Hue, among others - may be a reason for his emotional detachment when he
writes about violence and death. When people die in ''The Talbot Odyssey,'' as
they frequently do, his characters show little grief.

''There is a saying,'' Mr. De Mille said, ''that one death is a tragedy, but
multiple death is a sanitation problem.''

In Vietnam, he said, ''death was sort of unreal. People seemed to know what to
do instinctively - to put a handkerchief over a face or wrap a body in a
poncho.''

Mr. De Mille kept a notebook of his war experiences, which has helped him in the
novel he is now writing about Vietnam. Called ''Dawn's Early Light,'' the story
concerns a man whose ghosts come back to haunt him 18 years after leaving
Vietnam.

The novel's main character has much in common with Mr. De Mille, but the author
said, ''I am not particularly haunted by memories of Vietnam, though the book
has brought back memories.''

Stephen Friedman, the producer, recently purchased ''Dawn's Early Light'' in
outline form and is adapting it for film.

Mr. De Mille said he had given little serious thought to a writing career during
his college and Army years. At Hofstra University, he majored in political
science and planned to be a lawyer. Only on occasion in the Army, he said, had
he succumbed to the fantasy of writing a novel.

''I think every literate person who is in the service, especially in combat,
thinks he's going to come back and write 'The Naked and the Dead,' '' he said.

''How I got started writing is kind of serendipitous,'' he said. ''It's the kind
of thing that would happen in New York; it would not happen in Dubuque.'' One
night, in a Manhattan bar, an Army buddy introduced him to a paperback book
editor.  ''It was during the era of Serpico and the Knapp Commission, and they
were looking for police novels,'' Mr. De Mille said. With some background in
police magazine writing, he decided to try a police novel.

''I wrote day and night for two months,'' he said. ''There was no deadline, I
just felt financially pressured to finish it. Also, I didn't want to waste any
time on it if it wasn't going to go anywhere.''

The hard work paid off. The book was followed by a dozen other police and
adventure novels, some written - ''out of economic necessity'' - in two or three
months. His first major novel, ''By the Rivers of Babylon,'' took two years to
write. Published in 1978, it was a Book of the Month Club main selection.
''Cathedral,'' which followed, was a Literary Guild main selection. Both books
were best sellers.

Mr. De Mille, who is separated from his wife, has two young children. He keeps
an office in a century-old building in Garden City, where as a novelist he
considers himself a local anomaly.

''Garden City is very conservative,'' he said. ''I probably have the only beard
in town.''

On a typical day, he will start work at 1 P.M. and write for seven or eight
hours. Working with pencils and a lined yellow pad, he will often write as much
as 5,000 words a day.

Though in the midst of one book, he is already planning his next, an occult
novel set in Sag Harbor.

''Somebody once said that the most successful story is the story of chase and
escape,'' Mr. De Mille said. ''Alfred Hitchcock understood that it is the search
for the 'McGuffin,' whatever that may be - the Maltese falcon, the lost ark or
the purloined letter.'' ''I strive,'' he said, ''to get those factors into my
books.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Nelson DeMille

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              386 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 11, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

IN FROM THE COLD AND HOT FOR TRUTH

BYLINE: By PHILIP TAUBMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1579 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 10


A year ago David C. MacMichael worked for the Central Intelligence Agency
analyzing political and military developments in Central America. Two months
ago, Mr. MacMichael, no longer a Government employee, marched in front of the
United States Embassy in Managua, Nicaragua, to protest C.I.A. support of rebels
opposed to the Sandinista regime.

Mr. MacMichael's metamorphosis, the sort that intelligence officials dread, has
led him to challenge one of the foundations of the Reagan Administration's
policy in Central America: the assumption that Nicaragua is spoiling to export
revolution to its neighbors.

''The whole picture that the Administration has presented of Salvadoran
insurgent operations being planned, directed and supplied from Nicaragua is
simply not true,'' he said in recent interviews. ''There has not been a
successful interdiction, or a verified report, of arms moving from Nicaragua to
El Salvador since April 1981.''

The First Defection in Years


Mr. MacMichael, the first C.I.A. analyst in recent years to make a public break
with the agency, said that before he left the C.I.A. last July he had access to
the most sensitive intelligence about Nicaragua, including arms shipments to El
Salvador. Based on that, he said, he concluded that ''the Administration and the
C.I.A. have systematically misrepresented Nicaraguan involvement in the supply
of arms to Salvadoran guerrillas to justify its efforts to overthrow the
Nicaraguan Government.''

The charge, like the accusation that American commanders in Vietnam distorted
data about the numbers of the enemy's forces, is likely to provoke more heated
debate. Since the Administration began focusing attention on Central America in
1981, Congress has questioned giving funds to the C.I.A. for support of
Nicaraguan rebels. At first it asked whether the United States was indirectly
trying to overthrow the Sandinista Government. But, after disclosures about
C.I.A. roles in the mining of Nicaraguan harbors and other questions involving
the verification of arms shipments, the debate has become a question of whether
the United States should support the rebels at all. The House has voted twice in
the last year to cut off aid to the rebels.

'From the Soviet Bloc'


In his nationally televised speech on Central America in May, President Reagan
said: ''Weapons, supplies and funds are shipped from the Soviet bloc to Cuba,
from Cuba to Nicaragua, from Nicaragua to the Salvadoran guerrillas. These facts
were confirmed last year by the House intelligence committee.''

The committee, which suggested the United States no longer support Nicaraguan
rebels as a way to stop the arms shipments, said in a report that ''a major
portion of the arms and other material sent by Cuba and other Communist
countries to the Salvadoran insurgents transits Nicaragua with the permission
and assistance of the Sandinists.''

Well aware that the weight of official opinion runs contrary to his contentions,
Mr. MacMichael insisted that the House report and Mr. Reagan's comments were
based on old intelligence information.

While it is impossible independently to verify Mr. MacMichael's account, both
Administration officials and members of Congress familiar with intelligence data
on Nicaragua suggested that the issue of arms shipments to El Salvador was
susceptible to differing interpretations.

''It is true we do not have shipments we have interdicted,'' one intelligence
official said. ''But we do have numerous sightings, we do have intelligence
showing beyond question flights at night by small, unmarked planes from
Nicaragua to El Salvador, and we have tracked boats crossing the Gulf of
Fonseca. We know from monitoring radio communications that these planes and
boats carry weapons.''

'It's Hard to Believe'


Mr. MacMichael argues that such intelligence information falls short of
definitive proof. ''It's hard to believe, if we know so much about all these
shipments, that we haven't been able to capture one plane or boat,'' he said.
''It's even hard to believe that in the last two years one of the planes hasn't
crashed or one crate of guns hasn't been dropped mistakenly into a tree.''

When he raised these doubts with his superiors at the C.I.A., Mr. MacMichael
said, they assured him that there was definitive intelligence. ''A senior aide
to Casey told me, 'It's there, you just don't know about it,' '' he recalled.
William J. Casey is the Director of Central Intelligence.

Although the C.I.A. would not officially comment on Mr. MacMichael or his
accusations, intelligence officials privately confirmed that he had worked as an
agency analyst from 1981 to 1983. They said his contract was not renewed because
of questions about the quality of his work.

Other agency officials said Mr. MacMichael was let go because he had repeatedly
challenged established policy and pressed officials to produce intelligence data
to support their conclusions about Nicaragua.

The C.I.A. has not faced a defection like Mr. MacMichael's since the 1970's when
a number of former employees produced books highly critical of the agency,
including ''The C.I.A. and the Cult of Intelligence'' by Victor Marchetti and
John D. Marks and ''Decent Interval'' by Frank Snepp. The dissent ebbed after
the Supreme Court ruled in 1980 that in publishing his book about C.I.A.
activities in Vietnam Mr. Snepp had breached a legitimate secrecy agreement with
the agency and that he must turn over to the Government all earnings from the
book.

Compelled to Express Concerns


Mr. MacMichael, who signed a secrecy agreement when he joined the C.I.A., said
he had submitted an article about his views on Nicaragua to the C.I.A. for
pre-publication review. He also said he would not disclose classified
information. The secrecy agreement requires former employees to clear any
manuscripts, speeches or other accounts about intelligence matters that they
intend to make public.

However, Mr. MacMichael said, he felt compelled to express his concerns before
the review was completed for fear that President Reagan's policies in Central
America were moving the United States toward ''a major military intervention.''
He said his lawyers had advised him he could comment ''extemporaneously'' about
his experiences.

Like Daniel Ellsberg, the former Defense Department consultant who turned
against the war in Vietnam and made the Government's secret history of American
involvement there available to newspapers in 1971, Mr. MacMichael is fully
committed to opposing Government policy.

Since he left the C.I.A. last July, he has traveled twice to Nicaragua, spending
a total of more than three months there. He said he talked with Sandinista
officials, spent a weekend picking cotton, joined the weekly demonstrations by
Americans outside the United States Embassy and spent most of his time touring
the country ''to see what it is really like.''

He said he did not discuss intelligence information with anyone in Nicaragua and
was not asked by officials there to publicize his differences with the C.I.A.

'It Made Them Uncomfortable'


Mr. MacMichael, 56 years old, joined the C.I.A. in 1981 after a varied career
that included a stint in the Marine Corps, a period of academic research and
teaching and 11 years service at SRI International, a California consulting
company, where he specialized in Government contracts on counterinsurgency
strategy that included a 1966-69 tour in Thailand.

Not long after his arrival at the C.I.A., Mr. MacMichael said, he was asked to
prepare a paper on political and social conditions in Nicaragua. After reviewing
intelligence and State Department reports going back to 1979, he said he found
that ''I could not accept the conclusion, held widely within the Administration,
that this was a well-established Marxist- Leninist state.''

Mr. MacMichael said that despite ''a surprising degree of support'' for his
position from colleagues, the paper was never published as an official agency
report. ''It made them too uncomfortable,'' he said.

Later, he said, he attended an interagency meeting to discuss C.I.A. plans to
support Nicaraguan rebels. ''Although the stated objective was to interdict arms
going into El Salvador,'' he said, ''there was hardly any discussion of the arms
traffic, the routes it followed, the amount involved, the ways it could be
stopped and the impact interdiction might have on the guerrillas in El Salvador.

''I couldn't understand this failure,'' he said, ''until months later when I
realized, like everyone else, that arms interdiction had never been a serious
objective.''

When the C.I.A. first notified Congress in 1981 about its intent to support
Nicaraguan rebels, it said that blocking arms shipments to El Salvador was the
principal goal. In 1982, after Congress pressed for evidence of arms shipments
that had been halted, the agency revised the justification to include harassment
of the Nicaraguan Government.

A devout Catholic, Mr. MacMichael said he had consulted church officials and
hesitated a long time before approaching a reporter, wondering whether he was
doing the right thing. ''I'm trying to be a patriot,'' he said. ''I think
Congress and the public should know that within the C.I.A. there is pressure to
bend information to fit policy. It would be a terrible tragedy if we ended up
going to war in Central America.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David MacMichael

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              387 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 11, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

LONG-PLANNED COMECON TALKS DUE

BYLINE: By JOHN TAGLIABUE

SECTION: Section D; Page 4, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: EAST BERLIN, June 10


The leaders of the 10-nation Communist trade bloc are scheduled to convene in
Moscow on Tuesday for their first economic summit meeting in 15 years.

The long-planned meeting, beginning three days after the end of the London
summit talks of the non-Communist industrial nations, will likely serve to
underscore Soviet pre-eminence in the bloc, after a period of frequent
leadership changes in Moscow, and document the East bloc's unity at a time of
strained East-West ties, according to Western diplomats and economists.

If Western summit meetings are faulted for failing to keep promises, the Moscow
gathering may prove a clone of its Western model.

Though the last economic summit meeting of the leaders of the Council for Mutual
Economic Assistance, or Comecon, in April 1969, laid the groundwork for the
widened East-West industrial and financial ties of the 1970's, the Moscow
meeting is thought likely to offer little in the way of major policy shifts or
long-term remedies for the East bloc's pressing economic problems, such as its
towering debt and cumbersome trade system.

''It's necessary to get the East out of its dead-end street,'' said Raimund
Dietz, an expert on Eastern European economies at the Vienna-based Institute for
Comparative Economic Studies. He said Comecon nations faced serious obstacles to
sustained growth, such as disparities in internal pricing systems and the lack
of a convertible currency, which forces the Soviet Union and its allies to rely
on a bilateral barter system that handicaps trade.



Broad Policy Differences

But experts said the deliberations in Moscow would likely be overshadowed by the
same broad policy differences that have been standing in the way of the
long-planned summit meeting since it was announced more than three years ago.

Western experts, like Mr. Dietz, said the meeting would likely produce pleas by
conservative East bloc leaders from the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia and Poland
for greater economic integration and a more efficient division of labor within
the bloc, to bolster industrial production and reduce dependence on the West.

Such pleas, they said, are a result of concern over the bloc's immense foreign
debt of nearly $55 billion, which some Communist leaders fear gives Western
governments a lever against the East. More deeply, however, it reflects unease
over United States efforts to halt the flow of high-technology to the East bloc
that Reagan Administration officials fear might find military application.

To underscore the seriousness of the integration effort, some Western experts
think the announcement of a major energy project, such as a second Siberian gas
pipeline from the Yamal peninsula to Eastern Europe, to parallel the one built
by the West, is possible. Soviet officials are seeking to wean their Comecon
partners from costly oil by pushing the use of gas, and construction of the
pipeline with Eastern technology, it is argued, would underscore the East's
technological independence.



Special Trade Ties With West

But pleas for greater economic integration and less dependence on the West will
likely meet resistance from countries such as Hungary and East Germany. Hungary
has gone further than other East bloc countries in liberalizing its economy and
introducing marketplace incentives. East Germany, the bloc leader in many
high-technology sectors such as data processing and industrial robots, enjoys
special financial and trade ties with West Germany, and fears that reduced
financial and technological cooperation will widen the technological gap with
the West.

''There will be verbal attacks'' on trade with the West, said Jochen
Bethkenhagen, an expert on East bloc economies at the German Institute for
Economic Research in West Berlin. ''But in practice nothing will change.''

Rising energy costs, slowing growth and the immense debt problem led Leonid
Brezhnev, the late Soviet leader, to call for a Comecon gathering at a 1981
Soviet Communist Party congress. His death, however, and the ill health of his
successor, Yuri Andropov, plus intractable economic policy differences among
East bloc nations caused the meeting to be repeatedly postponed.

The other members of the trade group are Bulgaria, Rumania, Cuba, Mongolia and
Vietnam.

Yugoslavia, which has a Communist Government but which is not a member of the
Warsaw Pact military alliance, is an associate member. Several countries with
close economic ties to the East bloc, such as Afghanistan and Nicaragua, have
sent observers to the bloc's annual meetings in recent years.

Western analysts, like Mr. Dietz, say solving the energy problem is one of the
most pressing issues for Comecon's smaller members, who are net importers of
prime energy sources like oil an gas.

These countries import most of their oil and gas from the Soviet Union in
exchange for industrial and farm products, under a rolling price system based on
an average of Western oil prices over the last five years.

But when Western oil prices stagnate or fall, as is now the case, the Soviet
Union's trade partners continue to pay high energy prices.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              388 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

BRIEFING;
Jackson Pulls Strings

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Marjorie Hunter

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 749 words


''America's Black Forum'' is a syndicated, independently distributed television
program whose host is State Senator Julian Bond of Georgia. Barbara Reynolds, a
reporter for USA Today, was to have joined Mr. Bond last Friday in Washington
for the taping of an interview with the Rev. Jesse Jackson, a Democratic
Presidential contender. When Mr. Jackson objected to both, however, Mr. Bond was
replaced by Dolores Handy, a former program host, and Miss Reynolds was dropped.

Mr. Bond, who was an early supporter of Walter F. Mondale for the Democratic
Presidential nomination, said: ''This is the first time I've had anybody afraid
to appear with me. I don't get it.''

More disturbing to some was Mr. Jackson's demand that Miss Reynolds be removed
from the program. A few years ago she wrote a book, ''Jesse Jackson: The Man,
The Myth and The Movement,'' that provided a critical account of some parts of
Mr. Jackson's civil rights leadership. Miss Reynolds said she had been asked to
appear on the program three weeks ago. ''Then they called me and said I couldn't
be on because of overbooking,'' she said. ''I said, 'You know that's not true.
Jesse pulled some strings.' It disturbs me to see him exercise this kind of
power over the black media.''

Margaret Lenton, the show's producer, confirmed that Mr. Jackson did not want
Miss Reynolds on the panel. ''I think it was a little different with Julian,''
she said. ''I think that was more by mutual understanding.''

A Film Without Name

After 40 years the film still has no name, but the horrors it records are so
unspeakable that perhaps it is best that way. It is a documentary, supervised in
part by Alfred Hitchcock, on what Allied soldiers found when they liberated
prison camps in Germany and Poland. The footage is so grisly that the American
and British Governments deemed it inappropriate for public showing and stored it
in London's Imperial War Museum for 39 years.

This year it was shown on British television and at the Berlin Film Festival. On
June 19 it will make its debut here, in a special screening at the Kennedy
Center's American Film Institute Theater sponsored by the United States
Holocaust Memorial Council, American Film Institute, Congressional Arts Caucus
and its chairman, Representative Thomas J. Downey of Suffolk.

After its Washington screening, the 50-minute film will be added to the
Holocaust Council's archives. Parts are also scheduled to be shown on public
television later this year. ''No one is looking forward to seeing it,'' said an
aide to Mr. Downey.

The Sporkin Nomination

Ajudicial screening committee of senior officials at the Justice Department and
the White House has recommended that President Reagan nominate Stanley Sporkin,
general counsel of the Central Intelligence Agency, to a seat on the Federal
District Court for the District of Columbia. The nomination is on track despite
the opposition of some conservatives and members of the business community who
remember Mr. Sporkin as a tough enforcer of securities laws when he was chairman
of the Securities and Exchange Commission in the mid-1970's.

Mr. Sporkin, it turns out, has a powerful ally in his bid for the judgeship.
William J. Casey, Director of the C.I.A., has spoken directly to the President
in behalf of his longtime friend. His high regard for Mr. Sporkin is
understandable. In the fall of 1972, Mr. Casey, then chairman of the S.E.C.,
followed the advice of Mr. Sporkin, an agency enforcement official at the time,
and rebuffed repeated pressures from the Nixon White House to slow a sensitive
investigation into the business dealings of Robert L. Vesco, the financier who
later became a fugitive.

A Matter of Recognition

The Vietnam Veterans of America has won a major round in its

drive for Congressional recognition. Yesterday the House voted, 299 to 101, to
give the organization a Federal charter that would, if approved by the Senate,
bring it into the ranks of such established veterans' groups as the American
Legion and Veterans of Foreign Wars. Robert O. Muller, president, said, ''This
would afford our organization stature and recognition in dealing with Congress
and the political community.'' The V.V.A. has been recognized by the Veterans
Administration since 1981. Among the opponents to the Federal charter is the
V.F.W., which has criticized Mr. Muller's group for its dealings with the
Vietnamese Government on such issues as accounting for missing American
servicemen.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 14, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A report Tuesday in the Briefing column of the Washington Talk page incorrectly
reported the position formerly held by Stanley Sporkin at the Securities and
Exchange Commission. He was chief of its enforcement division.


                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              389 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS OF THE TIMES

BYLINE: By Michiko Kakutani

SECTION: Section C; Page 17, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 983 words


MACHINE DREAMS. By Jayne Anne Phillips. 331 pages. E. P. Dutton/Seymour
Lawrence. $16.95.

IN ''Black Tickets,'' a collection of short stories published five years ago,
Jayne Anne Phillips stepped out of the ranks of her generation as one of its
most gifted writers. Her quick, piercing tales of love and loss demonstrated a
keen love of language, and a rare talent for illuminating the secret core of
ordinary lives with clearsighted unsentimentality. Her first novel, ''Machine
Dreams,'' not only ratifies that earlier accomplishment, but also establishes
Miss Phillips as a novelist of the first order. The book will doubtless come to
be seen as both a remarkable novelistic debut and an enduring literary
achievement.

Though sections of ''Machine Dreams'' easily lift out and function as short
stories, they have been stitched together seamlessly into a beautifully
patterned novel that possesses the density of a highly ambitious work of art - a
novel that succeeds in examining the intersection of public and private
experience in America during the last four decades, without ever becoming
didactic.

Unlike many first novels, ''Machine Dreams'' is not simply a semi-
autobiograpical account of coming of age, or a conventional study of character.
Rather, its subject is history and the passage of time - as mirrored in the
fortunes of the Hampson family, whose own dissolution reflects the dislocations
suffered by this country in the wake of the 1960's and Vietnam.


Everywhere in this book there are signs that the old certainties, which Miss
Phillips's characters long for, have vanished or drifted out of reach. Looking
for love, they end up in dissonant marriages and improvised relationships;
wanting safety, they settle for the consolation of familiar habits. They look
out at the landscape of West Virginia, where they grew up, and see strip mines
and developments where once there were farms and trees; and the words ''now''
and ''then'' haunt their nightmares and their dreams. They even discover that
family - the mystical blood bond shared by mothers and daughters, fathers and
sons, brothers and sisters - is not for keeps, that it, too, is susceptible to
time and death. Like the machines that Mitch Hampson once worked on - machines
''built and repaired with scrap metal, welded in approximate versions of
whatever parts broke down'' - their lives slowly evolve ''further and further
into jumbled mismatched puzzles.''

Told from the point-of-view of various characters, the story of the Hampsons
begins during the Depression, with the intertwining lives of Jean and Mitch; and
already the sense of loss that will echo through this book is very much in
evidence. Having lost her father to madness and her mother to cancer, Jean is
scared of being alone, and she marries Mitch following a hasty three-week
courtship. After a year and a half of marriage, she realizes, while watching him
dance with another woman at a New Year's party, that ''he'd never belong'' to
her ''the way some men belonged to women.''

Two children, Danner and Billy, are soon born to the Hampsons, but by then their
marriage has already become a sort of nonaggression treaty, intermittently
broken by flare-ups of emotional violence and brief flashes of love - a marriage


 held together by silences and secrets, instead of empathy and passion.

An aging veteran of World War II who is haunted by memories of fighting in the
Pacific, Mitch is too self-absorbed to give Jean what she needs. And his own
life will slowly become more and more of a thin brittle shell of what it used to
be: when his partner dies, he sells his business, becomes a salesman and takes a
disability pension from the Veterans Administration. By the end, he is ''selling
a doubtful brand of life insurance.'' Like her own mother, Jean is the strong
one, the one who holds the family together until the kids have gone to college,
and she will pass on that strength to her daughter, Danner.

The childhood of Danner and her brother Billy is drawn by Miss Phillips with the
sort of precision that conjures instantly, for readers, private memories of
their own youth - long summer evenings, lit with the whirl of sparklers and
fireflies; and the dark sound of parents' voices, arguing, in the house, late at
night. Her sketches of the siblings' adolescence during the early 60's are
equally resonant. Dates spent listening to the car radio, leaking old tunes into
the soft spring air; summer jobs that mean carrying heavy trays and washing
catsup bottles; late-night talks with joints and beer - these scenes of ordinary
life possess the sweet-bitter nostalgia of ''American Graffiti'' translated to
paper, and their afterimage glows indelibly in the reader's mind.


It is a world and a time - and an innocence - that will be irrevocably
destroyed. Distressed by the events that follow in the wake of her parents'
divorce, Danner will exile herself to the far western reaches of the country.
She will live a restless life, as her mother says, encounter ''crazy situations,
strange people,'' and yet she will still dream of home - ''a two lane road
densely overhung with the deciduous trees of a more familiar world.''

As for Billy, he is drafted - his number comes up 19 in the lottery - and rather
than flee to Canada, he accepts the randomness with which his fate has been
determined. It seems, to him, apt in a certain way. ''He didn't know histories
or politics - he didn't want to know. Knowing wouldn't change what was going to
happen.''

Though Miss Phillips's rendition of Billy's experience in Vietnam captures
perfectly the sound and feeling of that most anomalous of wars, it is her
portrayal of the intimate consequences of that conflict on the Hampsons - and
the collision with history that this country would suffer during those
disordered years - which, in the end, distinguishes this astonishing novel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jayne Anne Phillips

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              390 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 13, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

THE KNOWN LESSONS OF THE VIETNAM WAR

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 203 words


To the Editor:


In his eulogy of the unknown serviceman killed in the Vietnam War, President
Reagan did not entirely elude the lingering specter of the war itself. To quote:
''We will never know the answers to these questions about his life. We do know,
though, why he died. He saw the horrors of war but bravely faced them, certain
his own cause and his country's cause was a noble one, that he was fighting for
human dignity for free men everywhere.''

The President does not say whether or not the beliefs gratuitously ascribed to
this dead man were justified. He rather advises that we ''debate the lessons
learned at some other time.'' It is doubtful that further debate will greatly
change these lessons, a few of which may be summarized as follows:


* Internal power struggles in third- world countries do not necessarily
represent a major Soviet threat to U.S. interests.


* Popular factions that we oppose cannot be bombed into submission.


* Unpopular factions that we support cannot be changed into stable, democratic
governments by purely military means.

The real problem is to apply the lessons already learned at so great a cost.

MARGARET MACG. GUITON New York, June 1, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              391 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 13, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

HOWARD E. RUTLEDGE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 14, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 92 words

DATELINE: OKLAHOMA CITY, June 12


Howard E. Rutledge, a former prisoner of war in Vietnam who was an unsuccessful
candidate for Congress, died of cancer Monday. He was 55 years old.

The Navy captain completed 200 successful bombing missions over North Korea and
Vietnam before being shot down over North Vietnam. He wrote of his seven years
of captivity and torture as a prisoner of war in the book, ''In the Presence of
Mine Enemies.''

Mr. Rutledge, a conservative Republican, twice ran unsuccessfully for Congress
against Representative Dave McCurdy, Democrat of Oklahoma.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OBITUARY

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              392 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE DEFEATS EDUCATIONAL BENEFITS FOR MILITARY

BYLINE: By WAYNE BIDDLE

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


The Senate narrowly defeated a measure today that would have provided new
educational benefits to American military personnel in an effort to attract
recruits.

The action came on a 47-to-45 vote withdrawing an amendment to the military
budget authorization bill for the fiscal year 1985. The amendment, offered by
Senator William L. Armstrong, Republican of Colorado, would have made benefits
that had been given to Vietnam-era military personnel available to those now
entering the services.

In other action, while the military bill was being debated until late tonight,
the Senate bolstered its support for the Reagan Administration's program to
develop antimissile weapons based in space. It voted to table an amendment
offered by Charles H. Percy, Republican of Illinois, that would have cut $100
million from the program's $1.8 billion 1985 budget in addition to the $150
million already deleted by the Senate Armed Services Committee.

Last month, in its version of the military bill, the House approved cuts of $400
million in the President's request for space-based weapons programs.

Air Force Lieut. Gen. James Abrahamson, head of the space weapons program,
observed the debate from the Senate gallery. He showed his approval when the
Percy measure was tabled with a gesture of his thumb.

Weaker Benefit Plan Approved

After turning back the Armstrong amendment on educational benefits, the Senate
approved a weaker experimental benefits plan sponsored by Senator John Glenn,
Democrat of Ohio. It would spend Federal funds to match salary deductions by
those in the military. The money would pay for educational programs.

The Armstrong amendment was vigorously opposed by the Republican leadership.
Vice President Bush, who may cast tie-breaking votes in the Senate, took his
chair at the head of the chamber when the voting grew close.

The defeated benefits plan would have provided $300 per month for 36 months to
military personnel after they had served for three years. It also contained
provisions for the transfer of these benefits to family members.

Senator John Tower, Republican of Texas and chairman of the Senate Armed
Services Committee, circulated a note while the amendment was being debated that
estimated the benefits would cost nearly $800 million a year by the end of the
century. The Reagan Administration did not suport the plan, Mr. Tower said,
because the armed services' recruiting goals are already being met.



Defeated on Technicality

Administration forces were able to defeat the plan only on a parliamentary
technicality, raised by Majority Leader Howard H. Baker Jr. of Tennessee.

Mr. Baker said the Armstrong amendment would have created an automatic benefit
program. The Budget Act of 1972 stipulates that an automatic benefit program may
not be established without a Congressional budget resolution for the fiscal year
in which it would begin. The benefits called for in the Armstrong amendment
would not start until 1986 or 1987, years for which budget resolutions have not
been passed.

A motion offered by Mr. Armstrong to waive the Budget Act in this case was
defeated by four votes.

Last month, the House accepted a plan to provide benefits to military personnel
in a progam similar to the Armstrong plan after voting to waive the Budget Act
requirements.

''I'm very disappointed that the Senate has defeated the G.I. education bill
which was overwhelmingly passed by the House,'' said Representative G. V.
Montgomery, Democrat of Mississippi, chairman of the House Committee on
Veterans' Affairs. ''I would hope that the leadership of the Senate Armed
Services Committee would give us the opportunity in conference to present a more
reasonable means of providing education'' benefits to military personnel.

The Senate planned to continue debate on the military bill Thursday. Mr. Tower,
who was managing the floor debate for the Republicans, said the only other major
amendments expected on the bill were those involving the MX missile system. He
said that those amendments would be taken up tomorrow.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              393 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Veterans Win Struggle Over a Civil War Law

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, June 13


Activists for veterans rights succeeded in challenging a Civil War law that
prevented millions of disabled veterans from hiring lawyers to fight for their
disability benefits.

The Federal court order handed down Tuesday was immediately hailed as a
''landmark'' decision for the veterans who want the Veterans Administration to
grant benefits as a result of service-related disability claims from radiation
poisoning in World War II and atomic testing in the 1950's and 1960's.

The ruling also affects Vietnam veterans denied benefits for exposure to Agent
Orange.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              394 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 14, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDS STUDY OF VIETNAM FILM

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 22, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 774 words


The National Endowment for the Humanities, under what its chairman calls an
emergency grant, has awarded $30,000 to a group that monitors the media to
assess a PBS series on the Vietnam War.

Acting under a statute in the endowment's charter by which he may award funds at
his discretion, William Bennett, its chairman, directed that Federal money help
finance a project proposed by Accuracy in Media, a lobbying group that monitors
the news media for instances of what it considers biased reporting, The $30,000
amount is the maximum Mr. Bennett, who was appointed by President Reagan in
early 1981, can assign without a vote from the endowment's council.

The PBS series, ''Vietnam, a History,'' a l3-part documentary financed by both
the N.E.H. and WGBH-TV, Boston's public television station, documented the
history of Vietnam through the American departure in l975. One of the most
expensive presentations in the history of public television, it was six years in
preparation and it received in excess of $1.5 million from the endowment to help
finance the programs.

First broadcast from October through December 1983, the series will be
rebroadcast for 13 weeks beginning July 3 on Public Broadcasting Service
stations.

Two-Hour Assessment

Reed Irvine, the chairman of Accuracy in Media, said that his group would
prepare a two-hour assessment to be offered to public television stations as
close to the July rebroadcast as possible. ''An answer was needed,'' Mr. Irvine
said, ''and since the N.E.H. put .5 million into the show, we asked for $200,000
for our reply. They said no, but came up with $30,000.''

Accuracy in Media, under Mr. Irvine, puts out a newsletter criticizing the press
and the broadcast news organizations, as it has since l974. For the most part,
it has scrutinized what it sees as a liberal bias in much of the major news
media. Writing on public television in The New York Times in l978, Mr. Irvine
stated that, ''it has proved to be more arrogant than the commercial networks in
its refusal to provide opportunities for the airing of views that it has
slighted or ignored in treating controversial issues.''

Mr. Bennett, who has said that he wanted to keep the endowment's grants away
from political involvements, acknowledged reports that his staff was divided on
the award, but said that this grant represented no departure from his policy.

''I met Mr. Irvine just once,'' he said. ''This is not a question of his
qualifications but that the people involved would be professionals. I consider
the proposal to be a fair statement of what they want to do. We don't make
judgments about the political vectors. I have rarely been questioned and asked,
'Why did you give a grant to someone with a serious liberal bias?' ''

Mr. Bennett said his impression of the project as presented was that, ''they
would interview the people who put the documentary together.''

Much Broader Sweep

Mr. Irvine, however, said he thought the program would have a much broader sweep
and would question the accuracy of the PBS series by interviewing experts and
participants on the war in Vietnam itself, and pointing out ''errors and
omissions.''

''We'll be talking to Vietnamese soldiers,'' he said, ''and American military
experts and journalists.''

About his decision, Mr. Bennett said, ''It is a small grant. It is an emergency
grant, technically known as a chairman's grant. In the middle of a series that
received $1.5 million in Federal funding, we got 300 letters calling it biased,
unfair and inaccurate. It seemed to me that $30,000 to give someone to make the
case that there may have been inaccuracies was not an unreasonable thing to do.

''When we got a proposal asking to do an assessment, we responded,'' he said.

''Considering the money that went into the production,'' Mr. Irvine said, ''we
felt that the money we were asking for our production, which we are budgeting in
the area of 00,000 was reasonable. We felt that an answer and a critique were
needed.'' Mr. Irvine said that he has a commitment for most of the remaining
money from Accuracy in Media members.

He cited what he called the series' ''errors and omissions'' in aspects of
Vietnamese political and military history, and concerning the life of Ho Chi
Minh, the first president of North Vietnam.

Stanley Karnow, the author and producer of the 13-part PBS series, reached at an
airport on his way to France, would not comment on the grant, but speaking to
criticism of the documentary said, ''We did a fair and balanced job. The
overwhelming reaction that we got from the public and the critics was
favorable.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              395 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 15, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

COMECON LEADERS BACK CLOSER ECONOMIC TIES

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 841 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 14


The leaders of the Soviet Union and its nine closest trading partners concluded
their first economic summit meeting in 15 years today, endorsing what they said
was a long-term economic strategy. What litle information was provided suggested
that, despite declarations of unanimity, the discussions did not always go
smoothly.

The concluding documents on economic cooperation and international affairs were
not immediately made available, but at a news conference Soviet oficials said
the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, or Comecon, allies had agreed on
measures for further integrating their economies and coordinating their central
planning systems.



High-Technology Development

They said measures had also been outlined for developing high-technology
industries in such fields as electronics, microprocessors and robotics. In
addition, they said, a new price structure for the sale of Soviet oil to its
allies would be put into effect.

Speaking of the meeting's atmosphere, the official press agency Tass called the
three-day meeting ''constructive and businesslike,'' and Leonid Zamyatin, the
Kremlin's chief spokesman, spoke of a ''frank exchange of views,'' formulations
that usually indicate some measure of disagreement.

Konstantin U. Chernenko, the Soviet leader who was chairman of the meeting, also
called the discussions ''frank'' and said in his closing remarks that in the
alliance's 35-year history there were shortcomings and setbacks because of both
objective and subjective factors.

In reviewing the meeting's achievements, he said, ''It is understandable that
good decisions of themselves will not produce results unless active and
purposeful actions are taken to implement them.''



Frictions Over Economies

Current disagreements within the alliance, which may have contributed to the
delay in meeting since the gathering was proposed in 1981 by the late Soviet
leader Leonid I. Brezhnev, involve frictions between those nations favoring
closer integration of the Comecon economies and those whose economies have a
high degree of dependence on the West.

The Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia and Poland have argued for greater economic
integration and a more efficient division of labor within the bloc. This
position reflects concern over the bloc's $55 billion foreign debt, and a
reaction to United States efforts to halt the flow of high technology to the
Soviet Union and its allies.

These arguments are resisted by countries such as Hungary, which is
experimenting with marketplace incentives and a liberalized economy, and East
Germany, a high-technology producer with special ties to West Germany.

In addition to their economic declaration, the Comecon leaders issued a
political document in which they called on the West to end trade restrictions
and work for peace.

Paraphrasing this statement, which amounted to a response to the London summit
declaration last week by the leaders of the seven Western industrial nations,
Mr. Zamyatin said, ''Attempting to achieve military superiority through the arms
race is the reason for the economic and political instability of the world.''

Mr. Chernenko also referred to the economic drain of the arms race when he said
in his closing speech: ''Socialism does not need war. It will be able to prove
its advantages in peaceful competition.''



Western Disruptions Charged

Mr. Chernenko said Western nations had disrupted international economic
relations by breaking off existing agreements and organizing what the Russians
call boycotts and blockades - such moves as the Reagan Administration's
embargoes on the export of gas pipeline equipment and high technology to the
Soviet bloc.

At the news conference, Boris Gostev, deputy chief of the Communist Party's
economic department, said Comecon leaders had agreed to meet every five years.
He said they had also devised a 20-year strategy covering scientific and
technological progress, an area in which Western economies have developed faster
than those in the East bloc.

Mr. Gostev also said the Soviet Union was changing the oil pricing system for
its Comecon partners under which they have in recent years paid more than the
world market levels. In the past Moscow has priced oil for its allies on an
average calculated from the world market price over the previous five years. But
because of dropping world oil prices, what was once a protective cushion for the
buyers has now become a burden.  ''Now we shall use a method more closely based
on the current prices in the world market,'' he said. He did not elaborate.

The session was attended by leaders of the Soviet Union, its six Eastern
European allies - Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Rumania and East
Germany - and Mongolia and Vietnam. Cuba was represented by a deputy to Fidel
Castro, who Mr. Zamyatin said could not leave his country because of an
''extremely dangerous situation'' created by the United States in the region. He
did not elaborate. Yugoslavia is an associate member.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              396 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 16, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodia Radio Says Vietnam Will Cut Troops

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 130 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 15


The official Cambodian radio said today that Vietnam would withdraw some troops
from Cambodia this month. It said the troops to be withdrawn included three
brigades and some regiments and battalions.

''The Governments of the People's Republic of Kampuchea and the Socialist
Republic of Vietnam have agreed to partially withdraw Vietnamese volunteer
troops from the western and northwestern provinces of Kampuchea and send them
home,'' the Phnom Penh radio said.

Vietnam is estimated to have 180,000 troops in Cambodia in support of the Heng
Samrin Government, which it installed in 1979 after toppling the Peking-backed
Pol Pot Government.

A coalition of rebel groups, including the Pol Pot forces, continues to wage a
guerrilla war against the Hanoi-backed Government.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              397 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 16, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

COMECON OUTLINES CLOSER TIES

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 29, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 15


The 10-nation Communist economic community published an outline today for closer
cooperation among its centrally controlled economies that appeared to give
Moscow a measure of the integration it has been seeking.

But Moscow apparently did not gain a major shift it had sought that would have
given the group an enhanced organizational role in coordinating the economies of
the Eastern bloc.

A communique issued the day after the close of a three-day summit meeting of the
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, or Comecon, said the members agreed to
coordinate industrial planning and to cooperate in high-technology research.

It also called for an increase in standardization in industry and cooperation in
the fields of machine-building, metallurgy and agri-industry.

In the statement, Moscow's allies accepted tightened conditions for the
continued long-term supply of Soviet oil and gas. They agreed to the
reconstruction and reorganization of their industries to supply the Soviet Union
with foodstuffs, manufactured consumer goods, some types of construction
materials and machines and equipment of a high quality.

Moscow has complained in the past that its allies, who barter goods for Soviet
energy, often send low-quality products that cannot be sold on the world market
for hard currency.

The Comecon summit meeting, the first in 15 years, followed a summit meeting of
the seven major non-Communist industrial nations that ended in London last
weekend.



10 Members and an Associate

The Comecon meeting brought together the leaders of the Soviet Union, East
Germany, Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Bulgaria, Rumania, Mongolia and
Vietnam plus a deputy prime minister from Cuba. Yugoslavia, an associate member
of Comecon, sent an observer.

The Comecon meeting was proposed in 1981 by the Soviet leader Leonid I. Brezhnev
but was delayed by his death and also by the death of his successor, Yuri V.
Andropov.

In addition, according to Western analysts, the meeting was delayed by
disagreements among Comecon members about the increased economic integration
sought by the Soviet Union and others. Closer cooperation would enhance the
efficiency of the group and provide a bulwark against Western economies. But
such Communist nations as Hungary and East Germany, with economies that are more
closely dependent on trade with the West, have opposed moves in this direction.



Few Specifics in Statement

Western analysts here saw the communique, which provided few specifics on
putting its ideas into force, as a move in the direction Moscow has been
seeking.

But they said the Soviet Union appeared to have fallen short of any radical
strengthening of Comecon's role, perhaps along the lines of the Brussels-based
Commission of the European Economic Community. That move has been resisted by
the smaller members of the alliance, who feel overwhelmed by their gigantic
Soviet partner.

Instead, the document spoke only vaguely of Comecon as an organization, agreeing
to enhance its activity.

Vague wording was also used on another sensitive issue - the role of the Soviet
ruble in Comecon trade, which is carried out on a bilateral barter basis and is
tallied in what are known as transferable rubles.



Viewpoint of Smaller Nations

Some smaller countries (particularly Hungary, with its advanced economy but a
huge trade deficit with the Soviet Union) would like the ruble to be given an
independent exchange rate to allow its free use among the member nations, which
have no hard currency. The communique, however, talked only of strengthening the
ruble. The wording did not suggest far-reaching changes in its use.

The statement also called for production of high-technology machines and
equipment comparable in quality and technical levels to that produced by the
rest of the world. In putting a priority on high technology, the communique said
special attention should be given to the development of electronics,
microprocessors and industrial robots, all sectors in which the Comecon nations
lag behind the West.

It also mandated conservation measures to cut the Eastern bloc's high rate of
energy consumption.



Call for Atomic Development

In addition, it mandated a change in the structure of energy production and
expansion of cooperation in the development of atomic energy. It called on
member nations to work out programs for the building of nuclear power stations
and heat-supply stations up to the year 2000.

In an accompanying 3,000-word political declaration, the Comecon leaders blamed
the West, under the leadership of the United States, for the world's economic
problems, saying the West's philosophy was to weaken rivals, squeeze them out of
world markets and establish control over whole regions of the world. The
declaration asserted that the West breaches existing agreements, organizes trade
credit and technological blockades and resorts to all sorts of pressures,
embargoes and sanctions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              398 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSITION IN 'ALTERNATIVE' PRESS FOCUS OF MEETING

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 930 words


First there was the ''underground'' press of the 1960's. In the 70's, it became
known as the ''alternative'' press. Most of the publications on display last
week at the Roosevelt Hotel in Manhattan, and the conversation about them,
suggest that the phenomenon is now comfortable as a tributary of mainstream
journalism.

''There's not too much room for 'hip' anymore,'' said Dan Pulcrano, 25 years
old, the editor, publisher and owner of The Los Gatos Weekly, whose circulation
is 15,000.

The Weekly is a ''hometown'' paper for a community in California's Silicon
Valley that, Mr. Pulcrano said, mostly wants to know about school boards and
police reports. ''We do rent control,'' he said, ''not Central America.''

Mr. Pulcrano was one of 75 editors and publishers who came to the hotel at 45th
Street and Madison Avenue last week for a three-day convention of the
Association of Alternative Newsweeklies. He has applied for membership in the
association, but the directors have not yet decided whether his newspaper is
sufficiently alternative.

Embodied Protest Movement


While the underground press had a clear identity as the embodiment of the spirit
and message of the 1960's protest movement, there is no agreement now on what
the alternative press is or even on how to quantify it in terms of the numbers
of newspapers involved, total circulation or advertising revenues.

Most major cities have one or more weekly newspapers, usually offered free, that
provide entertainment listings, shopping advice and some reportorial indignation
about matters the editors say the daily newspapers either miss or choose not to
cover.

Robert A. Roth, the president of the association, said the alternative press had
three characteristics: rejection of the ''objectivity'' in writing and reporting
that is the standard of daily newspapers, ''a purposeful stretching of the
common sense of newsworthiness'' as defined by the immediacy of daily papers and
''a readership of young adults.''

Mr. Roth is editor and publisher of The Reader, a Chicago weekly that he says
tries to find topics and writing that spurn immediacy in favor of ''that which
will seem most valuable in a year.'' For one recent edition, that translated
into articles on a stabbing at a church, a first-person account of getting a job
in a television commercial and a warning about the diseases children can get
from immunization shots.

Reliance on Experts and Officials


Mr. Roth said the ''establishment'' press relied too much on reporting what
experts and officials, like association presidents, say. Seek the views of the
common man, he said, Interviews with the rank and file of Mr. Roth's
organization revealed substantial respect for his business acumen, which has
made The Reader the flagship of the Reader Network, a highly profitable chain of
weeklies reaching from Los Angeles to Washington, D.C.

The conventioneers wore business attire and talked about business topics, such
as how to make a computerized analysis of changing circulation patterns. They
discussed the problem of covering the cultural life in a community that lacks
it, but they were as interested in advice about how to sell advertising or
expand the movie listings.

Stephen M. Mindich, a 40-year-old native of the Bronx, exulted in the success of
The Boston Phoenix, a 140,000- circulation tabloid weekly of which he is
president and publisher. The latest issue, previewing the entertainment
offerings of the city in summer, runs 356 pages and is, he said, ''our first
half- million-dollar week.''

In earlier incarnations and ownership, the paper could be relied on to savage
the establishment from a position on the political left. Now it spends most of
its energies guiding readers to the best in home computers, ''class act'' salads
and punk rock bands.

'One-Issue Publication'


''The underground press died because they were a one-issue publication,'' based
on opposition to the war in Vietnam, Mr. Mindich said.

'' 'Alternative' isn't unbusinesslike,'' he continued, noting that The Phoenix
had just bought a Boston radio station, WFNX-FM, on which it is broadcasting a
blend of music, news, entertainment and life-style features, reviews, political
commentaries and an arts and entertainment billboard.

Bruce B. Brugmann, 49 years old, editor and publisher of The San Francisco Bay
Guardian, which he started 18 years ago, has remained true to his ''muted
outrage'' over the ''Manhattanization'' of his city by high-rise builders, the
Chamber of Commerce and the board of directors of utilities.

The Village Voice, founded in 1955, was the spiritual father of the alternative
press, said Mr. Brugmann, adding that he represented its immediate offspring.
''We are essentially editorial people,'' he said. ''We had messages to give.''

Like Mr. Pulcrano, Katharine Fulton was at the convention to seek membership
approval for her paper, The North Carolina Independent, a year-old,
30,000-circulation tabloid that would like to be for its state what The Texas
Observer was: a voice of liberal Democratic advocacy combined with investigative
work on the state political structure.

Miss Fulton, a 1978 Phi Beta Kappa graduate of Harvard, said that so far, her
paper had managed to offend the state's major industry, tobacco, and was working
on the second, textiles. It is also competing with a financially secure
entertainment-oriented weekly and has lost $100,000.

''We are trying to do serious journalism,'' she said. ''Sometimes it's real,
real tough.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              399 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONFLICTING TESTIMONY HEARD IN INQUIRY INTO SINKING OF SHIP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 388 words

DATELINE: HOUSTON, June 16


A Coast Guard board of inquiry heard conflicting testimony this week on the
effectiveness of safety measures aboard an oil-drilling ship that sank in the
South China Sea last fall.

All 81 crew members are believed to have drowned in the typhoon that sank the
Glomar Java Sea on Oct. 25, although assertions have been made that some
survived and are being held captive by Vietnam. The Hanoi Government denies the
allegations, and the United States and China say they believe nobody lived
through the ordeal.

The crew included 35 Americans and 37 Chinese. Thirty-four bodies have been
recovered.

The five-member board of inquiry has held several public hearings since it was
impaneled Nov. 4, its final one a two-day session that ended here Thursday. The
inquiry into the sinking is to continue in private, and a report is expected in
several months.

The Glomar Java Sea, built and owned by Global Marine Inc. of Houston, had been
leased by a subsidiary of the Atlantic Richfield Company to explore China's
offshore oil tracts.

Thomas K. Sorce, a Global Marine safety inspector, said at the hearing that some
of the ship's life rafts lacked operating instructions.

In a report he completed last Aug. 29, he said that in life boat drills July 25
and Aug. 5, some crew members were not properly outfitted to evacuate the ship
and some members went to the wrong life boat stations.

The ship passed an inspection by Lieut. J. F. Lazaretti of the Coast Guard only
a week before she sank. The lieutenant told the panel that the crew did well in
a simulated evacuation and that company officials mentioned no safety problems
to him.

Capt. Walter McDougall of the Coast Guard, chairman of the marine board,
concluded that no information yet presented explained why the ship sank. She was
built to withstand severe storms, and tests have not shown any defects in
wreckage recovered.

The families of 20 American crew members are suing Global Marine on the ground
that the company's negligence in building the ship caused the ship to sink. The
company has denied the allegations.

Douglas Pierce of Austin, Tex., the father of one victim, told the panel that
his son and five other Americans had been seen in a Vietnamese prison camp.

Hanoi has denied knowledge of the whereabouts of anyone from the Glomar java
Sea.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              400 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STAGE VIEW;
TWO YOUNG PLAYWRIGHTS WRESTLE WITH VIOLENCE

BYLINE: By Benedict Nightingale

SECTION: Section 2; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1401 words


The atmosphere at the beginning of both plays is fraught, tense, dangerous, more
so than in anything else to have hit New York this season. In John Patrick
Shanley's ''Danny and the Deep Blue Sea,'' a sullen young man crouches over a
pitcher of beer in a bar, itching for an excuse to thump someone, perhaps break
his bones, maybe even kill him, as he suspects he killed a man who happened to
ruffle his nerves the previous night. ''Everything,'' he growls, ''

everything makes me mad.'' In Dennis McIntyre's ''Split Second,'' a thief
scuttles down a New York sidewalk, pursued by a black policeman with a gun, who
orders him to freeze and handcuffs him. The prisoner, who is white, whines and
pleads and then begins to mock his captor, topping each racial insult with
another yet more insufferable. The cop, his face turned away and glowering,
suddenly swivels around and plugs him through the heart.

For a couple of moments it looks as if we're about to get something rarer on the
American stage than in American life, a graphic experience of the violence
festering and intermittently exploding on and around the city streets. Two young
playwrights are going to shove a broken bottle, or its theatrical equivalent,
into our collective guts. It doesn't quite turn out that way, however, though
for different reasons. Mr. McIntyre makes violence the subject of an extended,
if anguished, moral debate. Mr. Shanley hardly seems to believe in violence at
all.

The bar of ''Danny,'' now at Circle in the Square Downtown, is in a less than
salubrious section of the Bronx. At a table near the seething title-character
there droops Roberta, a dim-witted slattern seemingly as self- destructive as
he's destructive. They fall into conversation, at first spiky, then acrimonious,
then a bit more confidential. She appears to think that the only escape from her
problems, which include fellatio with her father, is to eat glass or maybe
incite Danny to murder her. His way of coping with ever-present pain is, he
says, simply to find someone to hit. ''The Beast'' is what his workmates
reportedly call him, and the rough beast of Yeats's ''Second Coming'' is what he
certainly seems to be. John Turturro, a young actor who can count unusually
white, stark eyes among the many gifts showered on him by his Fairy Godmother,
glares and snarls and balefully rages his way through the part, looking as if he
might at any moment slouch off to Bethlehem to be born, like the monster in the
poem. Together with June Stein, whose Roberta somehow manages to blend street
savvy with goofiness, he successfully sucks us into a strange, menacing
half-world, a spookhouse of the spirit.

But then their author loses his nerve, his way, his sense, or something.
Suddenly the two of them are in her bedroom, talking about birds, the blue sea,
love and, even though they've never met before, the gorgeous show they'll make
at their wedding. There's a lost boy, perhaps even a repressed Romeo somewhere
inside the Beast: a revelation that may smack of the fairy tale to us, may
appear fantastic to Roberta in the cold light of dawn (''Youre a cave man
really, you'd be bouncing me off the wall'') but does not seem in the least
improbable to Mr. Shanley. Indeed, he'd go further. Along with that would-be
Romeo, an amateur psychiatrist has taken up residence inside Danny, and very
good at his job he would appear to be, too.

It's as astonishing a transformation as I've seen in a lifetime of theatergoing.
The Beast reaches for some invisible textbook in his brain, and starts earnestly
absolving Roberta of the guilt she feels for that incestuous episode with her
father: ''You've felt bad long enough, it's been biting you in your head long
enough . . .'' Then he launches into a little homily about her anomie and sense
of powerlessness. As the two ex-monsters draw affectionately together once
again, you can almost hear him and his author wondering who next to quote -
Freud, or R. D. Laing, or maybe Norman Vincent Peale? A bleak field-report from
the wilds of the Bronx, filed by a keen-eyed anthropologist of the theater, has
become a cozy bedtime story, told by a strangely sentimental social worker.



That's not the fault of ''Split Second,'' the play at Theater Four. It has much
more mental muscle; yet it, too, fails to sustain the impact of its opening.
After having shot his foul-mouthed suspect, the policeman, Val, hastily
substitutes an open knife for those incriminating handcuffs and submits to a
long, skeptical grilling by a superior. But then the action of the play moves
from the outside to the inside of his head, a rather less vivid and vital forum.
Should Val own up to what is, after all, a crime? Or should he follow the
example of a fellow cop, who strangled a swindling dope-peddler in Vietnam and
who now shrugs off the murder as a contribution to sanitation, akin to
incinerating garbage?

Val's father, himself an ex-cop exaggeratedly proud of the years he spent
keeping the peace in Pittsburgh, and Val's anxious, adoring wife add their
voices to the increasingly intricate, increasingly tumultuous argument taking
place in his head. What's his prime duty, to the oath he swore when he joined
the force, or to the family that depends on him and would obviously be
devastated were he to be sent to jail? And what, if any, is the relevance of the
color of his skin? Why should he tell truths that will destroy him, when the
white man has so little scruple about perverting or distorting them when it
suits him? And didn't he, too, fight in ''their'' war in the jungles of Vietnam?
And didn't white punks tie him to a tree, naked and festooned with poison ivy,
for five long hours when he was only six years old? Why shouldn't he strike back
when the gibes, the sneers, become overwhelming, unendurable? John Danelle plays
the stricken cop with great stillness and lack of ostentation, yet somehow
manages to suggest he's actually tossing and turning in a malaria-ward of the
mind. This strong, sensitive performance is the evening's one unequivocal
success.

That Mr. McIntyre, a white dramatist, can so stretch a black actor, would seem
proof enough of his imaginative reach and power. What he lacks is consistency of
discrimination, certainly in his writing, perhaps also in his thinking. He can
turn a crisp line: ''I didn't see any handcuffs, I just saw his mouth, then I
checked out his heart and it made sense, it was making his mouth move.'' His
dialogue can also become, if not actual soap, at least a bit sudsier than it
should be: ''I figured life was a little more complicated than staying alive,''
''There's nothing more complicated than staying alive,'' ''I can't live without
that man,'' ''Then get ready, because you're going to be living with a
stranger.'' Nor does Mr. McIntyre altogether avoid the sentimentality that seems
to afflict so many playwrights when overbearing fathers and balky sons are
trying to reach an emotional accommodation.



But what really troubles me is something more slippery. It isn't just that Mr.
McIntyre fails to explain how Val can claim to be (indeed, clearly be) a very
good, fair policeman, yet argue that law and order itself is part of a white
conspiracy. It's more that his play comes perilously close to asking us
intellectually to condone behavior hard to justify on any level whatsoever.
Gradually we're inveigled into seeing Val's victim as a spokesman for the
master-race, a nice, neat concentration of all its bigotry and injustice. But he
isn't. According to the evidence supplied by Mr. McIntyre himself, he's simply a
pathetically inadequate drifter, a failure even as a petty criminal, as far
beneath Val's notice and contempt as a thistle would be beneath that of an oak.
Is it so much more forgivable to kill him than, let's say, a mental defective
who has been insulting the doctors and making a nuisance of himself to the
nurses?

Still, Mr. McIntyre has written a play, and Samuel P. Barton provided a
production, that gets you worrying, arguing, defining your own particular
position on the uses and abuses of violence. That's a pretty uncommon
achievement these days. If ''Danny and the Deep Blue Sea'' is something of a
cop-out, ''Split Second,'' can reasonably be called a cop-in: a piece that uses
the conscience of a policeman to make you look hard and searchingly at your own.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              401 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A DISCUSSION: THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE HOUSE;
WHAT'S WRONG ON THE HILL? SOME ADVICE AND DISSENT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2042 words


R EPRESENTATIVE

Barber B. Conable Jr. is a Republican from a rural and small- town district in
upstate New York; former Representative Richard Bolling is a Democrat from a
mixed urban district in Kansas City, Mo. Mr. Conable went to Congress in 1964,
and early on became a policy maker for his party on tax and fiscal issues. Mr.
Bolling, first elected in 1948, was a protege of Speaker Sam Rayburn and an
adviser to the leadership after that. Mr. Conable, ranking minority member on
the House Ways and Means Committee since 1977, is retiring this year. Mr.
Bolling, who became chairman of the House Rules Committee in 1979, left Capitol
Hill two years ago. The Week in Review asked the two legislators to talk about
Congress, the institution, its powers and its practices, how it has changed and
how it might be changed. Excerpts of their discussion with Caroline Rand Herron,
an editor of The Review, and Steven V. Roberts and Martin Tolchin, reporters in
the Washington Bureau of The New York Times, follow.




Q

UESTION. It's been fashionable for some time to be critical of Congress as at
best inefficient, as out-of-touch, even as corrupt. What's wrong? Is it the
critics? Is it the institution? Is

it governing in this country? And is this condition new?



Mr. Bolling.  It's all of the above, and it's not new.

You know, there are a lot of myths about the Congress. In the relatively recent
past, there is a myth that (as Speaker) Sam Rayburn could do anything he wanted
to because he dominated the institution. That's baloney.  Sam Rayburn was
defeated more regularly than either Tip O'Neill or Carl Albert. He didn't get
defeated out in front on the floor; he was defeated in committee because the
committee system was in the control of (a conservative coalition that) opposed
the point of view that he had.

It's important to take a real look at how the Congress works. If this is a messy
institution, it at the same time is the only institution in Government which has
an opportunity to look at every interest group's problems and even the problems
of a good many individuals. It seems to me that the messiness is well worth the
trouble.



Q. But we have many more interest groups than we used to, which are often more
interested in stopping than in promoting legislation. We have what looks like a
new ideological tone, with legislators more interested in scoring points than
deliberating. Is all this a threat to the proper order of business?



Mr. Conable.  I'm really not that concerned about the feeling people have that
partisanship is somehow new.

I used to be part of a group called Rumsfeld's Raiders. We tried to reform the
rules of the House, and we largely succeeded because we didn't know much about
it: When you want to reform things you go to somebody who doesn't know much
about it. Dick Bolling, the perennial reformer, knew so much about the rules of
the House that he tended to resist Rumsfeld's Raiders. But finally we got some
young fellows like Tip O'Neill and others to join us, and we achieved what had
to be done.

That was part of the process of renewal we see constantly repeated here. I
haven't engaged in depredations on the floor of the House like that for years.
Why? Because I've had a central position and have been able to deal with issues
more directly.



subhede:




Mr. Bolling.  I have a somewhat different view of change and of reform. I think
the ferment is exactly as Barber says. But there are things that need to be done
- with the majority party taking the lead. The Congress has to be able to
function to a greater degree than it has for some time across party lines and
across interest group lines, or inevitably the party and the interest groups are
going to take over.

That's partly a problem of organization, and in recent years the House has made
some very serious mistakes - the enormous increase in the number of
subcommittees (is one of the biggest).

Mr. Conable.  One of our greatest problems here is we spend altogether too much
time trying to defend turf.

The leaders of the House are going to have to insist on some sort of
jurisdictional realignment so that every committee won't be seeking a piece of
every action that comes along. That greatly enhances the disorderliness of our
body. Energy, taxes, commerce - inevitably there are going to be other elements
in an energy bill that are referred to several committees, either concurrently
or sequentially, and in one or more of those committees there are going to be
people intent primarily on bringing the legislation to a halt.



Mr. Bolling.  You have another point there. Not only does the Congress have a
very hard time dealing with itself. The illogical divisions end up making for
greater chaos in the Federal Government's relationship to the states, the
counties and cities, because you have different committees being rivals to each
other and coming up with marginal decisions.



Q. Is Congress attracting a different type of legislator than when you began
here, and is this to the good or -



Mr. Conable.  Well, my impression is that there are fewer accidents in Congress
now. The competition is stronger. The result is, on the average, a high-quality
participant. But they're also moving toward professional representation and less
toward the role of citizen in Government. They've become a group skilled in the
techniques of political survival and less people interested only because of
their commitment to the overall system.



Mr. Bolling.  I mostly agree with that. But there's a difference occurring over
time. Most of those new people came in from '74 on. They were high-quality
public servants. But they felt that they could get by as legislators with the
same skills that they had getting elected.  You can get elected individually,
but you can't pass legislation except collegially. They're beginning to learn
that if they want a change, they are going to have to do it together. I think
they're becoming legislators.

Q. But don't these legislators need skills of political survival? If they were
just to spend a few years here, would they be any match for the people they
oversee?

Mr. Conable.  Well, it depends on what you mean by be a match for them. In a
sense, we in the Congress are situated between the experts and the executive
branch and the people.  We have an interpretative role, we have a cushioning
role and we have a questioning role. We veto the decisions of the experts in
some cases.  But the idea that we have to have the same degree of expertise as
those who are carrying out the rather complicated laws and promulgating the
regulations is a misinterpretation.  subhede:

Mr. Bolling.  And not only misinterpretation - it subverts the role because it
tends to make us move into the executive branch. The incredible number of
legislative vetoes (by which Congress delegated authority to the President but
retained the right to override Presidential decisions) in recent years is
directly related to the Congress misunderstanding its role.



Q. What will be the effect of the Supreme Court decision that the legislative
veto is unconstitutional?



Mr. Bolling.  It's going to bring some chaos, and we'll work out another not
necessarily completely written procedure that will restore some of the balance
of power. It may involve, for example, giving the President a line- item veto
(on individual programs in spending bills.)



Mr. Conable.  I don't agree with that. I personally think impoundment is much
more reasonable.

If you have line-item veto, the President is receiving a legislative power that
I don't believe is inherent in his office. At the moment of decision he decides
what the law will be by selecting among the various items and vetoing them.
Impoundment says simply that inherent in the powers of the President is the
right not to spend money that has become allocated as a matter of law.



subhede:




Mr. Bolling.  I think we have to get it out in the open and do it clearly.
Impoundment is a sneaky way that sometimes works and the other one is a
straightforward way, and I happen to be for the straightforward way.  There was
a President who was impounding money to such a degree that people felt that he
was changing policy well beyond the right of the President. And that's the
reason we ended up with a budget act.

The real problem here is that we make Government sound too simple. The
relationship of the executive and the legislative is very subtle, and you can't
with precision deal with some of the aspects of it. The place where you have to
have precision is the organization of the institution, (which) we've already
talked about as illogical and destructive.



Mr. Conable.  A lot of our problems are problems of leadership, and I'm not
picking on the current leadership. You know, from time to time we get these
panacea ideas - somehow Government is going to be greatly enhanced by this or
that device, whether it's zero-based budgeting or sunset laws or even the budget
reform act.

All of these things are interesting potential tools. Don't get me wrong. If
you're going to do a lot of gardening, you've got to have some garden tools. But
we better not pretend that those are going to be a substitute for the will to
govern.




JUGGLING EGOS, BALANCING POWER





Q

When Congress came back after its last recess, the top items on the agenda were
foreign policy, with the legislators getting into fairly minute areas, such as
under what conditions we can sell arms. Such involvement has been growing for a
while. Are we seeing a greater assertion of a foreign policy role and is that a
good thing or a bad thing?

Mr. Bolling.  In part it comes out of a series of mistakes, including the
management of the war in Vietnam, which turned the country off to such a degree
that the Congress lost confidence in the executive and began to thrash very hard
to come up with a countervailing power.

As often happens in extreme cases, the Congress went too far, and began to
believe that it had the capacity - more than the right, the capacity - to deal
with the detail of foreign policy matters. I simply don't think that the
Congress has that ability. The flexibility has to be restored, but it can only
be done with good humor. This is one of those places where good humor is more
important than politics and almost everything else.

Mr. Conable.  I tend to agree. We've overstepped our bounds on foreign policy,
and we do it badly. That's the reason the director of foreign policy and the
Commander-in-Chief under the Constitution is the President.

We do have an ultimate say in such things, and we can use that as a lever to try
to achieve more power than we're capable of exercising. Our ultimate say
involves the power of the purse strings, more or less a veto power after the
fact, and that's what gave rise to the War Powers Act.

Now personally, I don't like the War Powers Act, because it tries to delineate
the relative responsibilities of the two branches with too great precision. It
gives the President certain powers unquestionably for a limited period of time
providing he consults - a very vague word. It's much better to rely on the
vagueness of the Constitution and to leave both branches uncertain of their
powers so they'll have considerable incentive to consult.

Q. So often the political science assessment is that balance should be more
spelled out. You're saying you value the vagueness and ambiguity. Why?

Mr. Conable.  Because I believe Government is a collegial process. No President
should involve himself, for instance, in the use of force without a pretty good
idea that Congress is going to back you up.

Mr. Bolling.  And that the country is going to back you.

Mr. Conable.  Well, of course, the country gets its innings through the Congress
for the most part.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rep. Barber B. Conable and Richard Bolling ; cartoonscartoon

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              402 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEN;
THE WAYS OF FATHERS

BYLINE: By Walter Goodman

SECTION: Section 6; Page 42, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words


SAVING ARRIVED AT AN age when much of my reading is rereading, I find myself
engaged again with ''The Education of Henry Adams.'' I first read the book
nearly 30 years ago. My father had died recently and was much on my mind, as
Henry Adams's father was on his mind during the writing of his inimitable, if
occasionally unfathomable, autobiography. I fastened on a fragment of his
characterization of his father - ''singular for mental poise - absence of
self-assertion or self-consciousness - the faculty of standing apart without
seeming aware that he was alone . . . .''

Now, I do not presume to identify with Henry Adams, that incarnation of the New
England aristocracy. And the idea that my father, Hymie Goodman, who arrived at
Ellis Island at the age of 18 from an Eastern European shtetl called something
like Chvonick, and spoke all his life with a heavy accent, had anything in
common with Henry's father, Charles Francis Adams, son and grandson of
Presidents, carrier of the authentic American stock, must seem like a Woody
Allen joke, all the more comical in light of Henry's tart asides about Jews.

Henry Adams found it only natural to walk in the steps of his father, to Harvard
College, and then as his father's private secretary during the Civil War, when
Charles Francis was the Union's emissary to England. The fate of my generation,
we children of immigrants, was to move inevitably and decisively away, not only
from the world of our fathers, but from our actual fathers as well.

And yet, were I to describe my father's mind, it would be in similar terms to
Henry's description of Charles Francis. He was entirely free of self-assertion.
He did not lack opinions about the condition of the world, which in my youth was
as bad as it could be, but they were offered quietly, with a touch of resigned
humor behind them, and never any display of personality in front of them.

I sometimes met him at the subway station in the evening, after his day in the
garment center, and we talked on the way home; and on Sunday mornings we talked
while walking up the Grand Concourse in the Bronx to Fordham Road. Everything I
knew in those years about F.D.R. and Hitler, I learned from him.  The opinions
were conventional for our time and situation, and some I changed as I made my
own encounters with history. Of course he voted for Roosevelt, but there was no
touch of hero worship in him, and of course he hated Hitler, but in the way that
one hates a disease. If I had to sum up what I learned in those years, it might
be that, when it comes to politics, it is wiser not to hate or to love too
passionately.  Since Hymie Goodman was never designated to be Ambassador to
London, I was unable to serve as his private secretary; the talks were what we
had. Mostly I listened on those quiet Sunday strolls; I believe that I could
still identify the scent of the cigars he smoked. When I spoke, (far more
assertively than he, showing off anything I had happened to pick up an hour
before) and uttered something particularly stupid, his comments were too mild to
be called remonstrances, but I knew what they were all right. I wish I could
forget the look he turned on me, of astonishment and despair, when I told him
that I had used the money I'd saved up from a summer job at the cleaner's to buy
a Voightl"ander camera, right from Germany. That must have been in 1938.

Well, as I say, I have been reading ''The Education of Henry Adams'' again. Only
now, I am the father. My two sons are almost as old as I was when I first opened
the book. So this time when I came to Henry's passages about Charles Francis, I
found myself wondering how my sons would sum up my character in their
autobiographies. Would they conclude, as Henry had about his father, that my
mind was ''in no way exceptional either for depth or range''? Not all that
flattering, even if they should go on, as Henry did, ''Within its range, it was
a model.''

Since I was freelancing for most of the years that my sons were navigating their
teens, I was around the house a lot, and they could not have failed to catch
what I thought about Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon, about Vietnam and
Watergate. In a general way, those opinions were as conventional in our suburban
circle as my father's had been in the Bronx. The boys drove around with me in
the spring of 1968, stuffing mailboxes with fliers for Eugene McCarthy. He
carried our district.

But when we took time out from the family games that filled so much of our time
together to talk about big subjects like Vietnam, there was little show of
outrage or indignation; those emotions never vented well in our kitchen.
Instead, I remember raising some simple distinctions that seemed critical to me
during those years: Yes, Vietnam was a horror, but it was not genocide. Lyndon
Johnson was obsessed to the point of disaster, but he was not Adolf Hitler. Such
elementary observations were not as unnecessary in the circles I traveled as one
might have hoped.



 EREADING HENRY ADAMS, it occurred to me that I was passing on to my sons the
lesson I had inherited from my father - in political matters, distrust passion.
What Henry Adams was writing about in his discreet way went deeper than the
quality of his father's mind or ideas, to the reverence and love (a word
scarcely in the Adams vocabulary) that he felt for this upright man, who bore so
loyally the best values of a country shaped largely by his forebears and people
like them. A theme of his ''Education'' is the transformation of America in the
19th century and the fading of those values. The world of Adams vanished as
surely, if not as catastrophically, as Hyman Goodman's world.

Both my sons are older now than Henry Adams was when he emerged from Harvard
College, still having made no progress in his education. Now and then, at
precious moments, both will remark, regarding some decision of theirs, that they
know what I would advise - and that presumed advice is invariably on the side of
truth and fairness. Often, I am, in fact, torn between those hard requirements
and what will get them closer to their hour's objectives, but I would not for
the world contradict them. I am content to interpret their compliment as their
way of showing respect and affection. That, I think, is what Henry Adams was
trying to convey in his elaborate reminiscences of his father; that is what I
have been trying to do in this recollection.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawing

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              403 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VOICES FROM THE LEFT

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5910 words


DURING THE CLAMOR OF the Presidential campaign, a familiar voice seems strangely
muted. The more-or-less middle-of-the-road Democratic candidates can be heard
loud and occasionally clear, as can the neoconservative thinkers and their
President. But who and where are the thinkers of the left? Why have they been so
relatively silent? What ideas and programs do they stand for? How do they see
the nation's future?

The editors of The New York Times Magazine put these questions to two spokesmen
for the democratic left: Irving Howe, editor of Dissent, and Michael Harrington,
co-chairman of the Democratic Socialists of America.



HOWE: Is there an American left today? I mean, a more-or-less organized movement
which plays a role in our national life?

HARRINGTON: Yes and no. There are thousands of activists in the unions, the
black organizations, the women's movement, the community organizing groups who
are inspired by a democratic-left vision. They constitute a sort of network.

HOWE: Network?

HARRINGTON: We don't have a coherent, unified party - like the Socialist Party
of Norman Thomas in the 1930's. The effort to keep a left-wing party has pretty
much collapsed. And for many reasons: The American electoral system severely
handicaps third parties, but there is still an informal community - numbering,
I'd guess, between 20,000 and 30,000 people - who work together. Some think of
themselves as socialists, and belong to the organization of which I'm
co-chairman, Democratic Socialists of America - not a party but a sort of
activist-educational league. Others contribute to the magazine you edit,
Dissent.

So when we use the term ''democratic left,'' we mean a spectrum of opinion to
the left of conventional liberalism, including both socialists and freelance
radicals. We all believe in democracy, we all want social change.

HOWE: This ''network'' tries to put a little starch into traditional liberalism,
does practical work in popular movements, and also keeps alive the ideas of
democratic socialism.

HARRINGTON: All of this means, of course, that the left has suffered defeats
over the past decade or so - that's just a fact. But there've been some good
results, too. We've had a healing of relationships, especially between older
socialists like you and me and part of the New Left of the 1960's. Time passed,
tempers cooled, old disputes faded. And by now practically everyone on the left
agrees that the Democratic Party, with all its flaws, must be our main political
arena.

That would have been heresy at New Left gatherings in, say, 1969. Well, that's
over with - there's a distinct realism now within the left on what we can do in
American political life.

HOWE: But we've changed, too. We're more ready to see the virtue of some of the
venturesome ideas of the New Left, such as its stress on ''participatory
democracy.'' And while we're talking about intraleft matters, let me just
mention the question of Stalinism. There was a time when the Communists were a
major force, a terrible problem, within the American left. That's over with -
forever, I hope. So I'd say that whatever else, we of the democratic left did
win the intellectual battle against Stalinism these past several decades.

HARRINGTON: At a heavy price.

HOWE: The exhaustion of generations, a lot of bitter polemics. But we had no
choice: It was an obligation of moral hygiene.

HARRINGTON: I'd add that now, in the democratic socialist milieu, there's even a
small but significant group of former Communist leaders. They've broken with
their past, yet I'm sure they still feel a little uncomfortable with my visceral
anti-Communism. So something has been salvaged from the collapse of the American
left in the postwar years.

HOWE: When you're speaking of activists functioning in the unions, Mike, and the
black and women's movements, maybe we should describe what it is that these
people do. This is not the old Marxist-Leninist ''boring from within'' strategy.
There's a wholly different vision of our relationship to American society.
There's a feeling now that while we are very critical of many of today's
American socioeconomic arrangements, we are absolutely committed to democratic
institutions. We work with one major goal, and that is the increasing
democratization of socioeconomic life.

HARRINGTON: An illustration of this shift is that when I criticize American
foreign policy, our intervention in Central America, the MX, I do that in the
name of the national security of the United States.

HOWE: And this is not just a rhetorical stratagem, it's a genuine position.

HARRINGTON: If you think back to somebody in the late 60's at an anti-Vietnam
War rally getting up and talking about the national security of the United
States - well, it would have been difficult.

HOWE: And you speak of the national security because you recognize that there is
a totalitarian enemy out there which needs to be met.

HARRINGTON: Our critique is that President Reagan's policy with regard to
Nicaragua does not promote the national security, it hurts it.

HOWE: All of which shows that people, even we, learn something from experience,
though it takes an excessively long time. We've learned that we don't care
whether people call themselves socialists or liberals or liberal leftists - what
we care about is the political direction in which they're going. So we work
within all the liberal organizations - some of us have even been out in the
field, campaigning for one or another of the Democratic candidates. We are loyal
allies and sometimes friendly critics.

You know, you were talking as if the only people committed to the left view were
intellectuals. I think it's worth mentioning, though, that there are some, not
vast numbers, people in the unions and the black community who also -

HARRINGTON: Oh, absolutely. Just to drop a few names: Congressman Ron Dellums of
California; William Winpisinger, president of the machinists union; leaders of
the women's movement like Gloria Steinem and Barbara Ehrenreich - all are part
of our democratic-left community.

On our left boundary, things are somewhat hazier. We have some people who
tolerate our tactical approach to American politics but who still prefer to
stress fundamentalist socialism.

If we look back on why socialism failed in America, there are many reasons, but
one of them is a sectarian attitude toward liberal reform. It is ironic that the
Socialist Party of Norman Thomas was all but destroyed by the Great Depression.
Here was the greatest collapse that capitalism has ever known, a moment when the
argument for anti- capitalism was right there before your eyes, and the
Socialist Party falls apart because it cannot come to terms with Roosevelt.

Every criticism Norman Thomas made of Roosevelt tended to be true. What was
wrong - I talked to Norman about this before his death and he agreed - was that
even though there were profound limitations to the Roosevelt reforms, the New
Deal drew upon and reinforced a mass movement for social change in the United
States. The Socialists made a terrible mistake in counterposing themselves to
it.

HOWE : But let's come back to liberalism today. We're saying that we see
ourselves as part of a reformist impulse in American society, that we share many
of the values of traditional liberalism (civil rights, political freedoms,
tolerance), but that we wish to extend those values into areas of social and
economic life traditional liberalism has shied away from.

HARRINGTON: I would add that out there, in the real world, there still exists
something called capitalism. For all of its changes, it still exists. What has
to be put on the agenda is structural change. The value of having a socialist
analysis of capitalism is that it allows us to advance some very large ultimate
goals while trying to realize what is possible now.

HOWE: What we're speaking of used to be called Fabianism or a social-democratic
reformist policy of incremental changes which create a welfare state that
modulates and humanizes capitalist society.

HARRINGTON: One thing that distinguishes us from the English Fabians is that we
reject their bias of a top-down elitist permeation of society. We are Fabians in
that we understand that reforms are going to come by stages.

But we depart from the Fabians - and this is a very American emphasis - in our
insistence on popular participation.

HOWE: As I see it, what happened in the last 50 years was a major social and
political change, the creation of a rudimentary welfare state ushered in by
Roosevelt and continued by Truman and Lyndon Johnson.  Under the Reagan
Administration, there has been a partial retreat from the welfare state, as a
result of planned government attacks. But from our point of view, it is
necessary for the country to enter what I call the second phase of the welfare
state, which is much more difficult and much more complicated, because now
corporate power has to be challenged and at least some national economic
planning, democratically executed, has to be undertaken. That's pretty rough
stuff for many Americans.

Now it's not as if the welfare state in the 30's came out of thin air. We all
know Franklin Roosevelt, when he campaigned for President, didn't really make
any proposals for reform. But once in office, out of sheer desperation he picked
up some of the ideas that had been developed for many years by thinkers of the
left.

Now we're in an interesting stage where the left has begun to do programmatic
work in preparation for what we expect, or hope, will be the next surge forward
of American liberalism. That programmatic work, which we'll discuss in a moment,
isn't by any means yet complete, but I think we are living through a phase
something like that of the intellectual preparation before the New Deal.

HARRINGTON: I am convinced - I'm not quite as radical as Wall Street on this
count but I'm convinced - that the current economic recovery is temporary, an
interlude between two crises.

The only question is when the breakdown of this recovery will occur - most
likely after the 1984 election, which bodes well for Ronald Reagan and not for
us. But if I am right, and there is a renewal of economic crisis - let us say
more inflation and unemployment - in the 1985- 86 period, a lot of our ideas
could catch fire.

I think we are coming to the end of a conservative phase. There will at least be
a liberal - radical, perhaps - possibility, because the crisis is a very
difficult one to deal with.

HOWE : A lot depends on what happens in the 1984 election. If a Democratic
candidate, let's say Mondale, wins, then certain possibilities are open. He will
have to face crises not quite as severe as those of Franklin Roosevelt, but
still of considerable magnitude. He has not been campaigning on any very bold,
liberal programs and he's going to need something more than ''what you see is
what you get.'' He's going to need some substance and it's possible that he will
have to turn toward the liberal- left thinkers.

Of course if Reagan wins, then we're in for a difficult period.

One other point, Mike, before we come to our actual proposals, and that is, we
talk as if the larger political coalition around the Democratic Party is as
coherent today as it was at an earlier point. Obviously it's not. There's a lot
of jockeying and uncertainty about internal relationships - for example, what
place is there for the ''Yuppies'' in such a coalition? How much influence
should the labor movement have?

HARRINGTON: What has happened since the New Deal coalition of the 30's is that
the class structure of American society has become much more complex. You now
have, for example, a middle class not of professionals but of salaried people
who work in large hierarchical institutions, but have a social outlook markedly
different from that of a production worker.

I think that the generational differences Gary Hart is stressing are profound.
Such factors make it difficult to put together an electoral coalition. We
certainly saw that during the 1960's, where you had a college-educated movement
which was right on the issue of the war but often needlessly angered patriotic
working people.

We have a similar problem within the left. The Marxist left of the 30's had a
vision of the proletariat as a single cohesive agent of social change. Everybody
remotely aware of what is now going on has abandoned that perspective. Like
American society itself, the left has become much more fragmented.

HOWE: Let's come to the question people ask us: ''What do you want, short of
some distant socialist goal? What do you want done in this country during the
coming period?''

I could mention a few immediate concerns. For example, we are totally against
the shameful interventionist policy that Reagan has introduced in Nicaragua. We
favor sustained negotiations on nuclear arms with the Soviet Union.

These are points which are not unique to the democratic left; most ordinary
liberals would agree.

HARRINGTON: Right. But on international issues I think there are distinctively
socialist analyses and emphases. For instance, there's the familiar idea that
revolutions in the third world are usually more a result of poverty than of
Soviet plots. Socialists would take that proposition to its conclusion. There is
a world capitalist market which systematically transfers wealth from the poor to
the rich. The terms of trade - the low prices the poor nations normally receive
from us and the high prices they pay to us - lead to that result.

That pattern affects even a ''middle-class'' developing country like Brazil. It
has successfully commercialized its agriculture and increased production in
recent years, but one consequence is more hunger, particularly in the Northeast.
In adapting to the world market it destroyed the subsistence plots of land.

So there is a ''new colonialism'' which often sends in the International
Monetary Fund rather than the Marines. In the Dominican Republic, a socialist
government recently faced riots because the I.M.F. forced it to accept a
bankers' ''discipline'' and raise the price of food and other necessities. In
this setup, money is more sovereign than independent governments.

HOWE: Are there socialist solutions to these problems that go beyond liberalism?


HARRINGTON: I'd be more modest and say, socialist emphases. The so-called Brandt
Commission, headed by Willy Brandt, the former West German Chancellor, was
composed of liberals as well as socialists, but it stressed the structural
solution of transferring capital and technology from north to south, from rich
to poor, with the proviso that these be used to help the people rather than
dictators of either left or right. The argument is that such a policy would
create jobs both in the advanced and developing countries. It wasn't an accident
that such an idea came from a group led by a socialist.

HOWE: Let's turn to the domestic economy. What's distinctive about the proposals
of the democratic left?

HARRINGTON: Let's put the question in a broad context. You've got Reaganomics,
which is a mishmash, but one of its characteristics is to try to roll back the
welfare state. It has purchased at intolerable cost a temporary recovery; the
mounting deficits and continued high unemployment make it highly probable that
the crisis will resume.

Second, there is a neo-liberalism represented to some degree by GaryHart, which
is opposed to the cruelties of attacking the poor but which says, ''Look, we did
spend too much. Government has to retreat. What government really should do is,
through tax and other policies, encourage enough private savings and then the
financial markets will allocate those savings and allow us to adapt to a new
international division of labor.''


There's a third point of view, represented by Felix Rohaytn, which is for
planning, but it does not look to the popular base. It has an elitist bias -
economic planning from the top.

I think on that spectrum - Reaganomics, neo-liberalism, and a kind of
sophisticated conservative planning - that where we come in is with the notion
that, yes, there has to be planning. On this we agree with Rohaytn. But we want
economic planning that, as much as possible, is democratic, participatory,
bottom-up. Second, not only bottom-up in process and procedure, but also
directed toward satisfying the needs of those at the bottom and the middle
rather than those at the top.

HOWE: Mike, let's go through some of the proposals that we make and then you can
elaborate. One of the criticisms we make, for example, of the Democratic
candidates is that no one speaks anymore about full employment. What do we mean
by full employment?

HARRINGTON: I would define full employment not, as is usually done in this
country, by an unemployment rate. I would define it in the way that the liberal
theorist Lord Beveridge defined it in England during World War II. Full
employment is when employers are looking for workers rather than workers looking
for employers. How many people are looking for a job is in part determined by
what people think are the possibilities of finding a job. Full employment is not
some abstract rate; it is a situation where everyone who wants a job feels that
he or she can find one.

One precondition is to reduce the workweek so that more people will be working
fewer hours. That involves all kinds of problems - it's much easier said than
done, but it's essential.

HOWE: The workweek has been cut before. One of the things that's so irritating
about conservative thought on these matters is the assumption that somehow we
have reached a point in human development where no further progress is possible
- the absolute dead end of human achievement - and we must, say the
conservatives, accept these limitations on the welfare state. I see no reason
for such a notion either in terms of history or the development of technology.

But when you speak of full employment in a capitalist economy, doesn't this mean
all but continuous governmental intervention, government work programs of
various kinds?

HARRINGTON: I think so. It's hard to suppose that the private economy in the
next period, particularly with the technological revolution now under way, will,
on its own, produce jobs for everyone. In particular I don't think it will
produce jobs for those now at the bottom third of the American social structure.
Government intervention is critical.

Having said that, I think one has said rather little. After all, Ronald Reagan
intervenes in the economy every day. The question is, how is it done?

HOWE: We have a situation in which the urban infrastructure is virtually
collapsing. This would seem a natural for government intervention.

HARRINGTON: One of the things that has changed on the left is that when I think
of government intervention, I want, wherever possible, that it not be done
centrally out of Washington, but through local agencies responsive to local
needs and decisions. Federal




 money is essential because the Federal income tax is the only progressive
source of public money in the United States. So, yes, there has to be government
intervention, but what the left would emphasize now is the need to get these
work programs as close to the grass roots as possible and to provide for input
from the working people and communities involved.

HOWE: You're speaking of a fairly complex and delicate mixture of basic funding
from the Federal Government with a good deal of autonomy by democratically
chosen local agencies.

HARRINGTON: Right. You're getting, as a result of the current crisis, a rather
dramatic increase in various kinds of worker participation in industry - some
good, some not so good. The contract signed by Eastern Airlines with the
machinists, the flight attendants and the pilots is one of the most significant
union contracts of the last 40 or 50 years.

In return for significant concessions on the part of the unions - they had to
give up wages and other claims on money - the workers now have 25 percent of the
equity in the company and 25 percent of the seats on the board of directors.

 HOWE: You have the beginnings there of the American equivalent of what the
Germans call co-determination, which means that you also begin to move - a small
but significant step - toward workers' control of their economic life.

Let's go back to full employment for a moment. Full employment was taken for
granted; it became virtually a platitude during the Roosevelt and Truman years.
Since then, there has been such an ideological shift to the right that many
conservatives and business spokesmen would say, ''Well, O.K., but if there were
full employment, wouldn't this lead to high inflation and wouldn't you then be
caught up in a vicious circle?''

 HARRINGTON: The policies we advocate do include a risk of rekindling inflation.
So do Reagan's; but leave that aside. Everybody on the left believes that there
have to be some controls. Wage, price, income, rent, dividend controls.

Reagan has his way of fighting inflation. It's supposedly ''no-hands'' - the
Government does nothing. That's utter nonsense. The Reagan method involved a
heavy use of governmental powers, through monetarism and other policies, to
disemploy about 12 million Americans. Their unemployment did buy us lower
prices. That is one way. You can roast the pig by burning down the barn!

HOWE: The economist Bob Lekachman says that a policy of controls doesn't have to
be all the way across the board; it doesn't have to include small businesses,
since to include them would raise the specter of bureaucracy and black markets.
He says that if you had controls over a significant portion of the major
corporations and major financial institutions, that would be enough. The rest of
the economy could continue on a more or less unregulated basis.

Lekachman also makes the point that there are enormous costs which are not
customarily recognized when you try to cope with inflation by creating
unemployment; not only the human and social cost but the government payments of
vast sums of money in unemployment insurance and other social benefits.

 HARRINGTON: The Reagan Administration uses a figure that every 1 percent
increase in unemployment loses the Federal Government $25 billion in the taxes
it will not collect and in unemployment comp and welfare it has to pay out. The
A.F.L.-C.I.O. figure is $30 billion. If you then say that unemployment under
Reagan was allowed to increase in order to fight inflation - unemployment went
up from 7 plus to almost 11 - even if you use Reagan's figure, that gets you
close to $100 billion of the current $180 billion deficit. That's quite a cost
to pay for the right-wing method for bringing down inflation.

Put another way, if we could get the full employment that the left talks about,
that would entail an enormous saving to the Federal Government because employed
workers pay taxes and don't collect food stamps.

HOWE: One of the things that's happened in this country over the last six or
seven years is a loss of social sympathy and a decline of social solidarity, the
rise of a very ugly form of ''possessive individualism'' which can be summed up
by the slogan, ''I've got mine, Jack.'' It's a tremendous change in social tone,
from, say, the early 1960's when we had a moment of relatively good feeling in
this country.

I suppose we have to give Reagan a sort of backhanded credit for this.

HARRINGTON: Reagan has done practically everything he campaigned for; he has
been more faithful to his ideology than any President in my lifetime. It's a
tragedy that the innovator really willing to strike out in new ways has come
from the right and not the left.

HOWE: Mike, let's talk about this mysterious thing called industrial policy.
Maybe it would be best to focus on one industry, the steel industry, in very
grave trouble. A lot of steelworkers are unemployed. The dominant corporations
are tending to place their capital elsewhere. The competition from abroad is
very fierce, one reason being lower wages over there, but another being the fact
that some foreign governments subsidize their steel industries.

There is a kind of technocratic elitist view of this which I find distasteful:
that the best thing to do is just let these industries, or good portions of
them, go down the drain and turn to high-tech.

HARRINGTON: There are obsolete plants that should be closed down. Or you can do
what the Swedish Conservatives did. They kept open plants that, economically,
were no longer viable because they had calculated how much it would cost in
retraining, unemployment benefits, relocating those workers as compared to what
it cost to subsidize them in a losing form of production.  They decided, for the
short run, to keep the plants open.

Part of the answer in America is to create other new industries. There has to
be, as part of your response to steel, a Government initiative to rebuild the
railroads, for example.

What then do you do with an obsolete plant? I think you phase the workers out so
it's not they who pay the cost of the transition. If the entire society is going
to gain from the efficiency of closing down the plant, then the entire society
should pay the cost, which includes the human cost as well. You phase some of
the workers into new jobs, many of which have to be created by government
planning.

Secondly, I think you offer certain subsidies to the private sector. I would be
for Federal tax subsidies to steel corporations to create jobs in those parts of
the industry where the demand is going up - specialty steel, for instance. If a
company was willing to go to McKeesport, Pa., and open up a profitable modern
steel plant, then fine, I would be for giving them a big tax break for creating
jobs.

Thirdly, there's been a proposal that a lot of people in both Pennsylvania and
Ohio and the steel areas have talked about, of creating the equivalent of a
Tennessee Valley Authority to try to cope with the problem on a regional basis.

Another idea is to take the advice of economists like Wassily Leontief and adopt
the goal of a 35-hour week.

Nineteen eighty-six will mark the 100th anniversary of the struggle for the
eight-hour day. I think it would be rather good if the A.F.L.-C.I.O. said, a
hundred years after the eight-hour day, we are now ready to talk about the
seven-hour day. Leontief says, and I think he's right, that if you tried
overnight to go from the 40-hour week to the 35-hour week at 40 hours' pay, you
would cause enormous harm since increasing the wage bill by that much could
decrease profits too much. And as the profits decrease you're drying up a major
source of new investment. Pretty soon workers would be laid off because the
company couldn't make it on that basis.

Suppose, however, company A paid you 36 hours of pay for 35 hours of work, with
tax credits and other governmental policies making up the other four hours of
pay. You will wind up with a total package of 40 hours of pay for 35 hours of
work; but the 40 hours of pay will not necessarily come simply from that one
company. It will be borne by society as a whole.

HOWE: Let's turn to the question of taxation and paying for the things we
propose.

HARRINGTON: Clearly, after the '84 election, tax reform is on the agenda. The
Republicans obviously don't want to say it, but they have got to take back some
of the money that Reagan gave away in the '81 tax bill, mainly to the rich.
Right now it looks as if most of the debate will center around the
Bradley-Gephardt bill for tax simplification. The Internal Revenue Code is an
absolute maze. Congress, when it wants to promote an activity, let's say home
building, rather than sending an individual a check to go and buy a house,
writes the tax law so that the interest on the mortgage payment is deductible.
That's a marvelous example: The bigger the house, the higher the interest; the
more income you have, the more of a subsidy you get from the Government. If you
rent, you get zero subsidy. So Bradley-Gephardt says we take away almost all of
these deductions. And in return we lower the tax rates because your taxable
income is going to go up as a result of your losing many of these deductions.

What worries me - and this is why I think that the mobilization of a left is so
important - is that this is the kind of debate that takes place behind closed
doors, involving technical details and fine print. The ordinary person just
cannot follow it.

HOWE: That's one of the real difficulties of politics in modern society, a
difficulty felt especially by people like us. In the old days, before
Roosevelt's New Deal, when we were fighting to get a rudimentary welfare state
established, the issues seemed simple and dramatic. Everyone could respond:
Should we have unemployment insurance or not? Should we encourage unions or not?
But once you establish some sort of welfare state, social issues tend to become
technical, a matter of increasing this social payment or decreasing that one.
The experts take over, and while the results can be tremendously important to
millions of people, it's hard to make the issues seem clear and dramatic.

 HARRINGTON: Pat Moynihan identified the problem years ago as ''the
professionalization of reform.'' People at the base are not well equipped to
enter into a technical discussion of economic issues. That's why I think we have
begun to propose the novel idea that public money be available for such debates,
so that ordinary people - residents near a proposed

nuclear plant or in a town threatened by a plant closing - can hire their own
experts. The steelworkers I talked to in McKeesport, Pa., were absolutely right
in their suspicions that the companies were going to sell them out once they
made wage concessions. Those steelworkers should have had their own experts to
come up with their own plans. Corporations

add the cost of their expertise to the prices that we all pay.

 HOWE: Let me raise one point that is likely to be made in criticism of what
we're saying. Most of the proposals we suggest involve a far higher degree of
governmental intervention - indeed, economic planning - than has been true in
the past and this raises the specter of bureaucratism.

HARRINGTON: The left today makes all of its proposals with as much stress on
decentralization and public visibility as possible. But bureaucracy is a problem
in every kind of modern, industrial or postindustrial society - whether it's
capitalist, socialist, or a mixture of the two. The bureaucracy of the
multinational corporation can be as unresponsive and self-serving as that of
government - and since the corporations aren't subject to democratic check the
way government is, they can sometimes be a lot more unresponsive and
self-serving. What is needed is popular participation and wariness; review and,
if necessary, dismissal of officials, and an interplay of opinions and powers
among autonomous social units.

I think, for example, one of the most interesting developments in the world
socialist movement is the idea of wage-earner funds in Sweden, under which there
would be a kind of decentralized social ownership. A tax on profits above a
certain level would be paid by corporations to a fund controlled by workers in
the industry and representatives of the communities in which the corporations
function. The fund would be used to buy stock in Swedish industries, and then
the representatives of this fund would actually sit on the board of directors of
these industries. There would be elections for directors of the fund.

HOWE: But let's be candid about this. It really is a proposal which moves toward
a democratic socialist society. And the United States is by no means ready for
that, simply because most people in America are opposed to socialism. So that,
we can't think of such an idea in this country. But the idea of local control
certainly has a strong -

HARRINGTON: Very strong.

HOWE: - basis in this country. For example, the idea of cooperative ownership. I
think that the modest trend toward worker-owned and worker- controlled local
factories and economic units is tremendously encouraging. It offers a strong
active force locally checking the possible excesses of centralizing Government.
It's often a matter of consciousness and awareness. Government involvement in
the economy is going to happen, whether from right or left. The question is,
what will its social stress be, progressive or reactionary, democratic or
authoritarian?

Well, let's conclude by talking just a minute or two about our conception of
socialism.

HARRINGTON: First of all, there's something out there, in the real world of
business and money, called late capitalism. And then there's an ideal,



 cherished by millions of people in the world, called democratic socialism.
Between these two views of how things ought to be run there's a clash, even
though, as the world has changed, the terms of that clash have changed.

HOWE: Concretely, we distinguish sharply between the democratic political
structure of America, which is precious, and the socioeconomic arrangements of
American capitalism, which we criticize fundamentally. For instance, I think
it's outrageous that America should have the extreme inequalities of income and
wealth (hence, also power) that in fact exist. It's deplorable that
multinational corporations, responsible to no one but themselves, should wield
the kinds of power they do.

As for what we mean by socialism, I can only give a few telegraphic clues. We
want a society in which economic life has been transformed in the direction of
greater democratic participation, so that workers may have some control over
their workplace and their work life. We favor a dispersion and decentralization
of the excessively concentrated corporate ownership, so that certain industries,
especially those with a monopoly character, would be socially owned
(cooperatives, worker ownership, regional T.V.A.-like agencies) and would
coexist with a private sector. We want to see enacted tax legislation and other
democratic devices making for a redistributive income and wealth policy, so as
to move toward a more egalitarian society. We want a social order that stresses
cooperative and communal values, even as it also encourages individual
personality.

So we are working politically through a mixture of what I call the far and the
near - the far, our ultimate vision of a transformed world, and the near, our
steady effort for social reforms.

It's not, of course, an easy sort of politics; it doesn't offer the lure of
quick success. But I think it's a good politics. Perhaps this country will
gradually move in our direction while avoiding our vocabulary. That's O.K. with
us. After all, what's in a name?


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Irving Howe and Michael Harrington

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              404 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

DARK SIDE OF A DYNASTY

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2662 words


THE KENNEDYS

An American Drama.  By Peter Collier and David Horowitz.  Illustrated. 576 pp.
New York: Summit Books. $20.95.

By Ted Morgan

STRIP the paint and you get down to the wood at the risk of finding the wood
wormy, which is what Peter Collier and David Horowitz have done by stripping the
layers of myth from the Kennedy family history. Mr. Collier and Mr. Horowitz,
the authors of an excellent book on the Rockefellers, have done this by
circumventing ''the Kennedy Damage Control Department,'' which sponsors a
literature of apology by courting friendly authors into writing congenial
versions of the tale. One is reminded of Piero della Francesca's commissioned
portrait of the Duke of Montefeltro. It was painted in profile because the duke
was blind in one eye.

''The Kennedys'' is a full-face family portrait based on a phenomenal amount of
freshly harvested research that its subjects will not find flattering. It is a
portrait of four generations, with the feel of lives progressing through
historical time that one finds in such multigenerational novels as ''The Forsyte

Saga.'' Except that if this were fiction, one

would say that it lacked balance, that it strained credibility, that it was
overdone.  And yet, for all its Victorian three-decker plot twists - the Irish
immigrant's family clawing its way to the top of the heap, the heroic but doomed
President, the generation of numbed and sometimes aimless offspring - the group
portrait technique succeeds.

Ted Morgan, the biographer of W. Somerset Maugham and Winston Churchill, is
working on a book about Franklin D. Roosevelt.  It extracts the family's
''Kennedyness,'' showing each character in counterpoint to the others, and how
family traits are passed on and adapted by each generation.

Psychologists call this ''compulsive repetition'' - an acting out of the same
behavior, as if the generations were programmed by some inner logic. Thus,
infidelity, and his wife had to devise a strategy for dealing with it, as his
mother had. Thus, when David Kennedy, the son of Robert Kennedy who recently
died in Palm Beach, was interviewed at length by the authors, the family
banished him as a traitor, just as Rose had banished her daughter Kathleen for
marrying a Protestant English lord. In its structure, the Kennedy family seemed
designed in spontaneous imitation of the Roman Catholic Church, where the
harshest form of punishment in this life is excommunication.

As important as the theme of the immigrant may be, it is well to remember that
the patriarch Joseph Kennedy was not just off the boat. His grandfather had fled
the Irish famine, but his father was a well-to-do liquor importer who served
three terms in the Massachusetts State Senate and sent his son to Boston Latin
and Harvard. Joseph Kennedy was thus a transition figure between the
untouchables and the world of political power he aspired to. He made his pile in
the unregulated stock market of the 1920's, and he understood that by having a
large number of children he would increase his chances of penetrating the
American power structure. How you made your money was less important than how
you spent it, and Joseph Kennedy spent his to satisfy the dynastic impulse,
which means viewing ambition in terms of more than oneself.

He spent his money also to exert political influence, contributing to the
Roosevelt Presidential campaign of 1932, and was rewarded with the chairmanship
of a brand new agency, the Securities and Exchange Commission. After he was
named Ambassador to England in 1937, his views emerged as isolationist, and this
blinkered outlook ended his career in politics. It would take more than one
generation to make the transition from financial to political power. What he
could not do himself he would leave to his children, whom he brainwashed into
accepting ''the world according to Joe Kennedy.'' Winning was everything. Power
was everything. Everyone could be bought. The competitive instinct was honed
through games like touch football, and through the teasing and testing of
''rough love,'' as the family called it.

Joe's four sons totally accepted the ground rules. There was not a rebel among
them to doubt the father's crude social Darwinism. It was like one of those
families where all the sons become priests.

One condition of this drive for power, as the authors chronicle it, was the loss
of the examined life. What did not contribute to forward motion was better left
unsaid. It was best not to mention Rosemary, the retarded daughter who had a
prefrontal lobotomy (never previously acknowledged by the family but confirmed
by the authors in four separate interviews). It was best not to look too closely
at the contradiction of Rose's life - a woman who desperately clung to a strict
Catholicism while having to ignore her husband's scandalous conduct. Because she
had no influence over Joe, she looked for situations in which she could make her
children ''do the right thing.'' She was presented to the public as Mother
Courage, but as Jack Kennedy put it, discussing the impact of her marriage on
her, ''My mother is a nothing.''

In Jack one sees his father filtered and refined, one rung up the evolutionary
ladder, at the point where gills turn into lungs. Predatory still, but with more
wit. Contemptuous of women, but less bluntly so. One of his women friends
recalled that ''he was as compulsive as Mussolini. Up against the wall, Signora,
if you have five minutes, that sort of thing. He was not a cozy, touching sort
of man. In fact, he'd been sick so long that he was a sort of touch-me-not.''

That was another thing. A Kennedy did not admit to illness, and Jack gave the
appearance of health while being in pain. His illness was the one thing he did
not get from his father, and in it he found the source of his strength and the
will to overcome, like Che Guevara overcoming his asthma and leading his men on
forced marches.

Jack was brought onto stage center when his older brother Joe Jr. was killed in
World War II after volunteering for a suicidal mission to fly a plane loaded
with TNT against German V-1 sites, and the plane exploded - this too was an
aspect of ''Kennedyness,'' a way of young Joe's saying,''Since I take risks
others wouldn't, I don't have to live by the standards of others.'' Jack became
a double surrogate, now having to fill in for the dead Joe as well as having to
meet his father's expectations.

Pressured into politics, like an English younger son acceding to the peerage
upon the death of an unmarried older brother, Jack was elected to the House of
Representatives in 1946, at the age of 29, and to the Senate in 1952. This was
what it meant to have the family behind you - and the Kennedy millions. And
then, in 1958, when he was re-elected to the Senate, an odd transfer took place,
and his father's expectations became the nation's. Two years later he won the
Presidency by a tiny plurality of 113,000 votes, thanks to the well-oiled
Kennedy machine and the fact that he fitted the mood of a people who wanted a
sharp alternative to the bland Eisenhower years.

Well, they got it, with a vengeance. The account of the Kennedy Presidency in
this book is simply devastating. But before one accuses the authors of a hatchet
job, it should be noted that even a sympathetic and recent biographer like
Herbert S. Parmet concludes that ''at best, (Kennedy) was an 'interim' President
who had promised but not performed.''

In fact, he performed too much and too often. The underlying assumption of his
Presidency was that it is always better to do something than to do nothing, that
activism is an end in itself. It was couched in the Kennedy vocabulary of
winning and losing, of we beat them or they beat us. And so we had this
obsession about Cuba, with the Bay of Pigs leading to the Missile Crisis, and
one harebrained scheme after the other for ''getting even'' with Fidel Castro.
Looking at it all 20 years later, one finds it stranger than Strangelove that
decisions affecting our survival depended on these ruthless Hardy Boys, whose
abiding motive was playing catch-up with the Russians.

But that was only part of it, and here one wishes that Mr. Collier and Mr.
Horowitz had credited the achievements of the Thousand Days - the Test-ban
Treaty, the consistent effort at arms limitations, the Peace Corps, the Alliance
for Progress and the cautious leadership in the civil rights struggle. Instead,
the dark tones are highlighted, and the causes of President Kennedy's foreign
policy fiascos are barely examined. He was whipsawed between the military and
the liberal wing of his party. President Eisenhower had dominated the Joint
Chiefs of Staff because he had held higher rank in wartime, while Kennedy could
only think to himself that he had been a Lieutenant (j.g.) when the chiefs were
leading invasions. They were condescending, and he had to prove himself. And so
he gave them half a loaf - an invasion of Cuba that could not succeed and, in
Vietnam, tacit support of a coup against Prime Minister Ngo Dinh Diem that, to
his horror, resulted in the deaths of Diem and his brother.

In the end, the evidence rightly indicates that he was a weak President,
insecure and indecisive, the opposite of his image, relying heavily on his
brother Robert and constantly referring to his father. When he met Khrushchev,
he said that it was ''like dealing with Dad - all give and no take.''

The Brother Act was something new in American politics. Bobby was not a Colonel
House or a Harry Hopkins, but a true extension of Jack; it was like having a
dual President. Not someone who spoke for the President, but someone who spoke
as the President. And there developed a situation resembling an Elizabethan
tragedy, a revised ''Duchess of Malfi'' - the faithful and puritanical Bobby
seeing the Presidency compromised by his brother's libertinism. For one of the
President's mistresses was also the mistress of the Chicago Mafia boss Sam
Giancana, whom the Attorney General was trying to jail. And these same gangsters
were being used in the plots to kill Prime Minister Castro. And J. Edgar Hoover
was providing Bobby with memos about the President's conduct. One has to wonder
in the light of all this about the argument that if John F. Kennedy had lived
longer, he would have done great things. To continue in the White House this
kind of antics, oblivious to the political fallout, and place himself under
obligation to Hoover, showed an inability to mature, a kind of juvenile
arrogance. Behind the Kennedy ''product,'' there was not only the bedroom gossip
but the heavy medication, the procaine injections and the reliance on ''Dr.
Feelgood,'' Max Jacobson, who gave him amphetamine injections. Those young
Kennedys who later took drugs had a precedent.

Bobby comes off rather better, also coming into his own after the death of a
brother brought him the succession. He conveyed a sense of latency, and his
commitment to the oppressed and the powerless seemed absent of cynicism. When he
was cut down in the midst of his campaign for the 1968 Democratic nomination,
one felt that his destiny should have been allowed to proceed.

But Bobby is the exception in the tale of flawed overreachers that Mr. Collier
and Mr. Horowitz have constructed from some 300 interviews, including many with
the more talkative younger generation (which was also their method in ''The
Rockefellers''), and from other finds such as the remarkable collection of
letters written by Jack to his friend LeMoyne Billings when he was still in prep
school and college.

It helps to illustrate the authors' central theme, which they call the shadow
legacy: ''The shadow legacy maintained that the Kennedy climb to the top had
involved contempt for all the rules and flaunting of all the mores, a Kennedy
recklessness and a Kennedy arrogance toward the laws that bound everyone else.''
So that when Teddy Kennedy, the last of Joe's sons after the assassinations of
Jack and Bobby, went off the bridge at Chappaquiddick, the subsequent cover-up
seemed like yet another example of the shadow legacy.

Small wonder that in the next generation the Kennedy drive for power was
redirected. There was the same energy, now devoted to other goals, such as
getting thrown out of school. There was an oblique emulation of the father, as
when Bobby Jr. chose to live in an all-black dorm at Pomfret, an odd reference
to his father's civil rights record. Even in nihilism, the old Kennedy arrogance
surfaced. The authors speak of Bobby Jr. going to Harlem to score drugs while
working as an Assistant District Attorney in New York, which was not unlike Jack
Kennedy receiving Judith Exner at the White House. It was again the shadow
legacy - Kennedys live by their own rules.

The authors have focused on the troubled members of the family, rather than on
those who managed better to handle the legacy, such as the President's children,
Caroline and John, whom their mother removed from the Kennnedy orbit. Those who
do not bear the Kennedy name, such as the Shriver, Lawford and Stephen Smith
children, are not under the same pressure; for being named a Kennedy places you
under constant scrutiny and makes you an exception, requiring special handling.

Perhaps that is what got to David Kennedy, the latest casualty, whom some of his
friends saw as the ''designated victim,'' the one chosen (or scapegoated) by the
family to carry the collective burden. Understanding the dynamics was not enough
to save him, for in doing so he had lost the Kennedy mantra: I am not to be
defeated.

It is a shocking story that Mr. Collier and Mr. Horowitz have told, and there
will be talk of bad taste and of things better left unsaid. But in the lives of
eminent men and their families, the line between the public and the private
becomes blurred if not meaningless, and it is part of the boldness and novelty
of this disturbing book to have abolished the distinction. In such lives, minor
incidents are instructive - gifts to charity, speech mannerisms, favorite songs,
yearbook descriptions, pet names and names of pets, how they talk to the help -
it's all worth dredging up from the Sargasso Sea of personality. The authors
aptly make the point by quoting Henry James: ''What is character but the
determination of incident? What is incident but the illustration of
character?''B



Few Were Forthcoming Four years and nearly 300 interviews later, the authors of
''The Kennedys'' are taking a break before deciding on their next project (they
have an eye on the Ford family). Editors at Ramparts magazine 15 years ago, and
best friends, they wrote the book to ''get behind the kinds of mythology that
had encrusted the Kennedy family,'' Peter Collier said recently from Berkeley,
Calif., in a three-way phone conversation. ''If you want myth,'' said David
Horowitz, from Los Angeles, ''the healthy thing is to believe in movie stars.
Mythology is not necessary in order to believe in achievement.'' Of the Kennedy
''middle'' generation, only Eunice Kennedy Shriver talked to the authors. Mr.
Collier said Mrs. Shriver ''is regarded as the conscience of the generation and
was aware of the trauma the younger Kennedys were going through.'' The others
were not willing to be interviewed, he said. In 1983, after David Kennedy had
spoken at length with the authors, Mr. Collier said, ''The family forced him to
go to a lawyer in Boston to see if he could retract what he had said.'' The
refusal by many people close to the Kennedys to be interviewed, Mr. Horowitz
said, reflected their fear that the family would ostracize them. In contrast,
some members of the younger generation and their friends were forthcoming, Mr.
Collier said, ''because we had more material on the family than they did and
would reveal it to them. There was so much to be suppressed within this family,
so much that couldn't be talked about.'' -Andrea Stevens

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A photograph accompanying the review of ''The Kennedys'' (June 17) was
incorrectly dated. The photograph was taken in 1937.


GRAPHIC: photo of Peter Collier and David Horowitz; photo of Joseph P. Kennedy
seated with wife Rose and children

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              405 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SORT OF AN EMPRESS-OF-FASHION THING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1067 words


Charlotte Curtis is an Associate Editor of The New York Times.  D. V.

By Diana Vreeland.  Edited by George Plimpton and Christopher Hemphill.  196 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $15.95.

By Charlotte Curtis

IN the 1960's, Diana Vreeland reigned over Vogue

magazine and the American fashion mystique in

much the same way Louis XVI ran France. What

she commanded in her booming voice went. ''The ladies,'' aging or otherwise,
uniformed themselves in short-waisted, little-girl minidresses and great clouds
of hair. The wonder is that the decree didn't include mandatory lollipops.

Those were civil rights and Vietnam years, and the creep of the blue-denim
rebellion was as inevitable as the ultimate revolt against the order to dr p
those hemlines down around the ankles. Fashion imperialism was finished. Before
the decade ended, nearly everybody wanted to be liberated from something,
including Vogue. The magazine dumped Mrs. V. unceremoniously in 1971.

Yet aside from women's increasing desire to wear what they pleased, what these
and all fashion changes were and are about is the promotion and selling of
clothes, a big-money game at which the eccentric Dee- ANN, as she is still
known, instinctively excelled.

First as fashion editor of Harper's Bazaar, then at Vogue, she always said she
was simply reporting the news. But the ''news'' was often of her own invention.
She knew nothing of objectivity except that, like nostalgia, it was boring.
Instead, she could see a dress and, in her mind's eye, know exactly what sort of
odd model should wear it, and where and in what outrageous circumstance it
should be photographed and presented so the world would talk about it. Always
unknown beyond the velvet purlieus and now in her 80's, she concocts much the
same fantasies for the Metropolitan Museum's annual Costume Institute
exhibitions.

''Fake it! Fake it!'' she used to shout at various awe-struck and trembling
assistants and photographers, and she meant it. The so-called Empress of Fashion
has always exaggerated, embellished and invented to make a point.

It is no wonder then that her book, if that's what it is, is as absurdly
outrageous as those pictures of pouty beauties in ball gowns astride horses or
elephants. ''D.V.'' is not so much a memoir of any recognizable sort, but a
disjointed monologue based on tape-recorded interviews. In her real but narrow
life, Mrs. V.'s deliciously enigmatic observations (''Lizard is always best!''),
her pontifications, mysterious allusions (''It was all so sort of a Queen of
Spain thing'') and her non sequiturs are still available to anyone in the
vicinity of Manhattan's party circuit. Hence, it should come as no surprise that
somebody had to go back over the material to restore order.

Confronted with tales of Napoleon's valet pouring whole bottles of eau de
cologne over his master, the importance of the gallbladder, what Coco Chanel did
or did not mean to the Duke of Windsor and virtually no narrative (Mrs. V.
always counted on professionals to finish her sentences), the publisher must
have yelled, ''Help!'' to which the bemused Dee-ANN surely shrieked, ''Divine!''
- this being her favorite word. At this point, George Plimpton, a writer
frequently called upon to untangle other people's hodgepodges, must have been
approached. He and Christopher Hemphill, a freelance writer, are credited with
the editing.

Together, the threesome must have had a high old time. And the result is a
wacky, occasionally hilarious pastiche of anecdotes, conflicting statements,
dropped and mostly dead names and descriptions of who wore what where.

Little fact is known about Mrs. Vreeland's early life. She was born Diana
Dalziel (pronounced Dee-el, she tells us) somewhere in Europe (she claims Paris)
around 1903. Her father, Frederick Y. Dalziel, is said to have been a Scottish
stockbroker, yet she repeatedly describes him as an Englishman, and ''a raring,
tearing beauty'' to boot. Her mother, Emily Key Hoffman Dalziel, was an
American, ''un-understood,'' Mrs. V. says, because she wore gobs of makeup and
''traveled with a very good-looking Turk.'' She remembers a household that
''never had any money, never made any money.'' Yet there was always a car and
chauffeur to drive the family around Europe in the summer.

She says the family came to New York in 1914 and stayed briefly with a
grandmother in Southampton. Was it the same grandmother who had the farm outside
Katonah? Probably. But who cares? To Mrs. V. as well as her most ardent
admirers, reality and logic are too much the ordinary world. An invented life,
if that's what this is, is far more fun, and salable.


WHY not zebras lined up along William Randolph Hearst's San Simeon driveway in
her honor? Why not flocks of ''unbelievably beautiful'' but ''vulgar'' ''white,
white, white'' peacocks in the moonlight at the Baron d'Erlanger's house in
Sidi-bou-Sa"id, Tunisia? She claims that Buffalo Bill Cody taught her to ride,
that Josephine Baker and her cheetah sat next her in the theater, and that she
punched Swifty Lazar, the literary agent, in the nose. Why? Because he ''turned
to me and said, 'The problem with you, dollface' - that's what he always calls
me - 'is that your whole world is nostalgic.' ''

One suspects there is truth here, too, and it's not so glittering. As a child,
''All I knew then was that my mother wasn't proud of me. I was always her ugly
little monster.'' Mrs. V. talks about the British court and its denizens. But
she either worked in or owned a little lingerie shop in London and it was there,
not a palace, that she met the future Duchess of Windsor and sold her
nightgowns, she recalls in the loving detail usually associated with a ladies'
maid.

At the same time, who but Mrs. V. would recall casually looking into the sunny
sky over her father-in- law's Brewster, N.Y., house with her husband's
bootlegger at the exact moment Charles Lindbergh flew the Spirit of St. Louis
overhead on his history-making flight to France? One hesitates to intrude on the
old girl's creation, particularly since she denies the truth of much that she
has said before she closes shop, but Mr. Lindbergh did take off from Long
Island, flying east. And Brewster is a long way to the west. And that is the
trouble with this volume. The stories are funny. But she has faked it once too
often.B



LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Diana Vreeland

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              406 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS June 17, 1984

SECTION: Section 7; Page 30, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1330 words


Fiction1

14

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  2

44

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  3

215

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  4

310

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  5

53

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  6

83

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  6

711

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  8

1

BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams.  (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by the
author of ''Masquerade,'' offering a prize for the finder of the book's true
title. 8

103

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  10

614

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  11

1

POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A
woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears.  12

1

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES, by Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row,
$15.95.) A novella and four short stories by the Nobel laureate. 13

87

DESCENT FROM XANADU, by Harold Robbins.  (Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) A man who
has everything - power, money, women - seeks to obtain immortality.  14

1

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932.  14

118

WARDAY, by Whitley Strieber and James W.  Kunetka. (Holt, $15.95.) What follows
the first nuclear war in 1988.




Nonfiction1

26

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  2

75

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  3

1

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  4

38

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' TV series.  5

415

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  6

139

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  7

67

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  7

514

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  9

132

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  10

114

NATALIE, by Lana Wood. (Putnam, $15.95.) A sister's memoir of the actress
Natalie Wood.  11

97

CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Secretary of State gives his views on foreign policy.  12

718

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.  13

1

POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix Corporation.  14

107

KNOCK WOOD, by Candice Bergen. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster, $15.95.) The
autobiography of the actress, daughter of Edgar Bergen.  15

1323

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin.  (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  15

1190

A LIGHT IN THE ATTIC, by Shel Silverstein.  (Harper & Row, $12.45.) Light verse
and drawings by the author.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

112

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

212

WEBSTER'S NINTH COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard
work updated in 1983.  3

33

RANDOM HOUSE COLLEGE DICTIONARY.  (Random House, $14.95.) New revised edition.
4

1

GO FOR IT! How to Win at Love, Work, and Play, by Irene S. Kasorla. (Delacorte,
$13.95.) Advice from a psychologist. 5

1

THE 100 BEST COMPANIES TO WORK FOR IN AMERICA, by Robert Levering, Milton
Moskowitz and Michael Katz. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Profiles of the country's
most successful businesses.  The listings above are based on computer-processed
sales figures from 2,000 bookstores in every region of the United States,
statistically adjusted to represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and
How-to, five titles are listed because, beyond that point, sales in this
category are not generally large enough to make a longer list statistically
reliable.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

THE FOREVER STREET, by Frederic Morton. (Doubleday,

$16.95.) A novel about a young man who comes to Vienna, starts a

prosperous business, begets a son, who begets a son - and watches

the city's splendor turn to rot with the coming of the Nazis.

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE: A Father's Journal of His

Child's First Year, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The

newspaper columnist decided to record his daughter's start in life.

The result is a book full of love, happiness and wisdom.

HOME SWEET HOME: My Canadian Album, by Mordecai Richler.

(Knopf, $16.95.) A collection of sometimes funny, essentially

affectionate pieces by the one Canadian able to conjure foreigners

into reading about the Great Blank North.

LINCOLN: A Novel, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) A

massive work that is likely to be controversial, presenting

Abraham Lincoln as ambitious for greatness - whether at the

expense of ''emancipating slaves or enslaving free men.''

MODERN MEAT, by Orville Schell. (Random House, $17.95.) An

investigation, by the New Yorker writer, into the frightening (not

to say repellent) use of questionable chemicals and inferior feed in

the production of meat in the United States.

THE NIGHTMARE OF REASON: A Life of Franz Kafka, by Ernst

Pawel. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.50.) A vigorous and pointed

biography of the great Czech writer, whose short life (1883-1924)

was so deeply troubled and brilliantly productive.

SLINGS AND ARROWS: Theater in My Life, by Robert Lewis.

(Stein & Day, $18.95.) An anecdotal memoir by the well-known

director, with a star-studded cast, including Lee Strasberg, Stella

Adler, Elia Kazan and the ghost of Konstantin Stanislavsky.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              407 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

INSTITUTE SEES MOVE TO INDIANA AS A WAY OUT OF FINANCIAL WOES

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1479 words

DATELINE: CROTON


-ON-HUDSON, N.Y. - When the president of the Hudson Institute announced last
month that the research organization would pack up its scenarios of nuclear war
and move to Indianapolis, he explained that he welcomed getting away from ''the
power centers of New York and Washington.''

Relocating to the Middle West, the official, Thomas D. Bell Jr., added, might
help researchers think more clearly.

But interviews with Mr. Bell and other senior staff members indicate that the
main reason for the move and other changes at the 23-year-old institute founded
by Herman Kahn is a long history of financial woe.

The institute's troubles grew quite serious three years ago and, when Mr. Kahn
died last July, most Hudson officials wondered if the institute might collapse.


Outlook on New Move


Next October, when Hudson leaves its 22-acre, seven-building estate here about
45 miles north of Manhattan, it is expected to leave behind half its
professional staff of 30 physicists, economists and other specialists. Some say
they do not believe they can do their kind of work in a medium-sized Middle
Western city whose best-known recent acquisition was the Baltimore Colts.  Mr.
Bell and other staff members, by contrast, call the move ''fabulous,'' ''the
greatest thing since sliced bread'' and ''opportune.'' It offers them money from
the Lilly Endowment in Indianapolis and from a group of Indianapolis business
people, and links with a new university campus, access to graduate students and
a new role as a regional research group as well as a national and international
one.

The interest of Indianapolis in getting Hudson to help distinguish the city was
''an offer we couldn't refuse,'' said William M. Brown, a senior physicist here.
The alternatives were grim, he added. Several other staff members say the
institute's prospects are still bleak; most of Hudson's trustees and some
knowledgeable outsiders believe the worst is past.

''I think the downward trend has stopped,'' said Neil C. Pickett, a specialist
in international affairs, ''I think the move offers us the chance to expand
again and study what we want to study.''

Prediction of Prosperity


Even Jane Kahn, Mr. Kahn's widow, who said she was the only trustee to vote
against the move, predicted that Hudson would prosper if it found the right
research director to fill the post her husband held. ''I never did feel Hudson
could not go on without him,'' she said in a telephone interview.

The Hudson Institute was not just Herman Kahn's creature. Its clients and
competitors sometimes said it was Herman Kahn. A globe-trotting physicist and
futurologist, he had the genius and energy to do the work of three people,
colleagues recall, and his flair for the unpredictable gave Hudson a reputation
in some quarters as more free- thinking than conservative.

Mr. Kahn became famous in the early 1960's for his books on nuclear strategy,
including ''On Thermonuclear War'' and ''Thinking about the Unthinkable.'' He
and Hudson turned later to topics ranging from education to the economy of
Arizona to national energy policy.

From the start, Hudson faced financial uncertainty. Though Mr. Kahn attracted
government and corporate contracts on the strength of his dazzling mind, he
never built up an institutional endowment. Money apparently bored him and his
wife said, ''He just wasn't that good a fund-raiser.''

Problems in Vietnam War


He also tended to frighten off potential clients who wanted to know in advance
the thrust of an analysis, according to many who worked with him. In the Vietnam
War, said Norman Friedman, a Hudson specialist in naval strategy, he alienated
the military through his criticisms of the way the war was being waged.

Hudson's difficulties grew more pressing in the mid-70's.  According to Frank E.
Ambruster and other senior staff members, the key problem was a new legal
requirement that the Government take bids for consulting work rather than
directing contracts to particular research groups such as Hudson. In Hudson's
view, the new system, which involves long delays and much time-consuming
paperwork, has favored larger and richer organizations.

The Carter Administration caused the institute still more trouble. Mr. Brown,
the Hudson physicist, contended that senior officials of that Administration had
a strong ''ideological'' bias against Hudson's views on oil and natural
resources, which were much more optimistic than the Administration's. Mr. Brown
added that Mr. Kahn's earlier strategic ideas and studies of the Vietnam War
made him seem hawkish to Carter loyalists.

''Herman had a long-time reputation, you know, as Dr. Strangelove,'' said Mr.
Brown, referring to what he called an ignorant view of Mr. Kahn.

Stuart E. Eizenstat, assistant for domestic policy affairs under President
Carter, said by telephone from his law office in Washington, when asked about
any Carter Administration animus against Mr. Kahn and the Hudson Institute, ''If
there were such feelings, I'm not aware of them.'' He added, though, that the
Carter Administration's whole energy policy was premised on ''fairly
pessimistic'' predictions about oil supplies, and that Mr. Kahn's views might
have struck the officials as wrong.

Disappointment With Reagan


Some outsiders expected the Reagan Administration to be kind to Hudson, but it
turned out otherwise. Although Mr. Kahn spoke approvingly of Mr. Reagan's
economic policies in his book, ''The Coming Boom,'' Hudson staff members insist
that the institute was insufficiently predictable to get many new Government
contracts.

In late 1982, moreover, the section of the institute dealing with national
security, under Colin Gray, quit Hudson after a dispute over management, and
half a dozen Hudson staff members were soon working at Mr. Gray's new National
Institute for Public Policy in Fairfax, Va.

Mr. Bell, Hudson's president, says Hudson lost more than $1 million in defense
contracts as a result. Mr. Gray, interviewed by telephone, called the estimate
''grossly exaggerated,'' but said, ''People who would have given defense
contracts to Hudson went to our new organization.''

Hudson's budget sank in 1982 from $3.5 million to $3 million. Finding new money
was ''very tough,'' Mr. Bell said. The institute's estate had to be sold for $1
million to pay the bills. The staff was frozen and is still smaller than
officials say they need to compete.

''They were taking senior people and spreading them too thin,'' said a former
Hudson associate who departed with the security staff. ''You had to dash from
porthole to porthole. Herman liked it that way.''

Andrew G. Caranfill, a senior researcher, said: ''We ended up getting shorter
contracts. And that means you have less depth.''

The contracts Hudson took on to raise money fast demeaned the institute, said
Mr. Brown, who plans to move to Indianapolis.

Hudson also decided to seek the potentially lucrative job of managing the Center
for Naval Analyses, a Navy- sponsored research group. Earlier, Mr. Kahn had
wanted to distance Hudson from such regular defense work.

Morale Begins to Suffer


The institute's morale began to suffer, and Mr. Brown and others described Mr.
Kahn toward the end of his life as trying to conduct research, raise money
across the country and speak at seminars around the world. The task was
impossible even for Herman Kahn, said Mr. Brown, though one former Hudson
employee, B. Bruce-Briggs, who was Mr. Kahn's editor, said by telephone that Mr.
Kahn's speaking fees raised $500,000 a year and helped keep the institute
afloat.

Mr. Kahn's death of a heart attack was a shock here. ''We sat down,'' Mr. Bell
recalls of the first trustees' meeting two weeks later, ''and said, 'Are we
going to keep going, and what are our options?' ''

Soon after Mr. Kahn died, however, Hudson was awarded the contract to manage the
Center for Naval Analyses.  Mr. Bell said the job would earn Hudson an annual
management fee of $300,000 and that in 1985 Hudson would be paid $750,000 more
for research on behalf of the center.

Within a month or so, after the failure of attempts to find new funds and a base
in Texas, Arizona, Ohio and elsewhere, negotiations began in earnest with
Indianapolis.

Several Hudson trustees, including Charles Zraket, vice president of the Mitre
Corporation, a military contractor outside Boston, say they would have preferred
to keep Hudson on the East Coast. The offer of facilities at the combined
Indianapolis campus of Purdue University and Indiana University, and the
prospect of receiving $750,000 or more a year from Hudson's new hosts, were not
only tempting, but trustees saidthere were no other such offers. So they voted
May 16 to move.

''Look, it had to change,'' said Gail Potter, a trustee and former Hudson
president. ''Herman's dead.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 23, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article June 16 on the Hudson Institute incorrectly described the role of B.
Bruce-Briggs. He is a former senior staff member of the institute who edited
some of Herman Kahn's work. For the last four years of Mr. Kahn's life, his
regular editor was Carol Kahn.

GRAPHIC: photo of Herman Kahn meeting in 1982 with staff member William M. Brown

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              408 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

WORKERS' SUITS AGAINST MONSANTO GOING TO TRIAL

SECTION: Section A; Page 11, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 458 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, W.Va., June 17


The first of 170 lawsuits by workers seeking hundreds of millions of dollars in
compensation for medical problems that they say resulted from exposure to dioxin
go to trial Monday in Federal District Court here.

The trial will deal with suits filed by seven chemical workers against the
Monsanto Company, which produced the herbicide 2,4,5-T from 1948 to 1969 at its
plant in nearby Nitro, W.Va. Dioxin was a contaminant in the herbicide. In the
Vietnam War, Monsanto was a major supplier of 2,4,5-T for the defoliant Agent
Orange.

Each of the plaintiffs is asking $2.5 million in compensatory damages and $2
million in punitive damages. Estimates of the total being sought in all 170
cases range from more than $700 million to more than $2 billion.

Two Main Questions


The two main questions in the lawsuits are whether the dioxin caused long-term
health problems for the workers and their families, and whether Monsanto knew of
the potential danger.

The company maintains that there is no proof that any health problems are the
result of the dioxin or the 2,4,5-T. Doctors hired by Monsanto say repeated
tests of workers since the 1950's show no unusual deaths or illnesses.  Although
none of the plaintiffs has worked with the herbicide for 15 years, they say they
still suffer from various symptoms such as the recurring rash chloracne, aching
joints, and internal and nervous disorders.

A marked increase in reports of health problems came after an explosion in 1949
at the Nitro plant. A pressure valve ruptured on a machine mixing the herbicide,
spattering the material on men and equipment.

Many of the suits against Monsanto have been brought by the workers whose health
problems, they assert, were caused by that exposure to the 2,4,5-T.

The first trial is expected to last for as long as six months. It comes after
years of legal maneuvering and costly preparations. Federal District Judge John
T. Copenhaver Jr. will preside.

Lawyers for both sides say they want to avoid an out-of-court settlement like
the one reached in May between Vietnam veterans and six chemical companies
including Monsanto. The veterans and their families, who asserted that they were
poisoned by Agent Orange, accepted a $180 million settlement from the companies.

The lawyers say the case should be heard in the courtroom so that questions
about dioxin's health effects can be settled.

The United Steelworkers of America, which represents the chemical workers at
Monsanto, offered earlier this month to lend the plaintiffs up to $1 million to
finance their lawsuit. Lynn R. Williams, president of the union, said he
suggested the loan to show that the union took a hard line against exposure to
toxic substances.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              409 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ENDOWING DEMOCRACY

BYLINE: By Joshua Muravchik ;
Joshua Muravchik is author of a forthcoming book on the Carter Administration
and United States human rights policy.

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 783 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In a classic example of the old saw ''penny wise and pound foolish,'' the House
of Representatives voted last month to eliminate a proposed $31 million
appropriation for the fledgling National Endowment for Democracy. If the House
is imitated by the Senate when it votes this week, the endowment will die and
with it will go a promising approach to solving one of the most vexing dilemmas
confronting American foreign policy.

The majority of the recipients of American foreign aid are dictatorial or
autocratic governments. This is inescapable: Our largesse is directed primarily
at poor countries, and few of these are democratically ruled. Nevertheless, the
support we give to third world dictatorships has been the source of recurrent
crises.

In Indochina in the 1960's, in Central America more recently and perhaps in the
Philippines or Zaire tomorrow, the crises follow a similar pattern. Social and
economic grievances find few legitimate forms of political expression. Some of
the aggrieved are drawn to insurrectionary movements, which, whatever their
beginnings, usually end up dominated by Communists.

When the insurrection gains enough force to threaten the incumbent government,
the United States faces an agonizing choice. It can remain at arm's length,
knowing that triumph by the insurgents is likely to result in the imposition of
a new dictatorship no more humane than the existing one and probably
antagonistic to the United States. Or it can seek to shore up the incumbent by
dispatching increased aid and personnel, thereby incurring unwelcome
responsibility for the status quo. The very qualities that make it uncomfortable
to be allied with the incumbents also often make them thin reeds on which to
rest our hopes for resisting Communism.

Frustration with this Scylla and Charybdis choice spurred the Carter
Administration to develop an interntional human rights policy. Its principal
method was to threaten to cut off aid to various dictators unless they stopped
violating human rights, and it had some success. Political prisoners were
released in Indonesia; ''disappearances'' declined dramatically in Argentina; a
military coup was discouraged in the Dominican Republic. But the success was
almost always limited: Economic sanctions

can work to wrest some concessions from dictators, but they cannot turn them
into democratic rulers.  And so the Reagan Administration came up with a better
idea. (Actually, it revived an idea introduced during the Carter years by
Democratic Congressmen Dante Fascell and Don Fraser, but never enacted.) The
idea is to develop a program to encourage the gradual evolution of democracy in
nondemocratic countries. The method is to evangelize the democratic creed, train
democratic leaders and build the ''infrastructure'' of democracy - a variety of
independent civic and interest groups. The National Endowment for Democracy was
launched earlier this year to carry out this program.  The endowment's mandate
defies the pessimistic conventional wisdom about the prospects for democracy in
the third world and about the ability of the United States to enhance those
prospects. Certainly, democracy is a complicated way of life that does not come
easily, especially not to poor nations. But the examples of Costa Rica, India,
Botswana and Papua New Guinea show that democracy is indeed possible in the
third world. The examples of West Germany and Japan show, at an extreme, that
outsiders can help establish democracy where it has not flourished before.  Now,
only months after the endowment was created, a majority in the House - a
mischievous coalition of liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans - has
voted to kill it. The conservatives in this coalition are motivated by their
aversion to spending Federal dollars - especially abroad and for causes that
smack of ''do-goodism.'' What they are ignoring is that if the endowment
succeeds, it will be serving our hardheaded national interesets.  The liberals
in the coalition are motivated by a Vietnam-bred aversion to American
interference in the affairs of other nations. What they are ignoring is that the
absence of democratic alternatives in the third world is what often draws the
United States into the arms of the dictatorial right and tempts us to military
involvement.  The National Endowment for Democracy is an important experiment.
It will not spare us from difficult choices where crises are already upon us,
such as in El Salvador. But if it is successful, it will diminish such crises in
the future and help some other nations to share in the blessings of democracy.
It would be folly to abandon that effort before it has really begun.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              410 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 19, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Topics Persistence In Games and Life ''There's something that each of you
understands that no one else can ever fully appreciate, something that has to do
with courage, with will power and with the utter refusal to give up.'' That's
how President Reagan greeted participants in the International Games for the
Disabled on Sunday, and his words held special meaning for the American
athletes. For his Administration has mismanaged the Federal disability insurance
program, severely testing the courage and perseverance of the disabled.

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 112 words


Seizing on a Congressional mandate to reduce malingering, the Administration
terminated benefits for masses of the handicapped. Only those capable of
fighting their way through an arduous appeals process could win reinstatement.

More than half of those in a position to appeal were successful. But thousands
of others, particularly the mentally disabled, were not capable of fighting
back.

United States District Judge Lee Sarokin in Newark calls the policy ''a
heartless and indifferent bureaucratic monster.'' He was ruling in a case in
which a disabled Vietnam veteran had finally prevailed over the monster, but
only by virtue of his utter refusal to give up.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              411 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 19, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE;
THE STANDARDS OF EVIDENCE IN BOOK PUBLISHING

BYLINE: By EDWIN McDOWELL

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1226 words


What are the responsibilities of book publishers in a democratic society for
maintaining standards of evidence, proof and disclosure in the books they
publish?

This question, and the debate surrounding it, have been prompted by several
recent books on topical subjects that have made highly controversial
propositions while using questionable journalistic practices. Such books usually
construct sensational exposes or level serious charges against well-known
figures on the basis of circumstantial evidence, without attributing all of
their sources, and without providing adequate documentation for their
information or conclusions.

Two recent books that raise such issues are ''Vengeance: The True Story of an
Israeli Counter-Terrorist Team'' by George Jonas and ''In God's Name'' by David
A. Yallop.

The first book purports to be the recollections of a former Israeli intelligence
agent who supposedly headed an assassination team that killed Arab terrorists
responsible for the deaths of 11 Israeli athletes at the 1972 Olympic Games. The
Yallop book charges that Pope John Paul I, who died in September 1978 after a
reign of only 33 days, was poisoned because he was planning an inquiry into the
Vatican's finances and preparing to remove several high church officials.

The authors of both these books have largely refused to name their sources
because of supposed danger to those sources or themselves; they provide little
documentary support for their contentions and few footnotes that might suggest
standard methods of research.

In his foreword to ''Vengeance,'' Mr. Jonas said that he had to rely on his
pseudonymous ''Avner,'' the purported head of the Israeli assassination team, as
the sole source of some information that was otherwise unverifiable. But a
number of the ''facts'' in ''Vengeance'' were cast into doubt by recent articles
in The New York Times and elsewhere. Maclean's magazine in Canada, which paid to
excerpt the book but upon investigation declined to do so, recently described
''Vengeance'' as ''a tangled saga of deception and duplicity inspired by the
lure of large profits.''

In his book, Mr. Yallop lists as informants a full page of individuals,
organizations and libraries, which he describes as ''the tip of the iceberg.''
But he does not always say which fact came from which source, and therefore some
people consider such ''documentation'' pointless. Worse yet, it suggests that
his shocking conclusions may have come from some perfectly reputable library
included in his list, without giving the reader a way to check this information.
The Vatican press office last week denounced the book's conclusions as ''absurd
fantasies,'' adding, ''It is shocking and deplorable that anyone could so much
as think let alone publish theories of this kind.''

The Background

Books have always dealt with controversy, and, early in this century, Ida
Tarbell, Lincoln Steffens and other muckrakers published a steady stream of such
books, blending original reporting with moral indignation to expose business and
government corruption.

But books on controversial topics are more common now, publishers say, because
word processors and computers have made it easier to publish books in a hurry,
because the public has developed a greater appetite for controversy and
sensationalism and because, in the aftermath of a Presidential assassination,
the Watergate scandal and skepticism of Government institutions growing out of
our Vietnam involvement, almost no thesis any longer seems improbable or totally
absurd. Last, but far from least, there is also what Maclean's described as
''the lure of large profits.''

The Argument For Present Standards

Most book publishers, however, disagree that there is a serious problem. The
proper analogy for their industry, they say, is not the newspaper or magazine
article, but the signed column - that blend of fact and opinion aimed at
promoting a particular point of view.

Moreover, publishers do not necessarily endorse books that they publish. Bantam
officials, for example, said that their publication of ''In God's Name'' should
not necessarily be construed as an endorsement of the book's conclusions. ''But
we are completely convinced that where the author is concerned, his book is
written in good faith and is true to the best of his knowledge,'' Linda Grey,
Bantam's adult-book editorial director, said.

As for checking facts, Michael Korda, editor in chief of Simon and Schuster, the
American publisher of ''Vengeance,'' recently summarized the prevailing view of
book publishers when he said, ''We operate on a different basis than a
newspaper. We don't have a staff of hundreds of reporters to check every book we
publish. We start from the assumption that it's the author's book. If it isn't
libelous, the weight of responsibility is to let the author tell his story.''

Moreover, publishers argue that democratic values are preserved by their
publishing a multitude of opinions, rather than only books they approve of. ''I
can only name one book published in the last dozen years I absolutely wouldn't
have published, a book on how to make a bomb,'' Howard Kaminsky, president of
Warner Books, said.

The Argument Against Weakening Standards

What critics of these controversial books find unsettling, they say, is not so
much the accusations or themes raised, but the erosion of generally accepted
journalistic standards - i.e., that authors reveal sources, that facts be
checked, that quoted or transcribed material be attributed and that
controversial statements be verified by independent commentators.

A New York Times random survey of book publishers last December found that while
publishers generally ask lawyers to check potentially libelous or defamatory
statements in a manuscript, few houses employ fact checkers. Copy editors and
even proofreaders are encouraged to catch errors, but the ultimate
responsibility for accuracy rests with the author.

Charles Trueheart, associate director of the Institute of Politics at Harvard
University, acknowledges that publishers face a dilemma. ''Part of the process
of signing a contract with an author involves trusting his ability to get his
facts straight.''

But Mr. Trueheart, previously the Western correspondent for Publishers Weekly,
noted the irony that the facts in books, which many people regard as more
authoritative than newspapers or magazines, have actually become less reliable.
''Maybe the solution,'' he said, ''is for each publishing house to have a
fact-checker who will randomly check, say, 25 facts in a manuscript, and then if
he finds errors give it a much closer going over.''

The Outlook

Some industry observers predict that the threat of libel litigation will dampen
publishers' appetites for controversial books.

But most industry officials say that any such reservations were temporary at
best, for books with the potential for making headlines are already rolling off
the presses in growing numbers. Ideally, the caution would translate into more
strenuous vetting of books before they are published. But what the more
thoughtful of those publishers are concerned about is that the race to be first,
with its potential payoff in sales and publicity, could result in standards of
accuracy and fairness that are even less rigorous than those that obtain today.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              412 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 19, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

MUSIC: RAND STEIGER 'QUINTESSENCE'

BYLINE: By WILL CRUTCHFIELD

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 430 words


RAND STEIGER'S ''Quintessence'' was the standout piece on the Merkin Hall
program by the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers Sunday to
showcase its young grant recipients. It is a 13- minute work for piano, electric
piano, clarinet, cello and percussion; the organizing dynamic is passage of
primacy from one instrument (or pair) to another, as lyrical or transitional
passages alternate with bursts of virtuosity.

The drama of the thing catches the ear immediately, and so does Mr. Steiger's
striking juxtaposition of contrasting tone qualities at similar pitches. A
series of chords is struck on the piano and then, with the volume turned down,
on the electric piano; as the natural sound fades, the electronic one is turned
up. Tones ''bowed'' on the piano strings with lengths of nylon fishing line
mingle with those of the cello or (at the end, tellingly), with those of a real
bow drawn across a vibrating gong.

The percussion part seemed too pervasive, apt to dominate a listener's final
impression more than its role in the scheme of things probably called for. But
it's a piece one would like to hear again; different aspects of its
proportioning and balance might come to the fore each time.  Members of the New
York New Music Ensemble played it with exciting confidence and clarity.

David Lang's ''Illumination Rounds'' for violin and piano - the title refers to
a kind of bullet used in the Vietnam War - began as a gripping, obsessive
perpetual motion, but loosened its hold. Jon Kimura Parker played the piano part
with electrifying energy and precision.

A string trio by Robert Kelley spoke directly in its metric simplicity: the
rhythms were often either in unison or in easy-to-grasp opposition (melody with
accompaniment; motion over stasis).

Todd Brief's ''Canto'' is an intense, sometimes frenetic 10-minute soliloquy for
solo flute. Its ''extended'' flute techniques - intentional, controlled use of
some of the odder squeaks and whistles the flute can make by accident - were
brilliantly executed by Robert Dick, a flutist who has done much to develop
them.

The other pieces were accomplished one and all, but left less impression on this
hearer. They included a romantic song by Rodney Rogers, to a very sad poem and
an expressive ''Duo Concerto'' for cello, percussion and accompanying
instruments (the New Music Ensemble again). In a trio by Max Lifchitz, ''Yellow
Ribbons No. 2,'' the violin buzzed at a bleeping and blipping clarinet, the
piano joined in to accompany some lyrical lines, and the opening material
returned.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              413 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 20, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
POLITICS AND TELEVISION

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


WOR- TV presented a two-hour report the other night on the influence of
television on Presidential politics. It was a good and timely documentary, but
seemed to conclude that the influence of television on politics was not good.

The negative argument was that in politics TV encouraged the central characters
and the audience to believe in the appearance of things rather than the reality
of things.

TV's coverage of sports is quite different. It does not tolerate pretense. For
example, in the last round of the U.S. Open Golf Championship the other day, we
saw on the screen Fuzzy Zoeller of Indiana squander a four-stroke lead on the
back nine, and Greg Norman, from Australia, sink an impossible 40-foot putt off
the fringe on the 18th hole, after hitting a duffer's slice into the spectator
stands.

The audience, thanks to the TV cameras, saw everything: the stress of Fuzzy's
failure, the recovery of Norman, his final collapse in the playoff, and their
amiable respect and courtesy toward one another at the end.

No such accuracy or civility happens in politics, where everything seems open
but much is hidden. In politics, there are no instant-replay cameras to expose
dirty tricks or clarify disputes, but maybe it's wrong to blame this on
television rather than on the politicians who misuse it and the voters who are
deceived by it.

Here on the WOR program the other night were Theodore White, the faithful
Boswell of our last few Presidential elections; George McGovern, who is emerging
from defeat to be the conciliator and philosopher of the Democratic Party, and
former President Nixon - all agreeing that in this television age, what the
Presidential candidates say is less important than how they look.

If this is true - and it probably is - we may be in trouble. For who looks best
on the tube, they seemed to agree, may not be the best President. This is an
issue in the election of 1984.

It is not a new issue between the dream and the reality. As Franklin Roosevelt
was a master of radio - a father figure in his Sunday evening fireside chats -
so President Reagan is a master of ceremonies on television, strolling through
China and Europe, greeting foreign dignitaries, Olympic stars, crippled
children, and otherwise dominating the news.

When he was asked repeatedly at a press conference the other night whether he
was ready to negotiate with the Russians at the summit, he replied that he was
''ready, willing and able'' to meet them anywhere, though many of his own folks
didn't think he was either ''ready'' or ''able'' to discuss the hard questions,
and some of them thought it was a bum idea even if for political reasons he was
''willing.'' Nevertheless, here is the difference between television and
reality. On TV, this sudden switch to talk with Moscow about anything was a
triumph of both politics and diplomacy. He gave very little and gained a lot.
He relieved the allies, who have been imploring him to talk to the Russians if
not to agree with them, and he confounded the Democrats, who had hoped to run
against him on the ground that he was getting into a warlike bind with Moscow.
All this on prime time TV with people beginning to say his re-election was
inevitable.  In the world of political television news, the WOR show
demonstrated that it is not the steady definition of policy that determines
things but often the sudden flash of an unexpected incident that makes all the
difference in Presidential campaigns.  An argument can be made against the
commercial evening television news, for like the press it emphasizes conflict,
but unlike the press it now has the power to bring the struggle in the streets
and the fire in the night into the house.  This is a big difference, for it
encourages the view that everything is going wrong, and erodes the optimism of
the American people, which may still be the last hope of the Western world.
Still, in defense of television: The newspapers were onto the tragedies of Joe
McCarthy, Jack Kennedy's adventure at the Bay of Pigs, the racial violence in
the South and the deception of the U.S. Government in Vietnam and at Watergate
long before the television and radio reporters were paying much attention.  Yet
it was only when TV cameras were focused on McCarthy, and on the uprisings and
marches in the South, and on the battlefields of Vietnam and in the impeachment
hearings in the House of Representatives that these outrages really moved the
opinion of the nation and were addressed.  The WOR program illustrates a
paradox. Most of the time, the networks are patsies for politicians and give
them time to put their baloney on the screeen. But when television puts its mind
to a documentary, it is a powerful educational force. The trouble is that it
doesn't listen to its own lesson, for it doesn't put on many documentaries
because they don't get good popular ratings, which are the name of the
television game.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              414 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 20, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. Says Flow of Refugees From Vietnam Tripled in May

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 82 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, June 19


The number of boat people fleeing Vietnam by sea more than tripled in May from
previous months this year, a United Nations spokesman said today.

The spokesman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees expressed
concern about the increase and said he hoped the exodus had peaked.

The May refugee figure was put at 4,555, up from the previous monthly average of
1,500. In addition, 2,594 people left Vietnam last month under the Government's
''orderly departure'' program.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              415 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 20, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TV REVIEW;
'JFK,' DRAMATIZATION ON CHANNEL 13

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section C; Page 25, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 464 words


''JFK - A ONE-MAN SHOW'' is a curious enterprise. Mike Farrell, who was B. J.
Hunnicutt in ''M*A*S*H,'' plays John F. Kennedy talking about himself. He also
recites speeches. This is meant to be a history lesson of sorts, dramatized
insights into a President and his times. In fact, there are precious few
insights, and drama is notable only for its absence. The 90- minute program,
with Walter Cronkite as host, will be shown on Channel 13 at 9 o'clock tonight.

At the start, Mr. Farrell is in the Oval Office, talking on the phone. Then an
offstage voice reminds him that he has a news conference. An instant later, he
is at a podium, answering questions. Disembodied voices ask him about tax cuts,
''managed news'' and Vietnam. Verisimilitude is the name of the game until a
reporter asks Mr. Farrell about himself.


''Mr. President,'' the voice says, ''you were assassinated on the 22d of
November 1963, in Dallas, Texas. You were 46 years old. Your death shocked the
world. Your Administration, your life have become legend.''

''Yes, Camelot and all that,'' Mr.  Farrell says, and starts to reminisce.
Joseph P. Kennedy Sr. was ''always there for his children.'' Jacqueline Bouvier
was a ''true bluebood.'' The Cabinet was ''the best - smart men, tough men.''
Did Mr. Kennedy have affairs? ''The White House was never a monastery,'' Mr.
Farrell says, and lets it go at that. If the observations do not add to the
historical record, they do not unreasonably distort it.

Mr. Farrell is avuncular at nearly all times and, under the circumstances, it's
hard to imagine how he could play Mr. Kennedy any other way. Indeed, he shows
agitation only when he denies that hirelings worked on ''Profiles on Courage.''
''I wrote the book,'' Mr. Farrell says feelingly, ''every damn word of it.''


Mixed in with the recollections are excerpts from some of Mr. Kennedy's talks
and speeches. Mr. Farrell finds the accent, but the energy isn't there. He also
labors under the insupportable burden of having to say things away from their
time and place. Mr. Kennedy's talk at Francis Cardinal Spellman's 1960 dinner,
for example, was witty and then some. On the other hand, you probably had to
have been there to have appreciated it. The program is trying to raise ghosts.

Say this for the production, however: it can't be accused of apotheosis. This
President Kennedy is nice enough, but mostly he's a parochial man, and it's hard
to tell what he did in the White House. ''My legend,'' he says in conclusion,
''must rest on what might have been.'' This is fair enough, and it's also part
of the problem. Young viewers especially will wonder what the fuss was all
about. ''JFK - A One-Man Show,'' presented for public television by Channel 13,
is produced by David Susskind.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              416 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BERRLINGUER'S ASSETS AND MANY LIABILITES

BYLINE: Richard N. Gardner ;
Richard N. Gardner, professor of law and international organization at Columbia
University, was United States Ambassador to Italy from 1977 to 1981.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 784 words


Enrico Berlinguer achieved in death what he was never able to achieve in life -
in the elections to the European Parliament, the Italian Communist Party
overtook the Christian Democrats and earned a plurality of the popular vote.
This may well upset the existing non-Communist coalition headed by Socialist
Party leader Bettino Craxi and lead to new national elections. But Communist
entry into the Government remains neither inevitable nor desirable.

The Communists' relatively good showing in the European elections owed much to
an emotional reaction to Mr. Berlinguer's death that will fade quickly after a
new party leader is selected. Moreover, the Communist plurality was extremely
narrow - 33.3 percent for the Communists against 33 percent for the Christian
Democrats - making continuation of the present Government or a new non-Communist
coalition likely. Finally, Italian voters are likely to behave differently in a
national election when the composition of their own Government is at stake.

Feelings of sympathy at Mr. Berlinguer's death should not be allowed to obscure
the fact that, from the perspective of Western interests, his achievements were
far outweighed by his failures. The accomplishments are undeniable. The
Communist Party under his leadership accepted Italy's membership in the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization, developed a more critical view of the Soviet Union
and carried forward the quest of Palmiro Togliatti, who led the Italian
Communist Party for nearly 40 years, for a more ''human'' and democratic
Communism. But these steps were obligatory for any Communist leader who wanted
to come to power by democratic means in a country where public opinion wants a
place in the Western alliance and distrusts Soviet expansionism and
totalitarianism.

It is true that under Mr. Berlinguer, the Communist Party abandoned the policy
of ''NATO out of Italy, Italy out of NATO.'' But Mr. Berlinguer's party, while
accepting Italy's membership in NATO in principle, continued in practice to
oppose every Italian action that could help NATO to achieve its defense
objectives.

During my years in Italy, for example, the Communists opposed fulfill

ment of NATO's agreed 3 percent real increase in annual defense spending, sought
to shut down the American submarine facility in La Maddalena, Sardinia, and
urged a 50 percent reduction in the area available for use by NATO forces in the
militarily critical Italian northeast. It also opposed the deployment of the
cruise missiles in Comiso, Sicily.  Certainly, the Communist Party under Mr.
Berlinguer criticized the Soviet Union's invasion of Czechoslovakia and its
ruthless suppression of Solidarity in Poland. Yet the Communists continued to
endorse Soviet- sponsored ''wars of national liberation'' in Latin America,
Africa and Asia, and spoke warmly of Soviet allies such as Cuba and Vietnam. Mr.
Berlinguer regularly trooped to Moscow to issue joint communiques denouncing the
activities of ''imperialist, militarist and reactionary circles'' - meaning, of
course, NATO and the United States.  While occasionally critical of the Soviet
Union, Mr. Berlinguer was always careful to place it on a higher moral plane
than the United States. In an interview with Oriana Fallaci in 1980, he declared
that of the two superpowers only the United States could truly be called
''imperialist.'' During the Carter years, Communist leaders even tried to
persuade the Italian people that the Central Intelligence Agency was behind the
Red Brigades and the murder of the former Prime Minister Aldo Moro.  On economic
issues, Mr. Berlinguer and the Communist-dominated trade union flirted briefly
with moderate policies in 1976-77 but returned to intransigent opposition to two
fundamental reforms necessary to reduce Italy's double-digit inflation -
altering the wage-indexation system and cutting excessive social spending. When
Fiat dismissed redundant workers in 1980, in an effort to restore the company's
international competitiveness, Mr. Berlinguer stood at the Fiat gates in Turin
and called for worker occupation of the factories.  In the last analysis, it is
what Mr. Berlinguer failed to do that caused the Communists' setbacks in the
1979 and 1983 national elections. Many middle-class voters decided that the
Communist Party could not be trusted in a national government on either economic
or security questions. The Socialist and Republican Parties began to look like
better alternatives for those seeking a change from 35 years of Christian
Democratic rule. Italy's friends in the United States must hope that what was
true in 1979 and 1983 will continue to be true in 1984 and the years ahead.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              417 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TAINTED NEWS ABOUT THE WAR IN AFGHANISTAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 435 words


To the Editor:


Unlike the Vietnam War, which was an ''open'' war, the current Soviet-Afghan war
remains closed to correspondents, except those approved by the Soviet Union. And
those permitted inside are given only an official, limited view of the war.

Several European scholars and politicians accepted invitations from the
Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (D.R.A.), which used these visits as
propaganda and broadcast reports implying that the scholars recognized the
legitimacy of the regime.

Most Western news media reports are based on official D.R.A. handouts or
monitored broadcasts of the Government-controlled Radio Kabul, Soviet sources,
Western diplomats or accounts by those few intrepid Western reporters who
accompany Afghan

mujahidin

 (freedom fighters) to various fronts inside Afghanistan.

However, major stories, like those on the recent (and seventh) Soviet invasion
into the Panjsher Valley needed better information than was apparently available
to correspondents. (Incidentally, the correct transliteration is ''Panjsher'' -
Valley of the Five Lions - not ''Panjshir'' - Five Milks.)

The most important Panjsher military commander, Ahmad Shah Masood (of the Jamiat
Islami party), evacuated most of the civilian population before Panjsher VII,
because he knew of the forthcoming Soviet offensive as early as late February.
Masood had been warned by Afghans in the military loyal to the resistance. At
least 50,000 Panjsheris left their villages just before the attack.

The number of internal refugees, those who have left their home villages but
have not yet crossed over into Pakistan or Iran, is unknown.  One reason for the
widespread current Soviet offensive is that the period from mid-March to late
August finds the Afghans engaged in maximum agricultural activities. If the
people cannot harvest their crops because of constant military pressure, food
shortages will probably be acute for the

mujahidin

 next winter. The Soviets are apparently trying to destroy the

mujahidin

 in all the provinces of the north. Soviet tactics continue to be the
''rubblization'' of Afghan villages, in an attempt to drive them out of the
country - a kind of ''migratory genocide.'' It should not be forgotten that the
Soviets have been fighting in Afghanistan for longer than they were in World War
II, nor that about five million Afghans of a 1978 population of approximately 15
million are refugees, mainly in Pakistan and Iran.

LOUIS DUPREE Visiting Professor, Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University
Princeton, N.J., May 25, 1984

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              418 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 22, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'HURLYBURLY'

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section C; Page 3, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1330 words


It seems too good to be true to

walk into an Off Broadway

theater - during the summer,

no less - and find a half-dozen of our best young actors performing a new David
Rabe play under the direction of Mike Nichols. New plays by serious American
writers are rare these days; new American plays that attract the likes of Mr.
Nichols, William Hurt and Sigourney Weaver even rarer. But the marquee for
''Hurlyburly'' at the Promenade is no idle come-on. Until it crash lands at
midpoint - halfway through the second of three acts - ''Hurlyburly'' offers some
of Mr. Rabe's most inventive and disturbing writing, in a production of any
playwright's dreams. Since the better half alone runs 90 minutes, this is far
from a raw deal.

''Hurlyburly'' is set in the Hollywood Hills - seemingly a world apart from the
Vietnam-era Army base of the last Rabe-Nichols collaboration, ''Streamers.'' But
the tropical villa designed with seedy elan by Tony Walton might as well be a
barracks, and the battles haven't entirely changed. Mr. Rabe remains a dynamic
chronicler of the brutal games that eternally adolescent American men can play.
When his buddies aren't assaulting one another, they're on search-and-destroy
missions against the No. 1 enemy - the women they invariably refer to as
''broads,'' ''ghouls,'' ''bitches'' or worse.

The house in ''Hurlyburly'' is shared by two casting directors, played by Mr.
Hurt and Christopher Walken. Their cronies include a struggling tough-guy actor
(Harvey Keitel) hoping to land a network series, and a hack screenwriter (Jerry
Stiller) chasing development deals and their various female prey.


The first of these victims is Donna (Cynthia Nixon), a Midwestern teen- age
drifter whom Mr. Stiller finds living in a hotel elevator and brings to the
house as a willing ''Care package'' for his pals. No less pathetic are Darlene
(Miss Weaver), a photojournalist fond of the word ''weird,'' and Bonnie (Judith
Ivey), an exotic dancer who doesn't mind performing fellatio on strangers in
front of her 6-year-child.

Most of the men have discarded wives and children; they're all nose- deep in the
cocaine culture. At his impressive best, Mr. Rabe makes grim, ribald and
surprisingly compassionate comedy out of the lies and rationalizations that
allow his alienated men to keep functioning (if not feeling) in the fogs of
locustland. According to one character, television ''cuts the truth out of
stories and leaves only the surface.'' Mr. Rabe's people live in a similar
manner, with dense, contorted language to match. They dismiss depravities as
''whims,'' try to ''maintain a viable relationship with reality'' and hope to
sell their ''marketable human qualities.'' They work in an industry so corrupt
that its only honest executives are those who openly admit that they lie.

Amid the ebb and flow of the drug- sotted bull sessions and requisite Hollywood
gags are some inspired set pieces. At the outset, Mr. Keitel storms on to
explain that he beat his wife because she made him lose his train of thought
during a stoned rumination about ''how to take Vegas and save the world.'' By
the time he's finished telling the tale, the wife is the villain: she allowed
her tooth to injure the hand that slugged her. A bit later, Miss Nixon's
bubble-headed waif delivers a Leslie Fiedler-like mythological exegesis of her
only prized possession, Willie Nelson's ''Stardust'' album. We also get to hear
Mr. Keitel's surreal description of how a sexual vibrator functions after it's
been smashed by body- building weights in the trunk of a car.


Mr. Rabe's pi ece de resistance is his first act curtain scene - in which Mr.
Hurt and Miss Weaver decide to have sex only moments after their
''relationship'' had seemed permanently kaput. As the lovers exchange new
romantic vows, Mr. Nichols's staging ricochets off the lines to provide a
classic bit of nasty carnal farce: The couple's ever-phonier declarations of
sentiment are belied by ever lewder acts of disrobing.

The evening's collapse begins not long thereafter, once Mr. Rabe has finished
diagnosing the anesthetized, unhinged and unfocused lives in view. As in
''Streamers,'' one man is a psychotic waiting to detonate. When the explosion
comes - in successive acts of automotive violence - ''Hurlyburly'' sputters out
irrevocably. Suddenly, those characters in any remote touch with their anguish
start to emote about ''desperation'' - and, as they do, the speeches buckle and
the tears flow in the manner of a John Cassavetes male menopause film.

The ensuing revelations aren't terribly revealing - ''I don't feel loved,''
cries Mr. Hurt - and the tributes to the tough guys' previously hidden
vulnerability are banal. At the end of both Acts II and III, it's sentimentally
demonstrated that the men are at least capable of offering paternal, if not
romantic, affection to the opposite sex.

This is a paltry, amorphous payoff to the strong buildup, and it's unaccountably
larded with intimations of nuclear apocalypse. Mr. Hurt takes to ranting about
the metaphysics of neutron bombs, as if he'd been handed spare pages from Arthur
Kopit's ''End of the World.'' Perhaps a latent concern for the world's fate will
at last allow this man to connect to other people - and to stop bouncing around
the ''vague hurlyburly'' of his anomic existence. But we feel instead that the
playwright is floundering and fudging. By imposing grand, crowd-pleasing
significance on his characters, Mr. Rabe avoids the painful task of facing his
own conclusions about them.


As a Mike Nichols project, ''Hurlyburly'' almost seems a hybrid of the film
''Carnal Knowledge,'' another acidic treatment of misogyny in a showbiz milieu,
and ''The Odd Couple,'' a far merrier look at divorced bachelor roommates. Here,
the director is highly sensitive to Mr. Rabe's languid L.A. comic rhythms; the
staging is flawless, though the sordid West Los Angeles atmosphere seems several
shades lighter than the real thing.

The cast could not be better. It's beyond even Mr. Hurt's power to make us care
about the most articulate of the men, but the actor's febrile intelligence and
sensitivity are at high flame. Mr. Walken, as a self-protective cynic, offers
what may be his least mannered, most fully ripened comic performance ever. Mr.
Stiller, the sole representaive of Hollywood's older, Jewish generation, is a
frazzled amalgam of vulgarity and wounded vanity - loonily outfitted (by Ann
Roth) in Western gear. In her smaller role, Miss Weaver sports a cloudily vacant
face that nods in affectless agreement with any degrading proposition set before
her. The prodigious Miss Nixon, the bright British daughter of ''The Real
Thing,'' is just as persuasive as a mindless Hollywood Boulevard orphan.

Mr. Keitel and Miss Ivey rise highest in this illustrious crowd. Mr. Keitel's
down-and-out actor, feral in appearance and gravelly of voice, is a dimwitted,
tightly knotted animal who arouses contempt, laughter and pity. The dazzling
Miss Ivey - who's surely born to rehabilitate Mr. Rabe's ''Boom Boom Room''
someday - captures the boisterous manners and miraculous strength of a somewhat
sentimentalized tart. In one of the evening's snappiest lines, she announces,
''Doom and gloom have come to sit in my household like some permanent kind of
electric appliance.'' Be grateful that only the second half of ''Hurlyburly''
illustrates exactly what she means.


Sordid L.A. Air

HURLYBURLY, by David Rabe; directed by Mike Nichols; setting by Tony Walton;
costumes by Ann Roth; lighting by Jennifer Tipton; associate producer, William
P. Suter; production stage manager, Peter Lawrence. Presented by Icarus
Productions and Frederick M.  Zollo with Ivan Bloch, E R B Productions. At the
Promenade Theater, 76th Street and Broadway. PhilHarvey Keitel EddieWilliam Hurt
MickeyChristopher Walken ArtieJerry Stiller DonnaCynthia Nixon DarleneSigourney
Weaver BonnieJudith Ivey


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo of William Hurt and Christopher WAlken in ''Hurlyburly''

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              419 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

TALK-SHOW HOST VIEW ROLE IN LIGHT OF SLAYING

BYLINE: By PETER W. KAPLAN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 46, Column 5; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1091 words


Ever since Alan Berg, the controversial radio call-in-show host was shot to
death Tuesday, some of the broadcast provocateurs who invite the public to
debate on the air are taking a hard look at the roles they play with their
audiences.

''What you have to do in this part of the business,'' said Wally George, a
California radio and television call-in host with a combative manner and a
conservative ideology, ''is accept it as part of the game. You are taking your
life in your hands when you are a controversial personality. You can anger
people. I feel that what I'm doing is a necessary thing, and the danger involved
is just part of the game. You either accept it, or you do something else.''

Interest in these call-in show hosts, high in the 1960's, waned in the next
decade, but it has been growing in recent years. And the murder of Alan Berg,
whether or not it was brought about by an incited listener, has once more
reminded talk broadcasters not only of their power, but also of the risk they
face in taking on the unseen viewers and listenders.

Those Who Provoke

''I think there are some who do provoke,'' said Larry King, who turns up nightly
on 260 stations of the RKO radio network with an audience put at 3.5 million.
''There are broadcasters who do incite. And when the purpose is invective,
you're going to expect some weird things to happen.''

There are lesser known but more controversial hosts than Mr. King - whose style
is strong but generally not insulting. Until Tuesday, Alan Berg was one of them.

Mr. Berg, a 50-year old former Chicago lawyer, spoke to an audience estimated at
200,000 a night, listeners who unleashed their frustrations as invited guests in
a ritualized format for which Mr. Berg was well known. He had known angry defeat
during his lifetime, and he evoked the same anger from his listeners.

Having begun as a lawyer and having expressed the frustrations and anger of a
personality who had overcome his life crises, Mr. Berg was an irreverent
survivor who encouraged sharp responses from his listeners. After having beaten
alcoholism and spent time as a shoe salesman - and as a loner - he established
himself as an outspoken monologuist who spurred debate and controversy on his
Denver radio show. He developed a faithful audience that tuned in night after
night on station KOA in Denver.

Hosts Re-examine Roles

Although there is no indication that a listener killed Mr. Berg, the radio hosts
around the country who prod their audience to sharp responses are re-examining
their roles in the wake of his murder.

One of them brushed off the danger. ''Life's too serious to take seriously,''
said Don Imus, a monologuist on WNBC radio whom the station has promoted as a
man so controversial that he regularly offends well-known New Yorkers. As much
as anything, it is his aggressiveness that the station seems intent on using to
recruit more listeners.

''If this guy Berg was in Denver, it's one indication his format wasn't really
working on a national level,'' said Mr. Imus. ''So maybe that thing is over. I
was brought in to be funny and that's all, and, as a comedian, if I kill
anybody, it's myself, and maybe that's what my audience is waiting for.

''I can get them to buy Chevrolets and hamburgers, and when you can get people
to listen to you seriously, you can manipulate them in any medium. What I do
here, though, is deal with them comedically, and someone like me doesn't have
the potential to create that kind of danger.''

A Talking Tinder Box

Nevertheless, one of Mr. Imus's broadcast partners, Howard Stern, is considered
a talking tinder box, so ready to cause social combustion - he regularly
ridicules homosexuals and various ethnic groups - that WNBC reportedly asked him
not to speak to the press at all after Mr. Berg's murder.

''This was started back in the 60's,'' said Jack Thayer, the radio producer who,
l9 years ago, was first responsible for broadcasting the purposefully abrasive
right-wing radio host Joe Pyne and the left-wing comedian Mort Sahl on station
KLAC in Los Angeles. Although the talk shows are now crowded with combative
types like Steve Kane of Miami, Gary D. Gilbert of Washington and Mr. Stern, the
tradition began in Los Angeles during the Watts riots of 1965, when Mr. Pyne and
Mr. Sahl were put on the same station at different times of the day to solicit
all kinds of opinions and argue them down.  ''There was a lack of places for
people to express themselves - they could not get their opinions out,'' Mr.
Thayer said. ''This was during the war in Vietnam, when ordinary people could
not get their letters on the editorial pages, and so, they began to call in. I
think we did a lot of good. We vented hostility and kept the situation off the
streets during the riot years of the 60's and, particularly in Watts, kept
things a lot calmer than they could have been.

''We allowed people who were angry and frustrated, people who otherwise wouldn't
have spoken their mind, to get their telephones and call us and say what they
wanted.

People Who Want to Be Heard

''People are lonesome. If you don't believe that, go to a church any night. All
the time, we had threats. But people who talked with us loved it. For the first
time, they had a feeling they were being heard.

''When Ronald Reagan was running for governor for the first time in 1966, he
would call up all the time, and we would say, 'Ladies and gentlemen, Ronald
Reagan is on the phone,' and people would have a feeling they were being
listened to.

''And Joe Pyne was former marine. He looked tough. Joe would get angry and
abrasive, but he was a very soft guy. He listened to people and knew what they
wanted. He would insult them, and the next day at work, they would say to each
other, 'Gee, did you hear me? I got Joe Pyne so mad, he hung up on me. He told
me to gargle with razor blades!'

''There are just so many people with no identity, with nobody listening to them.
We just gave them somebody to talk to and get angry at.''

''Oh sure, I've had threats, a lot of them,'' said Larry King. ''I do rude shows
sometimes. I've had threats on my child's life. I've gotten a dozen dead roses
sent to me. There are a lot of sick people out there. But when I'm done at
night, I don't go out to the car and worry. Radio people are an easy target.

''But some of them almost enjoy it. They enjoy the nastiness and then they
insult deliberately. And when they do that, they are bringing it upon
themselves.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              420 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Pol Pot Forces Report Killing 79 Vietnamese in 2-Day Fight

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: ARANYAPRATHET, Thailand, June 22


The Pol Pot forces said Friday that they killed 79 Vietnamese soldiers in a
two-day battle near the southern Cambodian port city of Kampong Som.

In a clandestine Khmer-language radio broadcast monitored in Aranyprathet, on
the Thai-Cambodian border, the Cambodian rebels said their guerrillas attacked a
Vietnamese base 135 miles southwest of Phnom Penh on Monday, killing 75
Vietnamese troops and wounding another 87.

The broadcast said another four Vietnamese died and five were wounded Tuesday
when they stepped on land mines planted by the Pol Pot forces.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              421 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 23, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Tries to Block Herbicide Trial



BYLINE:
By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Page 27, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 93 words


The Justice Department asked a Federal appeals court yesterday to spare the
Government from a trial on charges that its use of Agent Orange harmed the wives
and children of veterans exposed to the herbicide in Vietnam.

Lawyers for the veterans' families and seven chemical companies that
manufactured the defoliant argued that the Government should not be allowed to
''shirk responsibility.'' The manufacturers are suing the Government for
reimbursement of the $180 million they have agreed to pay to more than 15,000
Vietnam veterans and their families.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              422 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NEW COLLEGE GENERATION DISCOVERS VIETNAM

BYLINE: By GENE I. MAEROFF

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1817 words


The Vietnam War, largely shunned on America's campuses for almost a decade, is
the subject of more and more courses as a new generation of students seeks to
learn about a divisive chapter in the nation's history.

Young people who had not yet been born when John F. Kennedy began sending troops
to Vietnam are hearing of strange-sounding places like An Loc, Khe Sanh and Bien
Hoa and straining to comprehend what happened in that Southeast Asian nation.

''There is enormous interest among the young in learning more about the Vietnam
period,'' said Marilyn Young, who teaches a course on the war at New York
University. ''These kids were babies when the war was at its height, but they
are profoundly curious to discover what upset their country so much.''

The courses often portray America's role in the war as a phase in Vietnam's
history rather than as an isolated event. Actions in Washington are frequently
studied in terms of how the reality of the situation in Southeast Asia jibed
with the view of American decision-makers.

New York University is one of a growing number of institutions offering new
courses on the Vietnam War. At the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, which
already had a course, interest is so strong that Richard Minear, the professor,
had to turn away students. And faculty members around the country, eager to
start courses, are exchanging information on existing courses so that they can
write their own curriculums.

''At practically every regional meeting of Asian historians there is now a
session on how to teach the Vietnam War,'' said Daniel Bays, a history professor
at the University of Kansas. ''We don't have a course on it yet at Kansas, and
we are starting to feel guilty because we feel we should be doing it.''

High school and college teachers from throughout the country met in New York
City this month to explore how they could help those who wanted to create
courses on Vietnam.

When the Asia Society sponsored a curriculum unit on the Vietnam War last year,
the guide was distributed to the 17,000 teachers who belong to the National
Council for the Social Studies. WGBH, the public television station in Boston,
has widely circulated a curriculum guide that it prepared to accompany last
fall's series ''Vietnam: A Television History.''

Interest in Vietnam among students coincides with the emergence of a new body of
scholarship, based on interviews and papers that have become available only in
recent years. This allows the courses to take cognizance of complexities and
nuances that were not apparent in the courses taught during the war and in the
highly charged period after South Vietnam's surrender in 1975.

There is no count available on how many courses on the Vietnam War are being
offered, but Allan E. Goodman, an associate dean of the School of Foreign
Service at Georgetown University, is about to conduct a survey. Experts say the
growing interest is the result of several developments.

For one thing, enough time has passed for the topic to be treated more
dispassionately. Many high school and college students regard an examination of
the Vietnam War as similar to looking at World War II or the Korean War.

Movies Raise Questions


''It is remote from their personal experience and they can deal with it more
neutrally than an earlier generation that felt involved in the war,'' said
Robert A. Divine, who includes a section on the Vietnam War in a course on
diplomatic history that he teaches at the University of Texas at Austin.

Moreover, young people have questions after seeing such movies as ''The Deer
Hunter'' and ''Apocalypse Now'' and after watching the recent television series
on the war.

Finally, criticism of United States intervention in Central America is provoking
interest in comparisons with what occurred in Vietnam.

Some students at N.Y.U., for instance, returned from a demonstration against
United States involvement in Central America wondering about the meaning of the
slogan on a button that read: ''El Salvador is Spanish for Vietnam.''

''We remember seeing the Vietnam War on television as children,'' said Anne V.
Mullen of McLean, Va., who took the university's Vietnam course, ''and we heard
our parents talking about the war. Now, we hear about Central America and we
want to understand why people are drawing parallels with Vietnam.''

Teaching Approach Varies


The approach of the courses differs from institution to institution, and the
focus depends on the professor's academic discipline.  Charles F. Keyes, an
anthropologist at the University of Washington, includes the Vietnam War in a
course on the civilization and culture of Southeast Asia.

At the University of Michigan, Ernest P. Young, a historian in the Center for
Chinese Studies, traces the modern era of colonialization, noting that American
involvement in Vietnam coincided with the dismantling of colonial empires. He
also discusses Vietnam's experience with the French and the Japanese before
delving into the era of American involvement.

''What I try to show students,'' said James Pinckney Harrison of Hunter College
of the City University of New York, ''is there was nothing wrong with the United
States trying to demonstrate that the Communist technique of guerrilla warfare
could be defeated, but that Vietnam was the worst possible place to try to do
it.'' Neither the North Vietnamese regime nor South Vietnam upheld human rights,
he said, but there was greater support among the people for the Communists.

Lessons of History


Professor Divine at the University of Texas attempts to show students how the
Americans misapplied the lessons of history.

''The L.B.J. generation of foreign policy makers had their view shaped by the
events leading to World War II and what they learned was to stand firm and never
negotiate,'' he said, referring to the Johnson Administration. ''They learned
the lesson so well that they misapplied it in Vietnam. The interesting thing is
that now some Americans would misapply the lesson of Vietnam and become
isolationists.''

The increasing classroom exposure to Vietnam follows a period in which many
institutions shied away from such courses.

''There was a time in the middle 1970's when everyone thought they knew all
there was to know about the subject,'' said Professor Young of New York
University.

Furthermore, according to some authorities, the outcome of the war left some
people uneasy with the idea of teaching about it.

''We lost the war and a lot of the courses that existed were discontinued,''
said Jane Werner, a research associate at Columbia University who taught a
course on the war at the University of Arizona. ''The aftermath of the war was
troubling to the nation and there was a period of silence.''

Revival of Interest


Professor Harrison of Hunter College, who has been teaching about the war since
1973, said that interest dropped in the late 1970's but that now he saw
''increased desire'' to learn about Vietnam. Professor Harrison teaches about
American involvement in the context of the long string of wars and revolutions
in Asia. His work in the course contributed to his book, ''The Endless War:
Vietnam's Struggle for Independence,'' now being used on many campuses.

The war can now be taught as history rather than as a current event, lessening
the potential for controversy and muting passion.

Alexander B. Woodside began teaching about the war at Harvard University in the
late 1960's, while the military battles were raging in Vietnam and peace
protests were spreading in the United States. Now he teaches it as history in a
course at the University of British Columbia.

''At Harvard I was talking about the inevitability of the Communist victory,''
Professor Woodside recalled, ''and now I find myself discussing the losing side
and trying to pretend that the outcome of the war was not preordained.''

Role of Antiwar Activists


Some of the instructors teaching the courses say their interest stems, in part,
from experience as antiwar activists.

''I suppose it is a way for us older people who lived through it to work out our
feelings,'' said Andrea McElderry of the University of Louisville. ''It lets me
get objective about a situation that was a moral stance to me at the time.''

Professor McElderry, an Asian historian, teaches about the war with Richard
Pfeiffer, an American historian. At the time of the war, she was a doctoral
student at the University of Michigan, where she joined protests against the
war, while he was in combat in Vietnam .

An unusual twist is that Vietnamese refugees are enrolled in the courses on some
campuses. At the University of Washington, for instance, almost a dozen former
''boat people'' who fled South Vietnam sat side by side this year with Americans
in a course on Vietnam.

After the students saw a film portraying the most egregious effects of American
influence on Saigon, which was depicted as a city filled during the war with
prostitutes, orphans and shoeshine boys, the immigrants complained that the
film, ''The Sad Song of Yellow Skin,'' did not show the Saigon that they knew.

More Documents Available


Another effect of the passage of time is that there is now a wealth of documents
available on American involvement in Vietnam that have been made public by the
Freedom of Information Act. Thus, some courses are rich in original source
material, an unusual experience for students accustomed to the synthesis of the
textbook approach.

For example, ''Presidential Decision Making in the Vietnam War,'' a course
offered at the University of California at Davis for the first time last year,
provided students with access to the 15,000 pages of photo copies of documents
that Larry Berman, the professor, has accumulated for his own writing.

What seemed to make the various courses more popular this year was the 13-part
series on public teleivison.

''It was a great leap forward for those who wanted to teach about Vietnam
because it brought the war to life for many of the students,'' said John Israel,
a professor at the University of Virginia, who incorporated what was aired on
television into the readings and lectures of his course, ''Vietnam's American
Interlude.''

However the courses are taught, it is clear that the attitudes of today's
students and the atmosphere in the classrooms are different from what prevailed
when young people felt more personally involved.

Among those enrolled in the course this year at the University of Michigan, a
center of protest during the war, were several cadets in the Reserve Officers
Training Corps, who sometimes wore their uniforms to class. Fifteen years ago,
activists regarded R.O.T.C. units as symbols of American involvement in Vietnam
and were trying to drive them off campuses.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              423 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CASTRO IS REPORTED READY TO FREE SOME PRISONERS ON JACKSON VISIT

BYLINE: By GERALD M. BOYD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: PANAMA, June 23


The Rev. Jesse Jackson said today that he would ask Cuba to release some
political prisoners when he visits there next week, and a prominent figure in
his campaign said Fidel Castro had already agreed to the release.

The campaign figure said the action was intended as a good-will gesture. The
Democratic Presidential candidate began a tour of this region today.

Mr. Jackson, at an airport news conference here early today, said he would carry
into Cuba a list of prisoners and would ''appeal'' for their release. An aide to
Mr. Jackson said there were 21 names on the list. Mr. Jackson is scheduled to
hold a private meeting with Mr. Castro for several hours Monday night. Another
meeting and a joint news conference is scheduled for Tuesday.



Talks About Prisoners

Before the news conference today, Armando Gutierrez, a spokesman for Mr.
Jackson, said the candidate had discussed the possible release of the prisoners
with Ramon Sanchez Parodi, the counselor of the Cuban interest section in
Washington.

''All we know is that they expressed a willingness to talk about Cuban and
American prisoners,'' Mr. Gutierrez said.But a Jackson campaign figure, who
asked not to be identified, said the matter was further along and that Mr.
Jackson had received assurances from Cuban officials that some prisoners would
be freed. The campaign figure said Mr. Jackson was trying to determine how the
freed prisoners could be transported to the United States, although he said he
did not know how many would be involved.

Estimates of the number of political prisoners in Cuba range from 200 to 10,000.

In a visit to Syria last year, Mr. Jackson won freedom for a captured United
States airman.



Early Morning Landing

Mr. Jackson and about 150 aides, reporters and Secret Service agents arrived
here after a flight from Washington. Often late for scheduled appearances in the
political campaign, Mr. Jackson was early this time and waited for about two
hours as Panamanian officials completed organizing a welcoming ceremony.

Mr. Jackson immediately sounded the theme for his six-day visit to the region
that will also take him to El Salvador and to Managua, Nicaragua.

''We came to Central America to engage in dialogue for peace,'' he said at the
news conference. ''We came to make a fervent appeal for peace.''

Mr. Jackson issued a 10-point program for the region, ranging from treating
countries with more respect to the development of what he called an alliance
similar to NATO involving the governments and various political factions in the
region.

Mr. Jackson reserved his strongest language for a new warning about what he
called an escalation in the conflict in Central America.

''This summer may be our last chance to work for peace before a fall
offensive,'' he said. ''If people are struggling for self-determination, an
escalating military crisis will have many fronts in different countries, but it
will be one war in this region.

''A war that will be more devastating than Vietnam. A war that would spread like
a brush fire in this hemisphere; a war that would tear our country apart.''

Mr. Jackson explained later that he believed if fighting continued it would
''become more intense and more widespread.'' He declined to provide details of
who he thought would launch a major offensive in the fall but added that the
''growing tension was self-evident.''

Mr. Jackson, in appearances here, promoted the aims of the four-nation Contadora
Group, Panama, Mexico, Venezuela and Colombia. Representatives of those nations
have been trying for more than 19 months to work out details for a negotiated
peace settlement in Central America.



Schedule Change

Mr. Jackson has accused the Reagan Administration of providing only ''lip
service'' to the process. Mr. Jackson's schedule had indicated that once in
Panama he would meet with foreign ministers of the four countries. After
arriving here, he indicated that he would not hold the meeting as planned, but
that he would still try to hold such a session before leaving the region.

In a visit later today to the presidential palace, Panamanian Foreign Minister
Oyden Ortega Duran said Mr. Jackson's emphasis on a negotiated settlement to
resolve the region's conflict had been a ''great help'' to the Contadoran
process. He said the four nations spearheading a drive for a solution were
nearly ready to submit an agreement that would call for the gradual elimination
of all foreign military advisers in the region and a reduction in the amount of
military hardware coming into the region. Mr. Jackson also met with Panamanian
President Jorge Illueca.



State Department Comment

WASHINGTON, June 23 - The State Department today said that they had no
information regarding a possible release of Cuban political prisoners during the
Rev. Jesse Jackson's visit to Cuba next week.

Kenneth N. Skoug Jr., director of the State Department's Bureau of Cuban
Affairs, said that ''it would not be suprising if several prominent Cuban
political prisoners were released, because Castro certainly has plenty of
them.''

Rumors were circulating last week, according to Mr. Skoug, that Armando
Villadares, a prominent Cuban poet who has been imprisoned since the early years
of the Castro regime, might soon be released.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Rev. Jesse Jackson with President Jorge Illueca (page 22)

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              424 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: 'ICE BRIDGE,' BY VETERANS' ENSEMBLE

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 46, Column 4; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 616 words


In its five-year history, the Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater has given a
voice onstage to actual Vietnam veterans and has presented a number of plays
dealing with war and related issues. The company is currently in residence at
the Public Theater with ''Ice Bridge,'' a postwar, pre-apocalyptic drama by John
Forster. While the subject - the threat of nuclear catastrophe - is one of
utmost urgency, the play attempts to score political points at the expense of
credibility.

''Ice Bridge'' takes place at a lonely outpost in Greenland 1,500 miles above
the Arctic Circle where five enlisted men are the watchdogs over nuclear
warheads. Isolation at 30 degrees below zero, with the fate of the world in
their hands, weighs heavily on their minds and their fingertips. The pressure,
in fact, has driven the group's leader, a 30-year-old military veteran bearing
the ponderously metaphorical name of Thor (god of thunder), into a fantasy life
approaching madness.

He imagines that he sees a large polar bear who rushes around the weather
station growling ''Oar!'' and also speaks confidentially in a mock Russian
accent. The bear is a fugitive from Mary Chase's ''Harvey'' and a John Irving
novel or two.


The other characters are not too far removed from a World War II world-
in-a-foxhole movie, especially a trigger-happy new recruit who has to be taught
the enormity of his responsibility. The conclusion is a cliffhanger, but the
journey to it is muddled. Motivations often seem at cross-purposes.

Instead of tautness - as in the movie on a similar subject, ''WarGames'' - the
author and his director, Edward Cornell, offer lassitude. Time is spent on card
games in the wardroom, cookies in the kitchen and sloppiness in the war room,
all of which share the same space in Salvatore Tagliarino's stage design. The
key to the missiles is a portable computer nicknamed Misty, which is handled
with extreme casualness, as if it were a bar cart.

Without sufficient apparel, men go out into the Arctic air to check up on an
unseen weather shack and to do various indeterminate chores. Thor, along with
his friendly bear, goes fishing from his own personal ''ice bridge.'' When the
men remain indoors, they mark time and compare memories of battle.


Occasionally, Mr. Forster strikes an interesting dramatic note. For example,
Thor has a compulsive curiosity about the village in Siberia that is - for
unexplained reasons - the target of the warheads, and has collected voluminous
information about it. More often the play meanders while symbols are written in
boldface. Even the bear's conversation leaves too little to our imagination.
Early in the evening he tells Thor, ''I am you.''

There is creditable acting from James Handy as Thor and Anthony Chisholm as his
deputy. Not only does Mr. Handy have to confide in a bear, he also has a running
relationship with the aurora borealis, which he affectionately refers to as
Abby. As the man inside the cuddly, stuffed-animal costume designed by Paull
Mantell, Brian Delate cuts a dashing ursine figure.

The Cast

ICE BRIDGE, by John Forster; directed by Edward Cornell; scenery by Salvatore
Tagliarino; costumes by Lee Entwisle; lighting by Marcia Madeira and Terry
Wuthrich; production supervisor, Cynthia Gold; production stage manager, Sally
B. Andrew; associate producer, Jason Steven Cohen. Joseph Papp presents The
Vietnam Veterans Ensemble Theater Company, Thomas Bird, artistic director. At
the Public Theater/The Other Stage, 425 Lafayette Street. Polar BearBrian Delate
ThorJames Handy MickTom Jenkins TerryRay Robertson SnowAnthony Chisholm IkeR. J.
Bonds Voice of TellerDavid Adamson


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: REVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              425 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Brings Home 3,000 From Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 164 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, June 23


About 3,000 Vietnamese soldiers returned home today as Hanoi began a partial
withdrawal of its estimated 180,000 troops in Cambodia.

A convoy of nearly 150 military vehicles, most of them carrying Vietnamese
soldiers but also including five 105- millimeter howitzers and five armored
personnel carriers, left for a 112-mile trip to the Vietnamese border.

Hanoi has described the move as the first stage of a partial pullout of three
brigades of Vietnamese troops. The partial withdrawal was announced by Vietnam
and Cambodia last week.

The United States, China, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and
Cambodian rebel groups have dismissed previous Vietnamese withdrawals as merely
rotation of troops. Western diplomats said fresh Vietnamese troops would be
brought to Cambodia to replace those taken out.

The Vietnamese troops are in Cambodia to support the Heng Samrin Government that
Hanoi installed in 1979 after toppling the Peking-backed forces of Pol Pot.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              426 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

INSANITY PLEA UPHELD ALTHOUGH ILLNESS WAS FAKED

BYLINE: By JOSEPH P. FRIED

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 645 words


A man who escaped prosecution for 16 Brooklyn robberies by faking a mental
disorder can keep the rewards of his fiction because prosecutors failed to
detect it until after they consented to his insanity plea, a state appeals court
has ruled.

The court held that instead of being prosecuted on criminal charges that could
bring him at least 6 years in prison and as much as 25, the man must be sent to
a state mental hospital for an indefinite period of confinement.

The length of the confinement will depend on periodic evaluations of his mental
condition, but under state law it could be as short as 60 days if the initial
evaluation finds no current mental illness.

The man, 33-year-old Samuel Lockett, previously convinced at least three
psychiatrists that he was a victim of ''post-traumatic stress disorder''
stemming from what he said were his harrowing combat experiences in the Vietnam
War. As a result, the Brooklyn District Attorney's office and a State Supreme
Court justice agreed 14 months ago to accept his plea that he was not criminally
responsible for committing the robberies, ''by reason of mental disease or
defect.''

In Texas, Not Vietnam


But the District Attorney's office consented to the plea before obtaining Mr.
Lockett's military records. When the office received the records several weeks
after the plea was accepted, it learned he had never been in Vietnam. Instead,
the records showed, he had been an accounting clerk at an Air Force base in
Texas during the entire time he was supposedly in combat in Indochina from 1972
to 1974.

The insanity plea was annulled last September, on the ground that it had been
obtained by fraud, and Mr. Lockett again faced prosecution for the 16 robberies
at four stores in Brooklyn in 1980 and 1981.

But he appealed, and last week the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court in
Brooklyn upheld him. It ordered Acting Justice Michael R. Juviler of State
Supreme Court - who had first accepted the insanity plea and then voided it - to
reinstate it.

Referring to the lapse by the District Attorney's office, the four-judge
appellate panel said the current status of the case ''arose in large part due to
the failure of the people to timely obtain petitioner's military records.'' If
the records had been obtained before acceptance of the plea, the prosecution
would ''in all likelihood not have agreed to its acceptance,'' the panel said.

It added that although the plea's acceptance ''may have been based upon
erroneous information given to the psychiatrists by petitioner himself, under
the circumstances of this case, no satisfactory authorization exists'' for
Justice Juviler to have vacated the plea.

No Decision on Appeal


A spokesman for District Attorney Elizabeth Holtzman said her office had not yet
decided whether to appeal the unanimous ruling of the panel, which comprised
Justices Milton Mollen, David T. Gibbons, Lawrence J. Bracken and James F.
Niehoff.

''Regrettably, the Appellate Division is letting this fraud stand despite well-
settled precedent to the contrary,'' said the spokesman, Ned Steele.

In voiding the insanity plea last September, Justice Juviler said that Miss
Holtzman's office had reported subpoenaing Mr. Lockett's military records before
consenting to the plea, but that the military had not immediately provided the
material because ''certain federally required procedures had not been
followed.'' Mr. Steele responded at the time, ''In hindsight, we should have
stuck to our guns and waited until we obtained the records.''

Mr. Lockett still maintains that he was in Vietnam, in a ''covert unit whose
records were destroyed,'' said his lawyer, Michael W. Warren.

Meanwhile, he is serving a two-to- six-year sentence at the Green Haven prison
in Stormville, N.Y., for an attempted robbery in Queens in 1980.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              427 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SUNDAY, JUNE 24, 1984;
 International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 633 words


Cuba has agreed to a U.S. proposal to begin negotiations for normalizing the
flow of Cubans between the two countries, but only after the November election,
the State Departement said. The United States wanted talks earlier. American
officials said Cuba's insistence on waiting was consistent with an apparent
policy decision not to do anything that might seem to contribute to President
Reagan's re-election. (Page 1, Column 3.)

Journalists must have licenses issued by the Government in a growing number of
Latin American nations. Fearful that press freedom is in danger, some publishers
and editors in the hemisphere are trying to stop the trend. (1:1.)

Reorganization of Lebanon's Army and other measures to be taken in an effort to
end the country's nine-year- old civil war were approved by the Cabinet. Under
the army reorganization, a new army commander and a six-man military council,
representing different religious groups, were appointed. (3:1.) National

Approval of a $50 billion tax increase and an $11.2 billion cut in benefit
pograms was reached by House and Senate tax conferees in a session that went
into early morning. The agreement was the most significant step so far toward
approving a deficit-reduction package this year. (1:6.)

Far fewer Democratic commitments to sweeping social programs will be part of the
platform being completed by the Democratic Platform Committee. The platform is
considerably more conservative than previous ones. (1:4.)

Release of Cuban political prisoners to coincide with the visit of the Rev.
Jesse Jackson to Cuba this week was expected by members of the Jackson
Democratic Presidential campaign. In Panama City, the first stop in his
Caribbean tour, Mr. Jackson said that on his Cuban visit he would have a list of
American and Cuban prisoners and would ''appeal'' for their release. (1:2.)

Edward M. Kennedy's endorsement of Walter F. Mondale's candidacy for the
Democratic Presidential nomination was expected by Mondale campaign officials to
be announced today after a visit by the senator to Mr. Mondale's Minnesota home.
(22:1.).

Space shuttle flights will be cut this year to seven from the 10 initially set
at the beginning of 1984 by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The reduced number of flights became known as the countdown began for the third
such flight this year, the maiden flight of Discovery, the nation's third space
shuttle. NASA officials said that because of rocket failures and other
scheduling problems the best they can hope for now is five more missions, seven
in all for the year. (1:1.)

College courses on the Vietnam War are being offered by a growing number of
schools as a new generation of students seeks to learn about a divisive chapter
in the nation's history. The courses often portray America's role in the war as
a phase in Vietnam's history rather than as an isolated event. Actions in
Washington are frequently studied in terms of how the reality of the situation
in Southeast Asia jibed with the view of American decision-makers. (1:3.)
Metropolitan

Restructuring of Medicaid services in New York State would be accomplished under
legislation agreed on Governor Cuomo and key legislators in Albany. They hope to
improve health care while reducing costs. The agreement would establish seven
health care centers designed to handle virtually all the health-care needs of a
Medicaid client, and provide subsidies to neighborhood clinics and increase
Medicaid fees for emergency- room visits as well as visits to most doctors and
dentists. (1:5.)

The city blocked a Sotheby auction of Judaica on Tuesday until it is shown that
the sellers of the 33 Hebrew books and manuscripts are the legal owners. (23:1.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              428 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CITI'S SOARING AMBITION

BYLINE: By LESLIE WAYNE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 3020 words


AS with the great empires of the past, the sun never sets on

Citicorp. Whether it is Chicago or Cairo, Sioux Falls or Singapore, the familiar
Citicorp sign is there. And, last week, in the highest sanctum of the Citicorp
world, the power changed hands. Walter B. Wriston, the nation's most influential
banker, handed the reins to John S. Reed, a boyish-looking wunderkind, who will
take over the premier bank in August. The announcement ends years of speculation
over Mr. Wriston's replacement and sets the course of Citicorp for decades to
come.

In taking over as chairman and chief executive, Mr. Reed assumes command of a
bank unlike any other. Citicorp, parent of Citibank, has led a charge in recent
years to unshackle banking from its straitjacket regulations of old and to open
fertile new fields for profit. With offices in all but nine states, Citicorp,
through its cleverness, aggressiveness and ambition, has become virtually a
national bank - in a nation that allegedly prohibits interstate banking. It does
business in 94 other countries, and is the world's biggest private lender. In
its drive for customers, Citicorp has muscled its way onto Main Streets
everywhere, reshaping competition here and abroad.

The bank boasts that it already reaches into one of every seven American homes
and wants to win even more, peddling credit cards, travelers checks, retirement
plans, mortgages, consumer loans and, even, in-home banking. Overseas, its
activities are even more varied; it can engage in businesses prohibited here
such as underwriting securities and selling insurance. The secret to its octopus
reach is its prescient mastery of high technology. Citicorp has outstripped its
competitors in embracing the computer era and in understanding that electronic
wires can be cheaper - and more efficient - than brick-and-mortar banking.

''There are hardly any banks - and few companies - that can be compared to
Citibank for sheer size and power,'' said J. Richard Fredericks, a bank analyst
with Montgomery Securities in San Francisco. Added Anthony M. Santomero, a
professor of finance at the Wharton business school: ''Citibank is the strongest
from a geographic distribution point of view. With its very large deposit and
loan base, it will prove to be the envy of other money center banks.''

Enter John Shepard Reed, the 45-year old head of Citicorp's consumer banking
operations. A graduate of M.I.T., Mr. Reed cut his teeth by streamlining
Citibank's troubled back office in the early 70's - and was immortalized for it
in a famous business school case taught to thousands of M.B.A's each year.
Later, Mr. Reed masterminded Citibank's marriage of electronics and consumer
banking, gaining the reputation as an abrasive but brilliant technician. With
his brusque speech and shirtsleeve informality, he hardly fits the mold of the
pinstripped and mannerly corporate bankers who have traditionally dominated top
financial institutions.

But he looks battle-ready. And it's a good thing. For despite Citicorp's lofty
stature, the big bank has some big problems. The banking system has been
profoundly shaken of late by the third world debt crisis. And Citicorp - with
some $12.3 billion in loans to six troubled debtor countries - is in the thick
of it, in a precarious position in the eyes of many investors. Its stock has
been trading around $30, far less than its bull market high of $46, set in the
summer of 1983.

Mr. Reed's challenges are not just external, how ever. Profits on Citicorp's
corporate banking operations have narrowed in the face of stiffened competition
for corporate loans. And, Citicorp's expensive - and highly risky - push into
consumer banking is only beginning to show results. Citicorp is also an
institution split into two hostile corporate cultures: a world where patrician
corporate bankers feel they are being elbowed aside by technocrats from the
consumer side, like Mr. Reed.

SOME say Mr. Reed's first task will be to smoothe the waters between these two
camps - in addition to helping address the bank's other concerns. ''One of John
Reed's jobs will be to integrate the corporate and the retail side,'' said Mr.
Santomero of Wharton. ''Corporate banking is very large and very aggressive. And
if it is not receiving the right kind of attention, this is likely to cause
concern. One of the things Mr. Reed will have to do is make evident his
commitment to the entire bank.''

There are some who doubt that Mr. Reed will prove to be the human engineer
needed to solve such problems, but when it comes to technology - on which the
bank has bet its future - Mr. Reed has few peers.  ''John Reed is probably the
No. 1 banker in America in terms of knowledge and experience in applying
technology to the financial services business,'' said George Salem, banking
analyst with Becker-Paribas Inc. ''Electronics is vital. It's the linchpin that
makes Citicorp different from the others and gives them the edge in
efficiency.'' Added James McDermott Jr., a bank analyst with Keefe, Bruyette,
Woods: ''Competition and narrow spreads have put profit pressures on traditional
lending. The momentum and direction of Citicorp lies in technology and in the
retail area. The election of John Reed is a recognition of that current
momentum.''

Mr. Reed is perhaps best known for persevering through consumer banking's
darkest hours at Citicorp, a time in the late-70's when it rolled up hundreds of
millions of dollars in losses through ill-fated ventures and start-up costs for
electronics. These activities cut Citicorp's earnings and took a bite from
executives' bonuses, as well. But the consumer division ultimately turned
around, earning $202 million last year, and Mr. Reed rose in the Citicorp
hierarchy. He was one of the three named to the Citicorp vice chairmanship in
1982 - all earned identical salaries and bonuses of $703,000 last year - while
speculation raged on the fate of the three.

Irving Shapiro, former chairman of Du Pont and a member of the Citicorp board,
said Mr. Reed was selected over his co-vice chairmen, Thomas C. Theobald and
Hans H. Angermueler, because ''in a practical sense, he was batting .350 and the
other two guys were batting .340.'' Mr. Shapiro said it was wrong to ascribe Mr.
Reed's selection to Citicorp's push in consumer banking. More important, said
Mr. Shapiro, is that Mr. Reed ''has great capacity for conceptual thinking, has
enormous intellectual power and is a very bright man.  Despite what I read, he
relates well to his troops - people like working for and working with him.''

In last week's excitement over the announcement of Mr. Wriston's heir, Mr.  Reed
was unable - or unwilling - to demonstrate such attributes in public.  Other
than a brief formal speech in New York, Mr. Reed was closeted far from the
press, unavailable for interviews or photographs.

Initially, Mr. Reed will be overseeing a blueprint that he himself helped to
draft, one that calls for a vast expansion of consumer banking activities and a
slowdown in the growth of traditional corporate banking. The Citicorp plan, if
Congress and the regulators allow, calls for the megabank to continue its
national push into the selling of insurance, deposit-taking from coast-to-coast
and the marketing of electronic information. Citicorp projects that by 1990 it
will have 35 million customers nationwide, each providing about $30 in earnings
- $1 billion in profits.

Even in its current configuration, Citicorp does not portray itself as a bank.
Rather it uses the phrase ''financial services conglomerate,'' stalking the
consumer landscape with other giants such as Sears, Merrill Lynch and American
Express. But, it isn't only the giants who are squaring off against Citicorp. It
is also thousands of regional banks that dot the nation. ''They will be the most
important competitors we will have in consumer banking,'' said Hugh McColl,
chairman and chief executive of NCNB Corporation in Charlotte, N.C.

For Citicorp, consumer banking is the promised land to be reached by money
machines and other electronic systems that slip around regulations and over
borders. Consumer markets offer vast untapped resevoirs of stable low-cost
funds. So far, the bank is reaching them through one of its three
recently-acquired savings and loan institutions (190 branches and growing), its
22 industrial banks chartered in seven states, and its 12 million credit card
customers who use Citicorp's Visa, Mastercard or Diners Club card.  Dealing with
consumers is a way for Citicorp insulate itself from the whims of the wholesale
money markets. There money often costs more and, in the wake of the near
collapse of Continental Illinois, it may flee at the first hint of trouble.
''Consumer funds are a lot more stable than other purchase funds, and in the
aftermath of Continental Illinois, that's important,'' said Ronald I.  Mandle, a
bank analyst with Paine Webber, Inc.


AT the same time that Citicorp is aggressively plunging into the consumer
business, it is relying less on corporate banking. Citicorp has been packaging
and selling its corporate loans - and realizing an immediate fee - rather than
holding them and waiting for interest payments to come in. Last year, Citicorp
sold nearly $5 billion of its corporate loans, primarily to other banks, and
plans to increase that to about $20 billion over the next five years.

Citibank can play consumers coming and going. Not only are they a cheap, stable
source of funds, but also they are ripe turf for Citicorp's vast lending
operation. And the bank has cleverly searched for loopholes to maximize what
they get per consumer.  For instance, faced with tough usury laws in New York
State, Citicorp made a landmark decision in 1981 to move its credit card
operation to South Dakota, where legislators were won over by Citicorp's promise
of jobs if that state lifted its usury ceiling.

Today, homes across the land are flooded with mailings from South Dakota
offering Citibank Mastercards - at a $20 annual fee and finance charges of 19.8
perecent. In these brochures, Citicorp offers a panoply of other products to get
the consumers' dollars - certificates of deposit, credit cards, I.R.A.'s,
insurance and money market funds - all in competition with the local banks.
Citicorp has also set up 77 Person-to-Person offices to make mortgage loans in
25 states, in addition to the mortgages it makes through Citibank, its
industrial banks and its savings and loan institutions. In 1983, the bank's
consumer loans totaled $29 billion while deposits were $26 billion.

But the key to making the consumer strategy work is to keep the enormous
overhead costs down - a problem the bank is trying to beat through the magic of
electronics. What Citicorp calls its ''thin-branch'' consumer network is, in
essence, a bank without walls - or boundaries. For instance, Citicorp estimates
that it costs $150 a year to service a customer through a traditional branch
office, but only $20 a year if the banking is done through credit cards.

Yet this strategy is not without problems. Even though Citicorp has been adroit
at finding regulatory loopholes, it is still hamstrung by regulations not faced
by its non-bank competitors like American Express and Sears, which in recent
years have leaped into financial service businesses. In many product areas,
Citicorp can expand only as fast as Washington allows, and the pace of bank
de-regulation is expected to slow in the wake of Continental Illinois.

Another potential stumbling block in the bank's effort to woo consumers is in
the wooing. Despite its heralded push for more business from the average
American, giant Citicorp has been given low marks in some polls by customers -
even in its home base of New York. Mr. Reed must somehow manage to make the
giant even bigger without transforming it into so impersonal a force that
consumers will turn away.

En route to drawing its first profit from consumer operations in 1982, the bank
experienced its share of blunders. A brief effort to force New York City
customers with less than $5,000 in deposits to use only automated tellers
backfired in a barrage of bad publicity. Analysts still talk of another debacle
in 1977, when Citicorp sent out some 26 million letters offering new Visa cards
and quickly became the No. 2 issuer of bank credit cards. But, many of those
using the cards turned out to be bad risks and this contributed to hundreds of
millions of dollars in consumer loans that were written off between 1979 and
1982.  In all, the bank's consumer activities are estimated to have lost some
$300 million before becoming profitable.

Nor is Citicorp's recent acquisition of three failing savings and loan
institutions problem free. The bank now is saddled with a portfolio of
long-term, fixed-rate mortgages that could cause problems if interest rates
continue to climb. And not only is consumer lending inherently more risky than
corporate lending, but some of the innovations Citicorp is pursuing could make
its consumer activities even more risky - for instance, Citicorp's consumer
loans against a homeowner's equity, which are essentially mortgages on top of
mortgages. These could turn sour if recovery is snuffed out.  Citicorp's plan to
expand more deeply into insurance, where it already underwrites some $1.5
billion policies under existing regulations, has already met stiff opposition
from the insurance industry and resistance in Congress.  Even Mr. Wriston wryly
noted this resistance when he spoke last year to a group of life insurance
executives and likened the occasion to Anwar Sadat's first trip to Israel.


WHAT'S more, Citicorp is a pathfinder and others may follow its lead into the
consumer's pocket - which could slow growth for the leader. ''Over time, the
profit margins on the consumer side are likely to be under pressure as well,''
said Mark Alpert, a bank analyst with Bear Stearns. ''Consumer banking can be
more profitable, but a lot of banks are headed in that direction.  And without
regulatory reform, Citicorp can only go so far.'' Added Montgomery Securities'
Mr. Fredericks: ''It's an inherently risky strategy. You can push into a new
business, something hiccups and you end up losing hundreds of millions of
dollars. Citicorp has historically been willing to take these losses. And they
could face more.''

One of Mr. Reed's biggest problems, no doubt, is that he is following in the
wake of an almost historic figure in banking. Though many quibble with details
of Mr. Wriston's 14-year rein, few would argue about the grandeur of his design
or his achievement. Though the bank's big exposure to third world borrowers
remains a problem and though he has ruffled the feathers of bankers and
businessmen who have felt the sting of Citicorp, Mr. Wriston will leave a large
space to be filled on Park Avenue.

It will be years before the measure of Mr. Reed can be taken. But his ascendency
through the technical side of the bank rather than the lending side and his
willingness to innovate and experiment with new directions indicate that he is a
banker who may very well set his own course. Said Mr. Mandle of Paine Webber:
''In selecting Mr. Reed, Citicorp is sending a signal that this is a changing
world and Citicorp intends to lead that change.''


NEXT UP:MYSTERY BANKER

John S. Reed, who will take over in August as chairman and chief executive of
Citicorp, is something of a mystery man in banking. He was raised in Brazil (he
is fluent in both Spanish and Portuguese), he has been variously described as
both icy and sensitive, and he is just as comfortable in the company of
engineers as he is with bankers.

There are many John Reed stories and they present a mosaic of a complex man of
45. Jay W. Lorsch, an organizational behavior professor at the Harvard Business
School, recalls a White House meeting that he and Mr. Reed attended. It was
during the height of the Vietnam War and Mr. Reed, a registered Democrat, took
on a Cabinet officer with a scathing critique of America's venture there. ''It's
misleading to see him as a narrow technocrat,'' said Mr. Lorsch. ''He's a very
broad- gauged thinker.''

Mr. Lorsch wrote an unflattering business school case about Mr. Reed's travails
in computerizing Citicorp's back office. He recalls that Mr. Reed was far more
sensitive to the human issues than the case lets on. In fact, it was Mr. Reed
who hired Mr. Lorsch as a consultant to help relieve widespread unhappiness and
concerns among Citicorp back office workers whom Mr. Reed supervised. And Mr.
Reed agreed to have the case written, allowing his and the bank's name to be
used, over the objections of many at Citicorp.

Mr. Reed's 19-year old daughter, Traci, says her father is hardly a tough guy.
''He rarely yells and home and when he does we deserve it,'' said Miss Reed, a
student at Denison University, and one of four Reed children. ''He's very
understanding and let's us go our own way as long as we obey the rules and
curfews.'' Miss Reed said her father reads scientific magazines, is not much
interested in exercise except for an occasional lap in the pool or gentle skiing
at the family's house in Stratton, Vt.

James Q. Griffen, former personnel director for Citicorp's international
division, recalls the day in 1965 when he hired Mr. Reed. ''He just stood out
from the very first two minutes,'' said Mr. Griffen, now treasurer of the
Metropolitan Museum of Art. Mr. Griffen recalls Mr. Reed's remarkable energy,
his ''ecclesiastical sense,'' and his habit of clipping the daily newspapers to
save an eclectic array of articles.

''He's verbal and he says what he thinks,'' said Mr. Griffen.  Mr. Reed's manner
is quite different from that of his predecessor, Walter B. Wriston. ''Walt is
more reflective and intellectual,'' said Mr. Griffen. Walt speaks in iambic
pentameter. John speaks in good old American English.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: chart of net income for Citicorp's core business; photo of Citicorp
Center in Manhattan; photo of John S. Reed; graphs of Citicorp's record

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              429 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
MONDALE AND WHO ELSE?

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 860 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 23


Walter Mondale, ahead on delegates but 15 points behind President Reagan in the
popularity polls, is now looking over the Democratic field for a Vice-
Presidential candidate who might help him win in November.

Should he go with Gary Hart, as Ronald Reagan went with George Bush in 1980, in
the hope of uniting the party? Or with a woman or a black? Or with the person he
thinks best qualified to be President, in case of accident, as Jimmy Carter
chose Mr. Mondale himself in 1980?

What Mr. Mondale does about this - selecting the best President-in- waiting or
the best vote-getter to help him in November - will probably tell us more about
Mr. Mondale than about his running-mate.

There is a popular view that the Vice-Presidential nominee makes little if any
difference, especially this year, since Mr. Mondale seems to be so far behind
that as Theodore White remarked here the other night, not entirely in jest, the
only woman who could help Fritz on the ticket would be Florence Nightingale or
Joan of Arc.

Even so, Mr. Mondale's choice of a Vice-Presidential nominee will be the first
indication of the quality of the people he would put in his Administration if he
won. And considering the disappointing record of Mr. Reagan's appointments to
the Cabinet, White House staff and embassies abroad, Mr. Mondale's decisions in
this period of rest and reflection, about where he's going and who's going with
him, could be important.

We all know the old historic and music-hall jokes about the Vice Presidency, and
even now they're vaguely amusing. Franklin Roosevelt picked John Nance Garner as
his Vice President, hoping to assure the electoral votes of Texas, and after
eight years in that office, Mr. Garner concluded that the job wasn't ''worth a
pitcher of warm spit.''

In more elegant terms, John Adams, our first Vice President, wrote that ''my
country has in its wisdom contrived for me the most insignificant office that
ever the invention of man contrived . . . .''

Yet as Martin Wattenberg, among others, has recently reminded us, in an article
in Public Opinion, nine Vice Presidents have had to assume the daunting
responsibilities of the Presidency upon the death or resignation of their
skippers. They served 26 years as President, and four of them were then elected
for four more years in the Oval Office.

In recent years, these facts have gradually changed the role of the Vice
Presidency. Franklin Roosevelt shunned Harry Truman, didn't even tell him about
the invention of the atom bomb. Dwight Eisenhower tolerated Richard Nixon but
just barely. Lyndon Johnson intimidated Hubert Humphrey and everybody else who
doubted his conduct of the Vietnam war.

But lately there has been a switch. President Carter brought Mr. Mondale into
the center of executive decisions, and President Reagan not only forgave George
Bush's opposition in the 1980 campaign, but has used and trusted him as a key
member of his Cabinet.

As a result, Ronald Reagan, now in his 74th year and the oldest President in the
history of the Republic, has dealt with the Vice-Presidential question with the
utmost care. And Mr. Bush, who has served in the Congress, as head of the
Central Intelligence Agency, as Ambassador to the United Nations and to China,
has not only been involved in the major decisions of the Reagan Administration,
but has had the good judgment to be invisible in the process.

Now it is Mr. Mondale's turn to choose, not only a Vice-Presidential nominee,
but a shadow Cabinet to run against the Reagan-Bush ticket, and also against Mr.
Reagan's Cabinet and White House staff, dominated by the President's California
friends. This may be Mr. Mondale's best chance.

There is little evidence so far, however, that Mr. Mondale has put his mind to
the problem of ideas for the future or people who could help him define and
administer them. It's not that he lacks resources. He has in the universities
and elsewhere a great number of talented supporters, who are deeply troubled
about Mr. Reagan's deficits at home and particularly his staggering and
blundering abroad. But Mr. Mondale has not recruited them and has yet to make a
speech about the future anybody here remembers.

Looking alone at the Democratic Party Presidential candidates he has already
defeated - Messrs. Hart, Jackson, Glenn, Cranston, Hollings, McGovern, and Askew
- not to mention such others as Senators Bentsen of Texas and Bumpers of
Arkansas, among others, Mr. Mondale already has the makings of a Cabinet that
could match Mr. Reagan's buddy boys, which is not saying much. But Mr. Mondale
is not bringing them together.

He is saying he has won but he's still talking about delegates instead of ideas,
about the convention instead of the election. His choice of a Vice-Presidential
nominee will be the first test of his judgment, but even that will not tell us
whether he intends to go it alone or pick a shadow Cabinet that can demonstrate
that in November the people will be choosing not merely a man but an executive
organization that looks better than Mr. Reagan's California pick- up team now
running the White House and the major departments.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              430 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RAYMOND CARVER: A CHRONICLER OF BLUE-COLLAR DESPAIR

BYLINE: By Bruce Weber

SECTION: Section 6; Page 36, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5677 words


Bruce Weber writes frequently on literary topics.



 RAYMOND CARVER is indulging himself of late, using time that is available to
him, finally, for writing and for not much else. He's working on poems these
days, another indulgence, instead of the short stories he's become known for,
but the key thing is all the available time. He's hoarding time for writing as
if he were afraid things might change again and he'd have to go back to
snatching an hour here and there, to working on a scratch pad in the car or in
the garage, or else to not writing at all. He is just getting used to this
liberty, the element in his life that has always been most elusive, a life that
is, at long last, serene, prosperous and productive. ''I feel good about
things,'' he says, though he colors his words with cautiousness. The exuberant
impulse is there, but it comes out in stammers. ''I feel, I feel, uh . . .
happy.''

Today Carver has been at his desk since just before dawn. At 45, Carver is a
large man, with hair in the throes of going gray, a pudding face, the beginnings
of jowls. He's wearing a patterned polyester shirt, with an oversized,
way-out-of-style collar, blue jeans and slippers that are coming apart. More
than anything, he looks kind.

Now, in the early afternoon, after seven or eight hours, he has cut his workday
short, and he is sitting - slouching, really, his customary posture - on the
sofa of his new home on the outskirts of Port Angeles, a fishing and logging
town on the northern shelf of the state of Washington's Olympic peninsula. For
several weeks, he has been living in the house by himself, with the phone mostly
unplugged and few social distractions because he knows almost no one out here.
Some of the best salmon fishing in the world is within walking distance of the
house, and Carver is a lifelong fisherman, but, he says, he's been out with his
waders only once, the afternoon he arrived. This is a brilliant, early spring
day, and the landscape, all precipitous terrain and deep colors, is beckoning
through the windows, but Carver is loath to go outdoors. His mind is still
tethered to his morning's work.

''Two in the bank today,'' he says, referring to the poems he's been revising.
He's smoking relentlessly and drinking glasses of caffeine-free cola.

Last year, Carver was the recipient of a Mildred and Harold Strauss Livings
stipend, a five-year annual sum of $35,000 granted by the American Academy and
Institute of Arts and Letters, that freed him from his post as a teacher of
creative writing on the faculty of Syracuse University. ''It's always been a
luxury for me to write,'' he says. And then he adds, protectively, ''It's a
luxury now that I don't want to forgo.''

It's odd, perhaps, that Carver is working so hard on poems right now. (For a
recent Raymond Carver poem, see page 38.) For He has published two slim
collections, ''Winter Insomnia'' and ''At Night the Salmon Move,'' but his
career as a poet has so far been undistinguished. On the other hand, Carver's
three books of short stories have made him, arguably, suddenly, America's
pre-eminent writer in that genre.

The influence of Carver's skillful, quiet voice is being felt by a generation of
still unpublished writers. According to Tom Jenks, who edits fiction at Esquire,
''The style most often attempted by young writers is one marked by short,
hard-edged sentences, like those of Ray Carver, and the subject matter often
brushes up against Carver's as well - representative of what I would call a
downside neo- realism.''

Both of Carver's last two collections, ''What We Talk About When We Talk About
Love,'' published in 1981, and ''Cathedral,'' which appeared last fall, garnered
front-page attention in The New York Times Book Review, the latter collection
prompting the critic Irving Howe to declare in his review, ''A few of Carver's
stories . . . can already be counted among the masterpieces of American
fiction.'' Generally, opinion about ''What We Talk About'' conformed to that of
the distinguished British critic Frank Kermode, who deemed it ''the work of a
full-grown master.'' ''Cathedral'' was chosen by The Times as one of the 13 best
books of 1983, and was a fiction nominee of the National Book Critics Circle.


Such recognition is anomalous, on the whole, for a fiction writer who is not a
novelist, but it comes at a time when short stories are creating a stir in the
publishing industry. Since 1979, a period virtually coinciding with that of
Raymond Carver's success, many publishers and critics have noted that the short
story seems to be undergoing a renaissance. Recent years have seen the
publication and critical welcoming of story collections by such new writers as
Mary Robison, Mark Helprin, Tobias Wolff, Bette Pesetsky, the late Breece D'J
Pancake, Jayne Anne Phillips, Janet Kauffman and Bobbie Ann Mason.

There has always been an appreciative market for the stories of established
masters. ''The Stories of John Cheever,'' for example, published in 1978, has
sold almost 200,000 copies in hard-cover and more than 500,000 in paperback and
was one of the few story collections ever to land on The Times's best- seller
list. But now publishers are saying that collections by previously unknown
writers are, if not enormously profitable, then at least worth a risk. ''Not
long ago,'' says Robert Gottlieb, editor in chief of Alfred A. Knopf, Carver's
publisher, ''it would have been all too easy to publish a collection of stories
by a talented writer and sell 2,000 copies at best. There's still the chance of
disaster, of course, but now these writers can sell 5,000 and more copies, and
get a lot of attention.''

However, there remain skeptics. ''There is no renaissance,'' says Ted
Solotaroff, founder of the defunct New American Review and now an editor at
Harper & Row. ''There's just Ray Carver and Jayne Anne Phillips and Bobbie Ann
Mason. For a brief period, the success of one or two books overturns the
conventional wisdom that short stories don't sell. So writers have a little more
incentive to write stories, and publishers are a little less cynical about
publishing short-story collections.'' Frank Conroy, who is director of the
literature program for the National Endowment for the Arts, and who is
completing a book of stories of his own, adds: ''You have to be careful how you
use the term 'renaissance.' There are more competent story writers turning out
work now than there were a few years ago. Whether there are more great ones,
probably no.''

Whatever the precise dimensions of the short-story surge, Raymond Carver is
indisputably at the center of it. ''Cathedral'' has sold nearly





 20,000 hard-cover copies, an extraordinary number for a book of serious stories
by a writer whose reputation has not long been established. And this spring,
Vintage Books published ''Fires,'' a paperback reprint of a limited edition of
stories, poems and essays, plus a lengthy interview with Carver that originally
appeared in The Paris Review. It's a curious smattering of Carver's work, what
amounts to a Raymond Carver reader, and an industry testament to the interest
his work has spawned that may well be unprecedented for a writer of such limited
output.

Carver's stories are populated by characters who live in America's shoddy
enclaves of convenience products and conventionality - people who shop at
Kwik-Mart and who live in saltbox houses or quickly built apartment complexes.
They don't seem to want much: ordinarily divided lives of work and home, food on
the table, love and solace when they need them. They yearn for serenity rather
than achievement.

Still, there is vast unhappiness in them; they don't get the little they want.
Carver's people end up being deserted by common satisfactions, and the stories
are moral tales, really, explaining why decent men and women, dealt crummy
circumstances in a plentiful world, behave badly in their intimate battles with
selfishness. Written in an accessible vernacular, resonant with cryptic
petulance and loud silences, the stories speak the language of everyday
profundity.

''He's an important writer from any number of standpoints,'' says Gordon Lish,
Carver's editor at Alfred A. Knopf for both of the last two books. ''Carver's
way of staging a story, staging its revelations, is, I think, unique. Carver's
sentence is unique. But what has most powerfully persuaded me of Carver's value
is his sense of a peculiar bleakness,'' a comment that rightly places Carver in
the peculiarly bleak tradition of Sherwood Anderson and Carson McCullers. ''It's
not that his people are impoverished,'' Lish continues, ''except that they might
be impoverished in spirit. It's not that they aren't educated, because in some
cases they are. They just seem squalid. In every manifestation of human
activity, they seem squalid. They're like hillbillies, but hillbillies of the
shopping mall. And Carver celebrates that squalor, reveals that squalor, makes
poetic that squalor in a way nobody else has tried to do.''

In the 1960's and the early 1970's, some of our more ingenious fiction writers -
Donald Barthelme and John Barth, Stanley Elkin and Thomas Pynchon, Joseph Heller
and John Hawkes - translated the clamor of those years into fictional worlds
spinning weirdly out of control, showing us the whimsy and contradictions in our
lives with the artifice of narrative form and the farcical nature of characters
trying to make a go of it in a behaviorally unbound society. Who can understand
the world? they asked. Life is lunacy.

The stories of Raymond Carver tell us that we don't live that way any longer.
And if the positive critical judgment of Carver and reader interest in his work
prove anything, it is that we believe his vision. In the small struggles of
individual lives, Carver touches a large human note: When hope flies and
impervious helplessness descends, where will we get our next boost from? What do
we do now? Life in Carver's America isn't incomprehensible. It's merely very
difficult, and like the claims staked by every fine writer, his territory is not
really so localized. ''He has done what many of the most gifted writers fail to
do,'' the critic Michael Wood wrote in The New York Times Book Review. ''He has
invented a country of his own.'' Carver country is a place we all recognize.
It's a place that Carver himself comes from, the country of arduous life.


Seven years ago, Raymmond Carver had hit bottom, having been virtually defeated
by recurrent domestic and financial troubles during the previous 20 years, and
having,




 over a prolonged period of alcoholism, nearly drunk himself dead. ''My life had
just sunk to a vastly low state,'' he says now. ''I was a goner.''

In the spring of 1977, Carver had separated for the last time from the woman who
had been his wife since he was 18 and she was 16. He was living alone, on money
he had borrowed from his wife, in a rented house in McKinleyville, Calif. He was
estranged from his two children; he was broke and unemployed. His first
collection of stories, ''Will You Please Be Quiet, Please?'', had been published
a year earlier, and had even been nominated for a National Book Award, but sales
and royalties were insignificant. Moreover, he hadn't written a word since.

''In the last 15 months before I quit drinking,'' he recalls, ''I was
hospitalized once and I was in a detox center, a drying-out clinic, three times.
I was in pretty serious shape. For all intents and purposes, I was finished as a
writer and as a viable, functioning adult male. It was over for me. That's why I
can speak of two lives, that life and this life.''

Much of Carver's fiction sounds like that life, the first one, life as he no
longer lives it. His characters, more often than not, are hapless, in the sense
that their lives are without luck. They are married or not, employed or not,
sober or not, solvent or not - but whatever the situation, things are in a state
of undoneness. Hearing Carver speak about the demise of his first life, you know
where the stories come from. His speaking voice sounds suddenly like his writing
voice, deadpan, sparse, short on exposition and long on resignation.

Carver quit drinking on June 2, 1977, a day he calls ''the line of demarcation''
in his life. As he recounts the six months before that date, he is forthright,
but the recollections come out softly and slowly and between deep breaths:

''The last of the dryings-out took place between Christmas and New Year's Eve of
1976. When I got out, I started drinking again. And then I went away, up to
northern California, to live by myself. I went up there in February 1977. I
tried to get sober. I stayed sober for a while, about three weeks. Then I got
drunk again, and then I was sober for about another three weeks. And then I
thought, 'Well, maybe I can go to San Francisco.' This was at the end of May. I
was going to meet Fred Hills, from McGraw Hill, about a novel he wanted me to
write. And Noel Young, at Capra Press, I had some business with him. So I went
down there and I had not had a drink for three weeks, and I spent the day in the
company of Fred. And we went to several bars in the North Beach area, and he
drank and I drank Cokes.

''I remember there was a party that night and a number of writers and editors
were there. And wine was the house drink. I remember picking up a glass of wine
early on in the party, drinking that glass of wine, and that's it. I do have
another recollection, that somewhere in this party I was going around trying to
find another glass that had some wine in it. But that's all I remember.

''When I woke up the next morning, I was hideously hung over, and I drank half a
pint of vodka, and I drank all that day. I drank all through that weekend, and I
don't think I went back up north until Tuesday. Then on Tuesday morning,
somehow, I got to the plane back to Arcata. I asked the cabbie to stop for a
bottle on the way to the plane. I got back to my house, and I was drunk when I
got there, and then I was sick for four days. The fourth day, I was feeling a
little better. And I didn't drink, didn't drink, didn't drink. No great
long-range plans. It was just a day at a time.''

Why this proved to be, as Carver calls it, ''the last waltz,'' isn't clear even
to him. The wine party was not the first occasion of his blacking out, the
weekend wasn't the worst of his drunken episodes. Asked in his Paris Review
interview to recall the worst, Carver responded: ''Let's just say, on occasion,
the police were involved and emergency rooms and courtrooms.'' Of the source of
his ultimate resolve, he says, ''It finally sank in on me after that that I was
not going to be able to drink like a normal person. I guess I wanted to live.''

Carver was born in Clatskanie, Ore., in 1939. He grew up in Yakima, a logging
town in the central part of Washington, where his father worked in a mill as a
saw-filer, and his mother held odd jobs, clerking and waitressing. After
graduating from high school, Carver worked for six months in the mill, long
enough to buy a car and some clothes. Then he moved out of his parents' house
and married Maryann Burk, the girl he had gotten pregnant. Two children were
born before Carver was out of his teens.

''I really don't feel that anything happened in my life until I was 20 and
married and had the kids,'' he has written. And though many of his stories draw
on his memories of Yakima and are set in the isolated, working-class environs of
the Northwest, the spirit of his fiction derives from the years following, after
he and his wife moved the family south, to Paradise, a small town in California.

In the fall of 1958, Carver enrolled as a part-time student at Chico State
College. He wanted to be a writer, a desire somehow spawned by his early reading
of pulp novels and magazines about fishing and hunting. At Chico State, he found
a fan for that flame, his first teacher, the late John Gardner, then an
unpublished novelist. Carver credits Gardner with being a seminal influence on
his writing life, names him as the man who taught him about the integrity and
honesty of fiction, about getting everything right, down to the commas, about
the agony and difficulty of that, ''a writer's values and craft.''

Gardner's inspiration notwithstanding, for the Carvers, the 1960's were a decade
of hardship and drain, of living in rented houses or apartments in unfamiliar
places, of part-time schooling and dispiriting full-time employment. Before he
landed his first white-collar job, as an editor at a textbook firm in Palo Alto,
Carver picked tulips, pumped gas, swept hospital corridors, swabbed toilets,
managed an apartment complex. His wife worked for the phone company, waited
tables, sold a series of book digests door-to- door. The kids kept them brutally
busy. There was a bankruptcy. Carver remembers baby sitters, laundromats, broken
appliances, lines of creditors: bad times.

''I learned a long time ago,'' he says, ''when my kids were little, and we had
no money, and we were working our hearts out and weren't getting anywhere, even
though we were giving it our best, my wife and I, that there were more important
things than writing a poem or a story. That was a very hard realization for me
to come to. But it came to me, and I had to accept it or die. Getting milk and
food on the table, getting the rent paid, if a choice had to be made, then I had
to forgo writing.''

After Paradise, they lived in other places: the San Fran




 cisco Bay area, and other California towns like Arcata, Eureka, Sunnyvale,
Cupertino, Santa Cruz, Ben Lomond and Sacramento. There was a brief stint in
Iowa City, Iowa, in 1963-1964, which Carver spent in the writers' program at the
University of Iowa. And in the late 1960's, there was a trip to Israel, when
Maryann Carver enrolled in a state-sponsored program for students abroad, a
planned year's sojourn aborted after a few months because they ran out of money.
Carver recalls the trip as a low point, a final straw, and it was not long after
the return from Israel that his drinking began in earnest. Carver had left his
editing post to accompany his family, and the dashed hopes of that journey
(among other disappointments, they'd been promised a villa on the Mediterranean,
which Carver envisioned as an idyllic writing space, and ended up living in a
crammed suburb of Tel Aviv) took on a significance for him that was revelatory.

''To make a long story short,'' he says, ''we bagged it and came home. I didn't
write the entire time I was over there, and we came back and lived in Hollywood
for a while. We finally came back up north, and I got my job back. But my life
had changed by then and I knew the world wasn't my oyster.''

The transience Carver experienced in those years has found its expression in his
fiction. It isn't that Carver's characters move around so much; for the most
part, their lives stand still. Events swirl around them that they are powerless
either to stop or take part in, and they feel stuck. The claims their lives have
staked seem worthless; the future becomes cruelly shapeless. Carver's characters
sense their limits, and their vaguely wandering minds are left deluged with
tiny, immediate concerns and unspecific longing.

Carver's people (those who are working) are mailmen, janitors, housewives,
teachers; others sell things or wait tables. Some have offices to go to. They
feed the children, visit friends and drink or get stoned, enjoy fishing. They
have possessions that they're always having fixed or trying to sell. They want
to be unperturbed, want the time to pass easily. Contentment lies in the
perpetuation of immediately gratifying experience. There is a lot of eating in
Carver's stories, a lot of booze and cigarettes, and a lot of fast sex.
Reviewers have often portrayed Carver's characters as destitute, whipped by
life. But they aren't as tragic as that. Their lives are shabby, not empty, and
excruciatingly ordinary.

''Until I started reading these reviews of my work, praising me, I never felt
the people I was writing about were so bad off,'' Carver says. ''You know what I
mean? The waitress, the bus driver, the mechanic, the hotel keeper. God, the
country is filled with these people. They're good people. People doing the best
they could.''

There is a pivotal, revelatory moment in virtually all the lives he describes.
Whether it occurs during the story or has taken place before it begins, that
moment upsets the patterns, however banal, in which his characters are
accustomed to living. It is the moment at which complacency disappears. Carver
focuses on his characters just when they realize that things will be the same
forever, a realization that insures that they will never be the same again.

In ''So Much Water So Close to Home,'' a man returns from a weekend fishing trip
and goes to be with his wife. The next morning, he confesses that on the first
evening of the trip, he and his companions had found the body of a young girl
floating in the river near their campsite, but that they'd decided to remain and
fish for the weekend before leaving the woods to report it. The wife, who
narrates the story, is hugely unsettled by her husband's having made love to her
still possessing such an ugly secret, and her revulsion catalyzes a genuine
despair.

In one version of the story (Carver, an incorrigible and persnickety reviser,
has written several and published two), she makes her lament explicit: ''Look at
what has happened. Yet nothing will change for Stuart and me. Really change, I
mean. We will grow older, both of us, you can see it in our faces already, in
the bathroom mirror, for instance, mornings when we use the bathroom. And
certain things around us will change, become easier or harder, one thing or the
other, but nothing will ever really be any different. I believe that.''

In ''Vitamins,'' a hospital janitor seeks relief from the uneventful routine of
his life. (''It was a nothing job. I did some work, signed the card for eight
hours, went drinking with the nurses.'') He initiates what promises to be a
squalid affair with a friend of his wife's. Their first date is obscenely
intruded upon by a huge black man, a recently returned Vietnam veteran. His
sudden presence ruins the tryst and turns the couple's thoughts toward bitter
self- examination. ''Maybe I could go to Portland,'' the woman says, leaving.
''There must be something in Portland. Portland's on everybody's mind these
days. Portland's a drawing card. Portland this, Portland that. Portland's as
good a place as any. It's all the same.''

The story ends when the man returns home and finds his wife stalking through the
house in the middle of an unruly nightmare. The final paragraph is a
particularly Carveresque moment of quiet, personal horror:

''I couldn't take any more tonight. 'Go back to sleep, honey. I'm looking for
something,' I said. I knocked some stuff out of the medicine chest. Things
rolled into the sink. 'Where's the aspirin?' I said. I knocked down some more
things. I didn't care. Things kept falling.''

Carver's is not a particularly lyrical prose. A typical sentence is blunt and
uncomplicated, eschewing the ornaments of descriptive adverbs and parenthetical
phrases. His rhythms are often repetitive or brusque, as if to suggest the
strain of people learning to express newly felt things, fresh emotions. Time
passes in agonizingly linear fashion, the chronology of a given scene marked by
one fraught and simple gesture after another. Dialogue is usually clipped, and
it is studded with commonplace observations of the concrete objects on the table
or on the wall - rather than the elusive, important issues in the air. The title
of Carver's second story collection, ''What We Talk About When We Talk About
Love,'' is suggestive of both his subject matter and technique, his interest in
how we obliquely address the grand concerns in our lives.

To illustrate, here is a passage from ''A Serious Talk,'' in which a man pays a
post- Christmas visit to the family from which he's been achingly separated. He
gives his children their gifts, and then chats with his fed-up, bitter wife:


''Vera?''

She looked at him.  ''Do you have anything to drink? I could use a drink this
morning.''

''There's some vodka in the freezer.''

''When did you start keeping vodka in the freezer?''

''Don't ask.''

''Okay,'' he said. ''I won't ask.''

He got out the vodka and poured some into a cup he found on the counter.

She said, ''Are you just going to drink it like that, out of a cup?'' She said,
''Jesus, Burt. What'd you want to talk about, anyway? I told you I have
someplace to go. I have a flute lesson at one o'clock.''

''Are you still taking flute?''

''I just said so. What is it? Tell me what's on your mind, and then I have to
get ready.''

''I wanted to say I was sorry.''

She said, ''You said that.''

He said, ''If you have any juice, I'll mix it with this vodka.''

She opened the refrigerator and moved things around.

''There's Cranapple juice,'' she said.

''That's fine,'' he said.

''I'm going to the bathroom,'' she said.


Carver's characters know a good deal less than the author does. They don't share
his wide perspective, and they don't often go in for analysis or philosophical
speculation. The intelligence of the stories is communicated over their heads,
so to speak, from author to reader, and it is this quality that has led more
than one critic to observe a note of condescension in some of the stories. But
in his best work, Carver's voice serves to reinforce the world of his
characters. His is an almost journalistic kind of accuracy; his voice is the
voice of experience.

''All of my stories have in some way to do with my own life,'' Carver says. But
he is firm in his assertion that he doesn't engage in outright autobiography.
The germ of a story is a single sentence, he explains, a sentence that offers a
million possibilities. ''It's a process of connections,'' he says. ''Things
begin to connect up. A line here. A word there. Stuff I heard or saw when I was
16 years old or 40 years old. There's no way I could ever write a story about my
neighbor Art. But I may some day write a story and use him wandering onto his
porch and saying, 'I'm doing my spring cleaning.'

''That picture may appear in my head later with yet another character, who is
half his age. 'I'm doing my spring cleaning. What a beautiful day.' That may get
into the story. It may have to do with a black man who is 30 years old, doing
just that. Or the fact that I heard not so long ago that Art was urinating
blood. There was something wrong with his bladder. I won't forget that. And some
character in my story, one I'm very close to, he may be urinating blood.'' The
difference between the lives Carver writes about and the life he has lived is
clear. Recently, he wrote an introduction to ''On Becoming a Novelist,'' a book
by his former mentor, John Gardner, published posthumously. In the midst of fond
recollections and considerable gratitude, Carver describes his own desire to be
a writer as having always been ''so



 strong that, with the encouragement I was given in college, and the insight
acquired, I kept on writing long after 'good sense' and the 'cold facts' - the
'realities' of my life - told me, time and time again, that I ought to quit,
stop the dreaming, quietly go ahead and do something else.''

That desire, coupled with his long years of blue-collar living, has created a
dual impulse in Carver, to be both artist and Everyman. As he assesses his
chosen work: ''If I write a story and somebody connects up with it in some way,
is moved by it and reminded of his humanness, then I'm happy. What more can I
want? It's important to do the work because somebody needs to do it. It's
important to be reminded that we're human. I know I make more of it than I
should, but I think it's a noble undertaking, this business. It beats a lot of
other things I can think of.''


Port Angeles rests against the Strait of Juan de Fuca, a pretty blue sluice that
separates Washington's Olympic peninsula from British Columbia. It's a town of
blue-collar homes and trim lawns, bars and takeout restaurants and motels.
People who live here work outdoors, in the woods or on the water; vacationers
pass through and fish, hike or ski in the mountains close by. It's an odd place
for a writer enjoying success, neither a cultural center nor a genuine retreat.
Port Angeles is the home town of the poet Tess Gallagher, the woman Raymond
Carter has been living with for five years.

They met in El Paso, while Carver was teaching there, the first job he landed
after getting sober, but they are keeping house long-distance at the moment. She
is in Syracuse, where she teaches and where they keep another home. Their lives
have been hectic lately. ''Traffic, traffic, commerce, you know,'' Carver says,
too distracting for him to work well, and that is why he is out here alone. Tess
Gallagher helped design this house, which sits on an abrupt bluff, and this
afternoon it is full of light streaming in through a dozen windows. It faces
north, across the water, and the air is clear enough today that the city of
Victoria, 22 miles distant, is plainly visible.

Throughout the afternoon, Carver has been nibbling, the sort of instant stuff
that nourishes his characters - shrimp cocktail, supermarket cake, breakfast
cereal, canned soda. And there are other signs of well-established habits. Dirty
dishes are piled up on the kitchen counter, and the place is generally littered,
with paper, books, record albums, a typewriter, all absently put down on
available surfaces and left there. The whole scene is actually charming, a man
creating his natural life in a better place than he is used to.

Times change, writers continue to write. Carver's stories about life as it used
to be may be spent. Many critics have noted that the stories in ''Cathedral''
are fuller, more generous and more optimistic than those in his previous books.
Two stories in particular, the title story and one called ''Fever,'' end on
notes of resounding uplift. Also, many of his personal wounds have healed. He is
back on amicable terms with his first wife and with his children. And his recent
projects have taken him in directions he hasn't explored before. There are these
poems, spilling out in droves, he says, ''better poems than I've ever written
before.'' Later on this year, Carver will be the feature poet in a special issue
of the literary magazine Tendril. He has a novel underway, but it is incomplete
and dormant at the moment. And last fall, he completed a long screenplay with
the director Michael Cimino, about the rehabilitation of juvenile felons. ''I
spend just a few minutes a month in the past,'' Carver says. ''I have my
children now, and I know them now on this basis in this new life. And I can't
wish for things to be different.''

Standing, looking out the window over the bright water, Carver bites into a
sweet roll. ''Nietzsche has a phrase, Amor fati,'' he says. ''Love what is.''







 Lately, Raymond Carver has taken time off from short stories to return to
poetry. Here, published for the first time, is one of his most recent poems.







 MY DAD'S WALLET



 Long before he thought of his own death, my dad said he wanted to lie close to
his parents. He missed them so after they went away.  He said this enough that
my mother remembered, and I remembered. But when the breath left his lungs and
all signs of life had faded, he found himself in a town 512 miles away from
where he wanted most to be.







 My dad, though. He was restless even in death. Even in death he had this one
last trip to take.  All his life he liked to wander, and now he had one more
place to get to.







 The undertaker said he'd arrange it, not to worry. Some poor light from the
window fell on the dusty floor where we waited that afternoon until the man came
out of the back room and peeled off his rubber gloves.  He carried the smell of
formaldehyde with him.  He was a big man, this undertaker said.  Then began to
tell us why he liked living in this small town.  This man who'd just opened my
dad's veins.  How much is it going to cost? I said.







 He took out his pad and pen and began to write. First, the preparation charges.
Then he figured the transportation charges of the remains at 22 cents a mile.
But this was a round-trip for the undertaker, don't forget. Plus, say, six meals
and two nights in a motel. He figured some more. Add a surcharge of $210 for his
time and trouble, and there you have it.







 He thought we might argue.  There was a spot of color on each of his cheeks as
he looked up from his figures. The same poor light fell in the same poor place
on the dusty floor. My mother nodded as if she understood. But she hadn't
understood a word of it.  None of it had made any sense to her, beginning with
the time she left home with my dad. She only knew that whatever was happening
was going to take money.  She reached into her purse and brought up my dad's
wallet. The three of us in that little room that afternoon.  Our breath coming
and going.







 We stared at the wallet for a minute.  Nobody said anything.  All the life had
gone out of that wallet.  It was old and rent and soiled.  But it was my dad's
wallet. And she opened it and looked inside. Drew out a handful of money that
would go toward this last, most astounding, trip.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photos of Raymond Carver; photo of Raymond Carver and poet Tess
Gallgher

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              431 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BEST SELLERS Fiction1

SECTION: Section 7; Page 38, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1347 words


15

FULL CIRCLE, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $15.95.) The relationship of a
mother and daughter is altered by the changing values of the past 40 years.  2

142

''. . . AND LADIES OF THE CLUB,'' by Helen Hooven Santmyer. (Putnam, $19.95.)
Life in an Ohio town, 1868 to 1932. 3

25

THE WALKING DRUM, by Louis L'Amour.  (Bantam, $15.95.) A young man from Brittany
sets out to free his father, enslaved in 12th-century Asia.  4

316

THE AQUITAINE PROGRESSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Random House, $17.95.) A lawyer is
caught in a conspiracy to seize the Western world.  5

411

THE HAJ, by Leon Uris. (Doubleday, $17.95.) One man's experience in the bloody
wars of the Holy Land.  6

54

THE WITCHES OF EASTWICK, by John Updike.  (Knopf, $15.95.) Three witches wreak
havoc in a contemporary Rhode Island town.  7

1

LINCOLN, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $19.95.) Fictionalized account of the
Civil War Presidency. 8

82

BOOK WITHOUT A NAME, by Kit Williams.  (Knopf, $10.95.) New picture story by the
author of ''Masquerade,'' offering a prize for the finder of the book's true
title.  9

64

DEEP SIX, by Clive Cussler. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) One man copes with a
sinister Asian shipping family and an even more threatening Soviet plot.  10

84

THE WHEEL OF FORTUNE, by Susan Howatch.  (Simon & Schuster, $19.95.) The legends
of an old manor haunt four generations of an English family.  11

612

HERETICS OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert.  (Putnam, $16.95.) The fifth volume of a
series about life on a faraway planet.  12

1015

THE BUTTER BATTLE BOOK, by Dr. Seuss.  (Random House, $6.95.) A warning about
the nuclear arms race in words and pictures.  13

112

POSSESSIONS, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon Press/Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) A
woman discovers the truth about her husband after he disappears.  14

122

HIM WITH HIS FOOT IN HIS MOUTH AND OTHER STORIES, by Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row,
$15.95.) A novella and four short stories by the Nobel laureate.  15

12

THE DANGER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $15.95.) A kidnapper at large in the horse
racing world.















































  Nonfiction1

32

WIRED, by Bob Woodward. (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) The troubled life of the
late entertainer John Belushi.  2

516

ONE WRITER'S BEGINNINGS, by Eudora Welty.  (Harvard University Press, $10.) The
novelist recalls her childhood in Mississippi.  3

26

THE FIRE FROM WITHIN, by Carlos Castaneda.  (Simon & Schuster, $16.50.) Another
report on the world of magic and sorcery.  4

93

THE NIGHTMARE YEARS: 1930-1940, by William L. Shirer. (Little, Brown, $22.50.)
Second volume of the memoirs of a celebrated foreign correspondent.  5

49

PAST IMPERFECT, by Joan Collins. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) The autobiography
of the star of the ''Dynasty'' television series.  6

17

FIRST LADY FROM PLAINS, by Rosalynn Carter.  (Houghton Mifflin, $17.95.)
Memoirs.  6

715

THE MARCH OF FOLLY, by Barbara W.  Tuchman. (Knopf, $18.95.) The blunders of
government in four periods, from Troy to Vietnam.  8

78

BALLS, by Graig Nettles and Peter Golenbock.  (Putnam, $14.95.) The San Diego
third baseman tells about his life with the New York Yankees.  8

640

MOTHERHOOD: The Second Oldest Profession, by Erma Bombeck. (McGraw-Hill,
$12.95.) A humorous look at the biggest on-the-job training program ever.  10

105

NATALIE, by Lana Wood. (Putnam, $15.95.) A sister's memoir of the actress
Natalie Wood.  10

132

POWERPLAY, by Mary Cunningham with Fran Schumer. (Linden Press/Simon & Schuster,
$16.95.) The rise and fall of a woman executive at the Bendix Corporation.  12

118

CAVEAT, by Alexander M. Haig Jr. (Macmillan, $17.95.) President Reagan's first
Secretary of State gives his views on foreign policy.  13

1219

MAYOR, by Edward I. Koch with William Rauch.  (Simon & Schuster, $17.95.) New
York's mayor's opinions about his job, his city and the world.  14

1

SWEET SUFFERING, by Natalie Shainess.  (Bobbs-Merrill, $15.95.) A psychiatrist's
account of what she calls ''woman's masochistic behavior.'' 15

1524

THE DISCOVERERS, by Daniel J. Boorstin.  (Random House, $25.) Man's search to
know himself and the world over the centuries.  15

1

GOOD MORNING, MERRY SUNSHINE, by Bob Greene. (Atheneum, $14.95.) The syndicated
columnist's journal of his child's first year.

And Bear in Mind(Editors' choices of other recent books of particular interest)

ENCOUNTERS WITH VERDI, edited by Marcello Conati. (Cornell,

$25.) A revealing and fascinating anthology of reminiscences - by

journalists, musicians, impresarios and chance acquaintances -

of the great, secretive Italian composer.

THE FOREVER STREET, by Frederic Morton. (Doubleday,

$16.95.) A novel about a young man who comes to Vienna, starts a

prosperous business, begets a son, who begets a son - and watches

the city's splendor turn to rot with the coming of the Nazis.

THE KENNEDYS: An American Drama, by Peter Collier and

David Horowitz. (Summit, $20.95.) The triumphs and tragedies of

four generations of Kennedys as they fought their way to the

highest levels of American wealth and power.

LYING IN BED, by Mark Harris. (McGraw-Hill, $14.95.) Another

epistolary novel, the protagonist being the letter-writing and

-receiving Lee Youngdahl of ''Wake Up, Stupid.'' Full of Mr.

Harris's unique sense of fun and playful misadventure.

THE NIGHTMARE OF REASON: A Life of Franz Kafka, by Ernst

Pawel. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $25.50.) A vigorous and pointed

biography of the great Czech writer, whose short life (1883-1924)

was so deeply troubled and brilliantly productive.

SLINGS AND ARROWS: Theater in My Life, by Robert Lewis.

(Stein & Day, $18.95.) An anecdotal memoir by the well-known

director, with a star-studded cast, including Lee Strasberg, Stella

Adler, Elia Kazan and the ghost of Konstantin Stanislavsky.

A WAVE, by John Ashbery. (Viking, $14.95.) A collection of 44 poems

and prose pieces, marked by inspired phrasings, elusive images

and difficult changing surfaces, all written with an air of sovereign

intelligence. Mr. Ashbery's llth book.


Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous

1

113

EAT TO WIN, by Robert Haas. (Rawson, $14.95.) A regimen for participants in
sports and fitness activities.  2

213

WEBSTER'S NINTH COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY.  (Merriam-Webster, $14.95.) A standard
work updated in 1983.  3

34

RANDOM HOUSE COLLEGE DICTIONARY.  (Random House, $14.95.) New revised edition.
4

4

2

GO FOR IT! How to Win at Love, Work, and Play, by Irene S. Kasorla. (Delacorte,
$13.95.) Advice from a psychologist.  5



78

NOTHING DOWN, by Robert G. Allen. (Simon & Schuster, $16.95.) How to buy real
estate with little or no money.

















 The listings above are based on computer-processed sales figures from 2,000
bookstores in every region of the United States, statistically adjusted to
represent sales in all bookstores. In Advice and How-to, five titles are listed
because, beyond that point, sales in this category are not generally large
enough to make a longer list statistically reliable.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: list

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              432 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN SHORT

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 3758 words


FICTION

A DEATH IN CHINA. By William D. Montalbano and Carl Hiaasen. (Atheneum, $14.95.)
William D. Montalbano, a former Peking correspondent who is now bureau chief in
El Salvador for The Los Angeles Times, and Carl Hiaasen, an investigative
reporter for The Miami Herald, are co-authors of two previous novels, ''Powder
Burn'' and ''Trap Line.'' In ''A Death in China'' they demonstrate once more
that they know how to turn their journalistic experience to fictional advantage.
Their story is set in China, Washington, Hong Kong, New York and a few other
magic-carpet cities. Tom Stratton, an American professor, tracks down a senior
colleague of his, David Wang, who is related to an important official in Peking.
When Wang suddenly dies, Stratton becomes embroiled in Chinese politics in an
attempt to discover why. What he discovers is a smuggling ring, which is
slipping priceless works of Chinese art into New York; the smugglers' trail
leads to, of all places, Arlington Cemetery. Along the way, the reader gets a
short education in contemporary Chinese affairs, though sometimes in lecture
form. The backgrounds for this novel - restaurants, streets, airports - ring
true. But the authors are inclined to have their characters ''snort,'' ''mock''
and ''growl,'' and they are partial to the word ''gaggle.'' Nevertheless, there
are memorable observations in this imaginative thriller. - Herbert Mitgang

* THE HAUNTING OF SUZANNA BLACKWELL. By Richard Sethowe.  (Holt, Rinehart &
Winston, $14.95.) Suzanna Blackwell, divorced and near 30, returns from Europe
to join her widowed father as he becomes commander of Mare Island, a naval
shipyard in northern California. There she meets Michael Lowenstein, a
television producer covering her father's investiture, and is immediately
intrigued by him; she also finds that a strange apparition has entered her life.
As an adolescent, Suzanna had been visited by her mother's ghost and at first
assumes that the new visitations are also from her mother - a surprise,
certainly, but not threatening, until she realizes that this ghost is male. But
Suzanna is not the only one haunted in this tale. Michael is haunted by his
experiences as a photographer during combat in Vietnam, and Suzanna's father is
haunted by a horrible decision he made during World War II. In place of the
traditional house, we have here a haunted ship, the Santa Cruz, one of the
vessels mothballed at the shipyard. It is inhabited by vicious five-foot owls,
but that isn't its most sinister attribute. The story begins slowly and,
although a mysterious murder helps the pace, stays that way for too long. The
overall structure and resolution of the narrative are cleverly worked out, but
Richard Setlowe occasionally uses some disappointing gimmicks to enliven his
plot (as when an early example of late-night terror turns out to be only a bad
dream) and seems unable to avoid some of its inherent implausibilities.
Suzanna's father finds it necessary, for instance, despite two mysterious deaths
and ''a deep, chilling dread that he did not understand,'' to explore the Santa
Cruz alone at night. And some readers will probably be disappointed that
Suzanna, an educated, independent woman, makes much the same mistake and
ultimately has to be rescued by her more clearheaded boyfriend.- Karen Ray

* DIE FOR LOVE. By Elizabeth Peters.  (Congdon & Weed, $14.95.) When Jacqueline
Kirby, a libarian at Nebraska's Coldwater College, decides to attend a meeting
of the Historical Romance Writers of the World in ''Die for Love,'' she has no
idea that she's leaving the groves of Academe for the graves of Manhattan. For
amid the pink hearts, white lace and red and purple balloons of the conference,
a murderer is at large. The first victim is Dubretta Duberstein, an acidulous
newspaper columnist with a vendetta against Hattie Foster, a literary agent and
panjandrum of the Romance Writers. The second is an erratic young fan of the
best-selling author Valerie Valentine. Who will be the third victim? The
fortyish Jacqueline has signed up for the conference to get away from Nebraska's
tiresome weather and her tiresome beau as well as to write her own romance.
Still, she is incapable of standing by while someone else deals with the
murders. After all, Jacqueline was ''inclined to interfere in other people's
business, when she felt her advice and assistance would improve matters - and
she almost always felt they would.'' While ''Die for Love'' is fitfully amusing
- ''It was rumored that the Wax Candle book line had lost its shirt on Regencies
and was now focusing on earlier historic periods, specifically the Late Stone
Age'' - Elizabeth Peters seems to be trying too hard to too little effect. The
novel is overwritten in just the manner of the ''bodice rippers'' it attempts to
satirize (raindrops pelt puddles, characters sigh voluptuously, murmur
maledictions, are assaulted by sunlight), yet it is not consistent enough in
style to work as parody. It also fails as mystery; the denouement isn't
sufficiently stunning, and librarian-turned- detective Jacqueline is not half so
beguiling as she fancies herself. -Joanne Kaufman

* NAKED AT FORTY. By Ruth Benjamin. (Horizon Press, $10.95.) Marian Bartolph, a
40-year-old Maine mother, housewife and would-be poet, receives an invitation to
a convention of the Association of Living Languages in New York and goes with
her painter-husband's blessings and instructions to stay at his sister's house
rather than at a hotel. What she experiences in the city, however, is more
jarring than she could possible have imagined. Her husband's sister, Nedda, is
an amoral, rich sybarite, unlike anybody Marian has ever known and altogether
too ready to introduce Marian to new and dangerous life patterns. At the
convention Marian runs into her first love, Myles, whom she has not seen or
heard of since her youth, and who has an unsettling effect on her. She is
exposed to some of the seamy side of Greenwich Village and to sexual situations
both wild and predictable. She also learns something about her parents' death
many years ago, with which Myles was involved. From what Myles tells her about
his marriage and complex problems, she understands that her own marriage has not
yet eroded in any untreatable way. Near the end of her trip, while taking a
shower in Myles's hotel room, she realizes that ''If one never left home, one
could never grow up at all.'' She is convinced that when she returns home,
nobody in Maine will know she has changed, and she will be free to begin
exploring her life. This, of course, would seem to be a positive result of her
trip, if the reader could believe all that has happened to her. But some of her
experiences and her responses to them seem illogical, given what we are told
about her when she arrives in town. Also not enough attention is allowed Myles
and his involved situation, and one is left wondering how he will handle his
problems. Altogether, ''Naked at Forty'' is a bit more frustrating than
rewarding. - Robert P. Mills

* ALL THE WAY HOME. By Ellen Cooney. (Putnam's, $14.95.) Ellen Cooney, the
author of the well-received Young Adult novel, ''Small Town Girl,'' has
difficulty making the transition to adult fiction in ''All the Way Home.'' The
story is focused on Gussie Cabrini, an ex- professional athlete who returns to
Currys Crossing, Mass., and struggles to rebuild her life after a devastating
accident. Against all odds, she transforms a motley crew of nonathletes into the
Spurs, the town's first women's softball team, which ultimately alters the lives
of the players as well as their families. Thus, Evelyn, haunted by the deaths of
her parents, slowly surfaces from her isolating depressions. Avis discovers the
joys of movement with her newly slim physique. Sandy, terrorized by her
estranged husband's brutal beating of their son, learns to rely on the team for
support. Marina Cabrini, Gussie's mother, begins coming to grips with her
feelings for her daughter. Among the townspeople touched by the team is Rollie
Pelletier, a local sports reporter who is forced to reassess his opposition to a
women's team. While the struggles experienced by the characters in ''All the Way
Home'' - toward the establishment of self-worth and identity - are mature
concerns, they are conveyed in an overly simple and plodding style. The novel's
structure - with its many flashbacks - is also problematic because it
continually disrupts the momentum of the story. Suspense is minimal since the
outcome of the big game is never in doubt. The dialogue, however, has a
believable ring and Miss Cooney has a nice feel for the psychology of women. The
characters, however, are finally overwhelmed by the awkward structure and
mundane presentation. - Jill Grossman

NIGHTBLOOM.  By Herbert Lieberman. (Putnam's, $16.95.) Character portrayal is
Herbert Lieberman's strong suit, as he has shown in earlier novels, and this
talent both distinguishes ''Nightbloom'' and takes it on a distracting tangent.
He vividly describes Frank Mooney, a 63-year-old New York cop who has survived
the city's bureaucracies. With his 240-pound frame, Mooney recalls Hank Quinlan
in Orson Welles's ''Touch of Evil''; he is ''given to a whole medley of habits
that policemen have no business cultivating.'' Mooney's slide toward a
retirement pension is interrupted when he clashes with The Bombardier, a
homicidal maniac who prowls New York rooftops hurling concrete slabs onto
innocent citizens. Mr. Lieberman gets sidetracked, however, when he details the
existence of Charles Watford, a Demerol-addicted psychopathic liar holding key
information in the case. Watford is an intriguing study in alienation and
paranoia, but his creator spends a disproportionate amount of time with him.
This is unfortunate, as Mr. Lieberman shows he can fuse action with an ingenious
style. When one passerby is preyed upon from above, the author shifts from the
thoughts of the victim right to the killer without missing a beat. This seamless
switch into the slayer's head is one of the book's highlights; too bad Mr.
Lieberman didn't spend more time examining the perpetrator of his ''long
distance'' murders. - Mason Buck

NONFICTION

* THE DIARIES OF JUDITH MALINA: 1947-1957.  By Judith Malina.  (Grove, Cloth,
$27.50. Paper, $11.95.) In that great, failed experiment of the 1960's, the
attempt to make theater and politics and life continuous with one another,
Judith Malina and her husband, Julian Beck, the founder-leaders of the Living
Theater, were the boldest and most seductive of experimenters. These diaries end
more than a decade before the Living Theater came storming back from European
exile to secure its place in American cultural history, but foreshadowings
abound - along with some surprises. These are the journals of a sensitive,
intellectual, artistic, histrionic, madly romantic young woman. Miss Malina
begins writing them on her 21st birthday, with a quotation from the German that
she translates, ''Twenty-one already, and I still haven't done a thing worth
immortality.'' She writes of her doubts and determinations, of her reading
(admirably weighty and varied), of her ''striving toward a free community of
artists and friends.'' She encounters E. E. Cummings, William Carlos Williams,
Ana"is Nin, Jack Kerouac, Allen Ginsberg, John Cage, Merce Cunningham. Paul
Goodman is her friend and therapist, James Agee her lover. She tries hashish in
1952. She makes love on the floor of the stage after the audience goes home. Her
diary entries are mostly short, two and three and four to a page, except for one
concerning her mother's death and two chronicling arrests for civil
disobedience. Surprisingly, her prose is disciplined, concise, even
apothegmatic: ''It is a kind of ecstasy to fulfill one's fears, as it is to
fulfill one's desires.'' This is a book to read, not just to do research in - an
evocative account of a questing spirit living la vie de boh eme in New York at
midcentury. - Julius Novick

* ENIGMA: How the German Machine Cipher Was Broken, and How It Was Read by the
Allies in World War Two. By Wladyslaw Kozaczuk Edited and translated by
Christopher Kasparek. (University Publications of America, $24.) ''Enigma,'' a
volume in its publisher's ''Foreign Intelligence Book Series,'' tells the story
of how the Nazi cipher machine - Enigma - was cracked by a team of young Polish
mathematicians turned cryptologists. The book is as much a tribute to their
cleverness as it is an account of Nazi arrogance. The Germans were so certain of
Enigma's impregnability that they used it throughout the the war. To crack its
secrets, the Polish cryptologists relied not only on their fluent command of
mathematics and the German language but also on their familiarity with German
customs, culture and mentality. Adding invention to ingenuity, the Poles built
replicas of the unseen cipher machine as early as 1933 and passed them on to
French and British intelligence. In addition to telling the story of Enigma,
Wladyslaw Kozaczuk, a Polish historian, provides disturbing examples of Allied
generals who possessed detailed accounts of enemy intentions but were unable or
unwilling to take adequate countermeasures. While illustrating that military
intelligence was indispensable to the war effort, he makes the point that
knowing the enemy's strength and strategy is not always enough to insure a quick
and decisive victory. - M. S. Kaplan

* CONTACT.

''Contact'' describes A. F. N. Clarke's experiences during two tours of duty
with the British Army in Northern Ireland. Mr. Clarke, a former officer in the
Parachute Regiment, writes well, even vividly at times, but his book doesn't
quite work. It is neither a memoir nor a strictly factual account of what his
battalion went through in 1973 and again in 1976. At the end of the book, we
know as little about Mr. Clarke as we did at the beginning. None of the British
soldiers emerges as a real person for whom we should care, and Northern Ireland
remains an abstraction. ''Contact,'' Mr. Clarke says, was written in anger, but
the anger comes across as impersonal, without focus, militaristic in both its
mechanical detail and detachment. We learn some things, none of which comes as a
surprise. His battalion made little distinction between Protestants and
Catholics. Both were held in contempt, both were constantly harassed, arrested
randomly, their houses and privacy invaded without regard to allegiance,
religion or ''loyalty.'' To the soldiers, they were all foulmouthed Paddies, a
sordid and barbarous lot. Thus the soldiers didn't hesitate to break the law or
bend it, dispensing what was, in their view, an evenhanded level of
''acceptable'' brutality. But the natives had their revenge. In Northern
Ireland, where the ''siege mentality'' of the majority Protestant community is a
large part of the problem, the soldiers caught the ''disease.'' Mr. Clarke is at
his best when he describes the soldiers' fears - of snipers, booby traps, the
carefully placed bomb. Observation posts became prisons, the surveillance from
within counterpointed by the surveillance from without. To alleviate the
tension, the soldiers patrolled maniacally, fear and fatigue constant, the
''enemy'' always elusive. Thus the ironic lesson of ''Contact'' - by treating
every Catholic and some Protestants as potential subversives, the soldiers made
actual subversives of many. - Padraig O'Malley

* THE GLASS HOUSE: Politics and Morality in the Nation's Capital.

Political morality is often considered a contradiction in terms. Politics, the
art of compromise, is viewed by many as being incompatible with the seemingly
rigid demands of virtue. Public opinion polls indicate most Americans believe
that politicians, by their mere choice of occupation, have forsaken any claim to
the virtuous life. Representative Paul Simon makes no such concession. In this
thoughtful, provocative book, he seeks to reconcile the seemingly
irreconcilable. A liberal Democrat from southern Illinois, a former journalist,
a Lincoln scholar and now a candidate for the United States Senate, Mr. Simon is
widely considered a man of rare integrity. He begins ''The Glass House'' with
the assumption that ''there are morally preferred options, and that it is the
responsibility of humanity and of government to strive toward the good, no
matter how erratic and tortuous that path may be.'' Thus political decisions
affecting issues ranging from abortion to nuclear armament can be viewed as
offering hope and justice, or inequity and despair. Mr. Simon cautions, however,
that such judgments can be complex, despite the pronouncements of the Moral
Majority and its counterparts on the right and left who ''speak with an Olympian
certainty that is appealing.'' For example, Mr. Simon warns that linking
American foreign policy to improvements in human rights could discourage arms
agreements with the Soviet Union while doing little for the oppressed within its
borders. In such a case, he says, ''our moral stance could bring about an
immoral result.'' Mr. Simon also analyzes the roles of money, journalism and
public opinion polls in politics. This readable, carefully nuanced book
emphasizes the ironic. Mr. Simon notes, for example, that he received a zero
rating from the Christian Voice while a colleague convicted in the Abscam
scandal was awarded a 100 percent rating. Among the votes held against him was
his support of funding for centers for battered spouses. This was listed as an
''antifamily'' vote, further evidence, if needed, that one man's morality is
another's transgression. - Martin Tolchin

* AMERICAN MEDICINE AND STATISTICAL THINKING, 1800-1860. By James H. Cassedy.
(Harvard University, $22.) Nobody collects statistics just for the fun of it.
Invariably there is a belief or motive behind an ordered list of numbers. In
''American Medicine and Statistical Thinking, 1800-1860,'' James H. Cassedy, the
historian of the National Library of Medicine at the National Institutes of
Health, presents countless quotes from and sketches of the early 19th-century
doctors, local worthies and quacks who were motivated to gather statistics to
support their particular causes. In this way, he not only shows how statistical
analysis came to be a powerful tool of medicine but also reveals many of the
concerns of antebellum America. This was a time of cholera epidemics, the
temperance movement and the installation of sewers and water pipes. But it was
also a time when Americans frivolously sampled medicines - herb cures, water
cures - as if they were sampling foods. There are far too many personalities and
causes crowded into this history to single out any of them as crucial to the
development of American medicine or statistical thinking. What emerges from Mr.
Cassedy's descriptive but unanalytical account is the sense that it was the
sheer number of causes - large and small, selfish and altruistic - all vying for
attention that spurred the use of statistics in medicine. ''American Medicine
and Statistical Thinking, 1800-1860'' seems, on the face of it, to belong to
''the least attractive species of literature yet discovered,'' as one
19th-century observer described numerical analysis, but it turns out to be an
intriguing excursion back to the days when America was first taking stock of
itself. - Sarah Boxer

* EXCELLENCE: Can We Be Equal and Excellent Too? Revised Edition.  By John W.
Gardner (Norton, $12.95.) John W. Gardner, the founder of Common Cause, a former
Cabinet member and a civic philosopher, is good at asking Americans searching
questions about their way of life. In ''Excellence,'' a revised edition of a
work first published in 1961, he calls for a more civilized, deliberate society.
''This book,'' he writes, ''is concerned with the difficult, puzzling, delicate
and important business of toning up a whole citizenry, of bringing a whole
people to the fine edge of morale and conviction and zest that makes for
greatness.'' The book's timely subtheme is American education. Does our
recognition of outstanding student promise and performance conflict with
democracy's tenet that all are created equal? If we choose to educate by fully
egalitarian standards, are we also choosing mediocrity? If we choose instead to
educate by more selective standards, are we overempowering a new intellectual
elite? Mr. Gardner also discusses the nature of leadership in America today and
the fragile balance between high aims for society and realistic expectations.
Avoiding an either-or approach, he stakes out a reasoned middle ground. The
judgment, ardor and scope of all this is Emersonian. (A minor flaw: There are
too many distracting quotations throughout the text.) All told, Mr. Gardner
takes the slogans ''excellence'' and ''education reform'' a step nearer to
circumspect change - an accomplishment of substance in an election year. -
Barbara Hall

An Artist's Evolution Though Jim Dine's reputation was established in the early
1960's as a leading figure in the Pop Art movement, his inclinations, he now
admits, were always toward a more personal, intuitive mode of painting. In 1967,
feeling oppressed by ''the spirit of irony and detachment then pervading the New
York scene,'' he and his wife moved to London, where he began the gradual
transition from Pop assemblages to introspective, painterly canvases.

JIM DINE: Five Themes (Walker Art Center/ Abbeville, $35) elegantly documents
this slow evolution of style. The book is a collaborative effort by Graham W. J.
Beal, the keeper of the Sainsbury Center for the Visual Arts in Norwich,
England; the poet Robert Creeley; Martin Friedman, the director of the Walker
Art Center in Minneapolis; and Mr. Dine himself. It opens with an insightful
essay by Mr. Beal, then divides into five thematic sections - ''Tools,''
''Robes,'' ''Hearts,'' ''Trees'' and ''Gates'' - the symbolic motifs that have
resurfaced throughout Mr. Dine's career.  Each section is prefaced by a
free-form meditation by Mr. Creeley, after which Mr. Dine adds some casual
thoughts on the accompanying illustrations. If the commentary by Mr. Creeley and
Mr. Dine is a little disjointed, the fine quality of the reproductions of Mr.
Dine's work compensates. And by emphasizing his most recent paintings, the book
makes a persuasive case for his place in the mainstream of contemporary American
Expressionism. - Andrea Barnet

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Judith Malina and Julian Beck

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              433 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 24, 1984, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CONNECTICUT OPINION;
NOSTALGIA SKEWS REALITY OF PAST

BYLINE: By BRUCE M. STAVE

SECTION: Section 11CN; Page 26, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1093 words


I RECENTLY returned from my

25th college reunion. My 14-

year-old son, who also attended,

said that my class was just right for me. Some of my classmates looked older
than me; some looked younger. While I am not certain that it was meant as a
compliment, the statement probably was not inaccurate.

The Columbia College reunion material referred to the return of the Silver
Lions, silver indicating our anniversary year. However, in preparation I had
conjured up images of gray, long-maned middle-aged males loping across
Morningside Heights in Manhattan. While in a very few instances such was the
case, more likely the mid-life returnees wore shorter gray hair, dark hair of a
variety of hues, and no hair or certainly less hair than when we sported
crewcuts during the 50's.

Seeing most of my classmates for the first time in 25 years did raise the issue
of the aging process. When I asked the multitude of classmate doctors with whom
I talked why some people age more quickly than others, with no gerontologist
among them, their guesses seemed to be as good as mine. Someone suggested a rule
of thumb that while we, who view ourselves in a mirror over a quarter century,
rarely age (at least not much), our classmates whom we have not seen always do.
Tells you something about mirrors, I thought.

A sobering note was the suggestion that should we now die, few would comment
that we did so at a young age; nor would they suggest that we ''hadn't yet
lived.'' While several speakers remarked that we still had much to look forward
to, most of those who had gathered realized that numerically, at least, we had,
on average, fewer years ahead than behind. Equally sobering was the thought that
had he lived, the first President for whom we had the opportunity to vote, that
young and vigorous fellow with the Boston accent who had attended another Ivy
League school, would now be 67.

The women who returned seemed remarkably well-preserved. However, since Columbia
was an all-male school until last year, when the first coed class gained
admission, these females were not classmates. In fact, if they were spouses, it
is not unreasonable to believe, given current custom, that they may have been
the second, maybe even the third, Mrs. Lion.

I did, however, recognize some who wandered over the campus 25 years ago, as had
my own wife. Facetiously, I asked her that if I was a returning Lion, was she a
Lionette? Having accomplished a great deal in career and life, she did not seem
charmed by the question. Nor, I suspect, would have been the other females
present. However, a quarter century ago, the notion of a ''women's auxiliary''
was not unusual. Moreover, in our college days, women were not permitted in the
dormitory rooms. So, it was all the more tweaking when an articulate,
attractive, young female student showed us through a dorm and casually remarked
that the suite was coed. In those 25 years, we had come a long way.

As is probably common to most reunions, those who return seem to be the
accomplished - or at least those secure enough to face a classmate and answer
the inevitable question, ''What have you done with yourself during the past
quarter century?''

Since our alma mater always valued humanistic learning and was famed for it,
rather than inviting some wealthy businessman to address us, the class chose as
speakers a novelist who doubles as an English professor at a New England state
university, not far from the borders of Connecticut, and a leading philosopher
who teaches at Harvard.

The novelist reflected on his craft and it became quite clear how his stories
were shaped by his formative years growing up in Brooklyn. The philosopher
expounded upon the ingredients necessary for his version of the good life.
Having grown up with him from the time we had entered junior high school, I
could not help but wonder if Plato had also played softball (or its equivalent)
in the playgrounds of Athens, had fled a gang of teen-aged girls such as those
who attacked us, had been a lifeguard in the Greek version of a Catskill
Mountain hotel, or had engaged in the usual range of adolescent behavior.

In any event, the current brilliance of the philosopher's ability to deal with
abstraction seemed to outshine his ability to cha-cha as I remember it. (Could
Plato cha-cha?) And, this may be part of the American Dream.

Those of us who returned might have remembered the short-lived Ivy Magazine,
which advocated ''the natural superiority of the Ivy League male,'' a doctrine
not only chauvinist but elitist as well. While the elitism may not seem
unfamiliar in the Reagan 80's, it was part and parcel of what came to be called
''The Silent Generation'' - our generation. Those growing up in the Eisenhower
50's mistakenly may have been labeled in this manner.

Things were not so silent as Martin Luther King Jr. began to stir the South, as
troops came to Little Rock, as Elvis wiggled his pelvis and as the Beat
Generation took to the road. The Beats, who began at Columbia, returned in 1959
to a now famous session at which my class jammed the lecture hall. Admittedly,
the nation, led by Life magazine, searched for ''national purpose'' at the end
of the 50's decade. But the cultural changes that transformed the United States
during the 60's were already under way. Columbia, which played east to
Berkeley's west during the campus disturbances of two decades ago, was calm
again in its urban beauty on reunion weekend.

My class, pre-Vietnam War, pre- women's liberation, pre-black militancy,
pre-counter culture, stood on a threshold that opened onto a new world, a world,
however, that was no less certain than the one in which we grew up. Nostalgia
all too often makes the past seem too secure, too certain, too steady. Those of
us who grew up during World War II, who witnessed the dawn of the nuclear era,
who saw the heating of the Cold War, who reached adulthood during the 50's would
be foolish to long for the good old days. The world then may have been
different, but not necessarily better.

These were some of my thoughts as we left the New York City campus and headed
home to Connecticut. In 2009, for our 50th, I expect there will be more gray,
even less hair, and definitely fewer classmates to renew acquaintances. However,
in the words of ''San Souci,'' the college song, ''Tomorrow's the future still;
this is today!'' And, so it is.





Bruce M. Stave teaches history at the University of Connecticut, where he is
director of the Center for Oral History.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              434 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 25, 1984, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A Medal In First Attempt

SECTION: Section C; Page 7, Column 6; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 389 words

DATELINE: UNIONDALE, L.I., June 24


Julie Holley knew she was facing tough competition in one of the amputee classes
of the high jump in the third International Games for the Disabled this morning
at Mitchel Park.

Miss Holley, an 18-year-old resident of Woodside, Queens, was making her debut
in formal competition against Petra Buddelmeyer of West Germany, who has been
jumping for seven years.

Experience paid off in the form of a gold medal for the 20-year-old Miss
Buddelmeyer, who set a world record of 5 feet 5 1/4 inches. Miss Holley earned a
silver medal by clearing 3-6.

''It was seven years' experience against seven days,'' said Miss Holley. ''I
only learned the event last week.''

Miss Holley, who was born with a short right arm, was captain of the swimming
team for two years at Grover Cleveland High School in Ridgewood, Queens, where
she was also president of her class. She said that Dick Bryant, president of the
United States Amputee Athletic Association, had asked her unexpectedly if she
would be interested in competing in the high jump.



Had to Learn Quickly

''He thought I'd be a natural, so I decided to go for it,'' she said. ''I took a
crash course in jumping from Debbie Tannerhill,'' the coach of the team.

Miss Holley, who attended the State University of New York at Purchase last
year, will transfer in September to Mount Holyoke College in South Hadley, Mass.
She says she is interested in becoming a lawyer.

The silver medal today was the third won by Miss Holley in the games, which end
Friday. She was a member of two second-place relay teams in swimming
competitions, handling the breast-stroke on one and the freestyle on the other.

Jim Martinson of Puyallup, Wash., a 37-year-old double amputee as a result of
injuries in the Vietnam War, set a world record of 2:18.05 in the semifinals of
the Class A1 800-meter wheelchair race. The final is scheduled for Wednesday.

In goalball, the United States won two games and tied in a third to gain a
deadlock with Italy for first place in the round-robin tournament leading to
Wednesday's semifinals. Each team has 11 points. Jim Neppl, a lawyer from Rock
Island, Ill., scored three goals in a 6-2 victory over Denmark. Reni Jackson of
Louisville, Ky., had the goal in a 1-0 triumph over West Germany. The third
contest was a scoreless tie against Israel.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              435 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Says U.S. Quota Delays Emigration

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 141 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, June 25


Vietnam said today that it had stopped issuing exit permits for resettlement in
the United States because of a backlog of nearly 30,000 cases caused by a United
States immigration quota on Amerasian refugees.

A Vietnamese official here urged Washington to take more people who want to join
American relatives, including all children fathered by Americans during the
Vietnam War. The official, Nguyen Phi Tuyen, head of consular affairs, said the
United States quota of 1,000 refugees a month, including Amerasian children, was
to blame for the backlog.

''For the U.S. alone,'' he said, ''we still have in Vietnam 28,000 to 29,000
people who have been granted exit visas but are still awaiting entry visas to
the United States. Since we have 29,000 awaiting entry visas, we hesitate to
grant more exit visas if they can't get entry visas.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              436 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Inquiry on Lennon Disclosed

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 17, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 269 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, June 25


The Central Intelligence Agency joined the Federal Bureau of Investigation in
gathering intelligence on John Lennon because the agencies feared he would
disrupt the 1972 Republican National Convention, according to a historian who
has written about Mr. Lennon.

The intelligence agency asked the bureau for information about Mr. Lennon's ties
to a group that was planning demonstrations at the convention, the historian,
Jon Wiener, said Friday. He cited previously classified documents he obtained
under the Freedom of Information Act.

Mr. Wiener said that in one of five heavily censored documents released by the
intelligence agecy, J. Edgar Hoover, the F.B.I Director, wrote that the
investigation of Mr. Lennon's antiwar activities ''must be handled on an
expedite basis and by mature, experienced agents.''

Mr. Wiener requested the documents as part of his research for a recently
published book on Mr. Lennon, the former Beatle who was slain in 1980. Mr.
Wiener said he received 26 pounds of F.B.I. and Immigration and Naturalization
Service documents last year.

But Mr. Wiener said the bureau withheld some documents in the Lennon file for
national security reasons. He sued the agency in 1983 for release of materials.
At a hearing in March, Federal District Judge Robert M. Takasugi ordered the
bureau to justify why it was withholding any Lennon material.  ''This is the
first acknowledgement by the C.I.A. that the agency also participated in the
Nixon era campaign to neutralize Lennon's antiwar activities,'' said Mr. Wiener,
a professor at the University of California, Irvine.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              437 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1984, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

DIOXIN TRIAL OPENS AGAINST MONSANTO

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 393 words

DATELINE: CHARLESTON, W.Va., June 25


Opening arguments began today in Federal District Court in the cases of seven
men who say they suffer long- term health problems as a result of exposure to
dioxin and other toxic chemicals while working for the Monsanto Company.

The plaintiffs' lawyer, W. Stuart Calwell Jr., told the jury he would prove that
Monsanto knew of the risks involved in working with the herbicide 2,4,5-T but
failed to halt production because of the cost. The seven former employees are
suing the company for a total of $31.5 million in damages.

Monsanto's attorney, Charles M. Love 3d, then detailed the history of Monsanto
and the lengths to which the company's doctors had gone since the 1940's to
insure employee safety. Mr. Love, who began his statement late this afternoon,
is to finish it Tuesday.

The company is ''made up of people,'' Mr. Love said. ''It is not a cold,
heartless thing.''

About 170 Similar Suits


The seven cases are considered tests of the legal and factual issues in about
170 suits brought by current and retired employees of Monsanto and their
families. The estimate of the total amount sought by all plaintiffs ranges from
$700 million to $2 billion.

The seven former Monsanto employees worked at a chemical plant near Nitro,
W.Va., for an average of 35 years. Mr. Calwell, a lawyer from Nitro, told the
jury of five women and one man that the men had been exposed to a ''chemical
soup'' of toxic substances that had caused a variety of skin rashes, internal
disorders and the threat of early death.

Mr. Calwell said he would prove that Monsanto had figured the cost of injuries.
''They calculated how much the sickness costs and found it costs them 4 cents
per pound of finished product,'' Mr. Calwell said. ''We're going to show that
this was all done for money.''

Federal District Judge John T. Copenhaver Jr. told the jurors that they must
decide whether Monsanto knew of the health hazards but deliberately continued
production of 2,4,5-T. Monsanto, which made 2,4,5-T from 1948 to 1969, was the
major supplier of the herbicide for use in the defoliant Agent Orange in the
Vietnam War.

The judge instructed the jury that under state law the plaintiffs must show that
Monsanto's acts were willful, wanton and reckless. A unanimous decision by the
jury is required if the plaintiffs are to win the case.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              438 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 27, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 104 words


U.S. Agrees to Accept More Vietnam Refugees

WASHINGTON, June 26 (Reuters) - The State Department today criticized Vietnam
for publicly demanding acceptance of additional Vietnamese refugees, but said
the United States was willing to take more.

The State Department said that the United States was willing to increase its
allocation of 1,000 a month.

At the same time it was critical of a statement made Monday in Hanoi, in which a
Vietnamese official, Nguyen Phi Tuyen, said the United States quota had created
a backlog of 28,000 to 29,000 people who had Vietnamese exit visas but not
United States entry visas.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              439 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 27, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
THE WESTWAY'S MAN IN THE MIDDLE

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section B; Page 4, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1038 words


Fletcher Griffis ordinarily plays racquetball three times a week. But lately he
has been playing every day. ''I'm trying to get my blood pressure down,''
Colonel Griffis said, smiling, ''so that it will have room to go up again.'' Bud
Griffis, as the colonel is known, presumes that presiding over two 13-hour
Westway project hearings, which began yesterday and involve environmentalists,
public officials, labor leaders and representatives of special-interest and
community groups, will not be a particularly relaxing experience.

But the colonel, the district engineer for the Army Corps of Engineers who will
make a crucial recommendation on whether the Westway proceeds, thrives on
assignments that might cause others to wilt.

As a major in Vietnam in 1969, he won the Legion of Merit for supervising the
construction of a 27-mile highway, a supply route from the southern Mekong Delta
to Saigon, that was completed in five months.

Air Bases in the Desert

In 1980, the year he was to retire, he went to Israel as one of the leaders of a
project to build two air bases in the Negev. The construction, which many
thought would take 10 years, was finished in 2 1/2.

The deadline for the first United States and Israeli squadrons to move in, which
was linked to the agreement that the Israelis would leave the Sinai, was Oct.
25, 1981. That is the feast of St. Crispin's, the patron saint of cobblers, and
the anniversary of the day on which Henry V led the English to victory at
Agincourt.

To spur themselves on to make their deadline, Colonel Griffis and his colleagues
formed the St. Crispin's Society.

Their symbol was a cobbler's hammer and a bucket, because, the colonel
explained, ''anybody foolish enough to work on air bases should put their head
in a bucket and hammer it.''

Westway Likened to a Battle


So it is no coincidence that he picked Oct. 25 to announce his decision on the
Westway; it is clearly another bucket-and-hammer job. ''The Israeli air bases
were like a battle and so is Westway,'' he said.

He often finds himself at parties where one person sports a ''Hooray Westway''
button and another a ''Stop Westway.''

''I know I'll make half the people unhappy,'' he said. ''There's no way to make
a decision that everybody considers in the public interest. But it's lonely in
the middle.''

The colonel, who is solidly built and has a Southern drawl, radiates quiet
self-assurance. He is a modest man who prefers discussing theater and art to
explaining his sheaf of medals from Vietnam.

Using the Truman Method


He said he was taking ''a Harry Truman approach'' to the Westway: ''Define the
problem, get together all the experts you can find, listen to all their
opinions, study as much as you can that's been written about the problem, then
make up your own damn mind.''

He has spent the last year immersing himself in the issues. ''I never wanted to
know this much about striped bass,'' he said with a sigh.

There are dozens of books and reports on striped bass under his bed, in his den,
in his basement and on his office coffee table.

While he has gained new respect for the bass, he has maintained scorn for
biologists. ''If we dealt with the data the way biologists do, not one of these
buildings would be standing,'' he said, pointing at the skyline of lower
Manhattan beyond his office window . ''These guys study and study and study and
get all the data and it means nothing.''

No Help From the Experts


He recalled gathering two dozen striped-bass experts at a conference a year ago
and asking them what the impact of the Westway would be on the fish. ''All I got
from these Ph.D.'s was 'I don't know,' '' he said. ''They study this fish their
entire lives and they can't even predict its behavior. Engineers would never
tolerate that.''

Fletcher Hughes Griffis Jr. was born on April 22, 1938, in Wauchula, Fla., the
son of a construction superintendent for the Florida Power Corporation.

He was not particularly interested in joining the service until he got an
appointment to West Point largely on the strength of his football prowess. After
graduation, he was assigned to the 82d Airborne Division at Fort Bragg, N.C. ''I
never thought another job could be so much fun,'' he said. ''But every one has
gotten better.''

He married his high school sweetheart, Nancy Inch, and the two traveled all over
the United States and abroad. Now living on Governors Island, they have two
sons, Hugh, 22 years old, a West Point graduate stationed at Fort Ord, Calif.,
and Greg, 16, a student at St. Paul's High School in Garden City, L.I.

Three Advanced Degrees


Colonel Griffis, who has two master's degrees and has a doctorate in engineering
from Oklahoma State University, teaches one night a week at Columbia University.
He spends spare time painting landscapes and still lifes and sampling the
theater and restaurants of Manhattan with his wife. He saw ''Joseph and the
Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat'' four times.

''We rarely spend a night at home,'' he said. ''There's an awful lot to do in
this town.''

Since he became commander of the New York District in May 1983, he has worked on
$200 million worth of military construction projects, including early-warning
radar systems in Greenland and a plan to solve the flood problems in Passaic,
N.J.

But mostly, he has wrestled with the Westway. While he worries about the fish
and the encroachment on the Hudson River - ''12th Avenue used to be in the
river,'' he said - he also believes the project would encourage badly needed
economic development on the West Side.

Worries About Being Wrong


''I see good things and bad about the highway,'' he said. ''I really worry about
making the wrong decision. But if it were easy, it would already be made.''

He doubts whether the hearings will turn up any new information, but he believes
it is important to follow the process scrupulously. He is determined to leave no
legal loopholes that will enable the losing side to mount a challenge later.

''The process is moving along just about right,'' he said. ''I just wish I knew
what the decision was.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Fletcher Hughes Griffis Jr.

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              440 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 27, 1984, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AUTHOR OF 'MACHINE DREAMS' FINDS DRAMA IN LIFE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section C; Page 23, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1081 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Jayne Anne Phillips had no clear plan when she set out four years ago to write
her first novel, ''Machine Dreams,'' which has recently been published to
critical acclaim.

''I had no idea of how to write a novel,'' she said. But Miss Phillips did have
''faith it would all come together in an organic way if I just followed the
material.'' The material was her keen sense of her family and the time and place
where she grew up, a small town of 8,000 people in West Virginia.

Miss Phillips doesn't want to give the name of the town - just as she doesn't
like to say the name of the working-class section of Boston where she now lives.
Coming from a small town, she relishes her current annonymity in a big city.

But her home town was much like Bellington, the fictional setting in ''Machine
Dreams.'' Like Bellington, it was surrounded by rich green forests, a swift
running river, had a small college and residents who clung to a vanishing way of
life.



Book Not Autobiographical

And much like the characters in the novel, Miss Phillips's mother was a school
administrator and her father a road-crew foreman. Danner, the daughter in the
novel, was born almost the same year as Miss Phillips - 1952 - and studied
English at the University of West Virginia, as she did.

But Miss Phillips insists that despite these coincidences, the book is not
really autobiographical. ''More often than not, the reaction I get from my
family is, 'Well, that's not what happened,' '' she said.

Moreover, in contrast to the semi- autobiographical quality of many first
novels, with their accounts of coming of age, Miss Phillips has chosen a more
ambitious format, telling the story through the different voices of four members
of the Hampson family. They are Jean and Mitch, the father and mother, and
Danner and Billy, the daughter and son.



'Always Interested in Language'

''I had a lot of sympathy for Danner,'' Miss Phillips said. ''But the point of
writing the book was to see if I could write the other three, to represent the
universe of them.''

''I didn't want a third person narrator commenting on the characters,'' she said
of her approach. ''I've always been interested in language, and I wanted the
characters to speak for themselves'' - as Mitch does in recalling his childhood.

''I was born on the farm in Randolph County, 1910, lived there until I was
six,'' Mitch says in introducing himself in the book. ''Then went to Raynell
with my aunt and her husband. He was a conductor on the railroad - big business
then, everything went by rail.

''It was a new job for him and not traditional in the family; they had all been
household farmers and worked in mines.''

Underlying ''Machine Dreams'' is a sense of the passing of time and a feeling of
loss as the Hampsons suffer divorce, alcoholism, bankruptcy and other
dislocations. As the book progresses, the Hampsons seem to become a parable for
what has happened to America in the last four decades.



Teaches Intermittently

''So the time went on quietly,'' the mother, Jean, recalls to Danner. ''I
worked, took classes at the college. Life wasn't like it is now. Look at you -
born here and think you have to get to California, go so far, do so much so
fast. Crazy situations, strange people - all this I hear about drugs. We had the
Depression and then the war; we didn't have to go looking for something to
happen. And the things that happened were so big; no one could question or see
and end to them.''

Miss Phillips's fascination with the passing of time is reflected in her hobby,
''collecting old things, junk.''

''They are almost always used things,'' she added, pointing to the old tin toys,
old photographs and old books that fill the modest two-family house she bought
when she moved to Boston a few years ago after spending a year as a fellow of
the Bunting Institute of Radcliffe College.

Although Miss Phillips did not have trouble getting ''Machine Dreams''
published, her previous collections of short stories have not been major
commercial successes and she has had to live off teaching intermittently at
Boston University and Williams College.



Concern Over Vietnam

Boston has a burgeoning community of writers, like James Carroll, author of
''Mortal Friends,'' Justin Kaplan, winner of the Pulitzer Prize for his
biography of ''Mr. Clemens and Mark Twain,'' and John Updike. But Miss
Phillips's mixed neighborhood of Irish and Hispanic families is cut off from
them, and she leads what she describes as a ''pretty quiet life, not very
interesting, except to me.''

Her drama is furnished by the local street with its ice cream truck and fights
at 3 A.M.

In her novel, the intersection between her fictional family and America reaches
a climax when Billy, the 19-year-old son, is drafted and sent to Vietnam as a
machine gunner on a helicopter. A few weeks later, his chopper is shot down and
Billy is listed as missing in action.

Miss Phillips's two brothers did not go to Vietnam, but she knew many people who
did, and she feels very strongly about the war.

''Vietnam has not been laid to rest,'' she remarked. ''It remains as palpable as
a death in the family, a death that goes on and on, haunting America. They were
all our brothers.''



'Politics Is Very Dangerous'

In this sense, Billy's loss in combat is meant both literally and
metaphorically, as a symbol of America's own loss of direction.

''Part of the point of the book is that politics is very dangerous, because it
kills people. People don't react till they are in immediate peril, but the
machinery that would entrap you is set in motion early on.''

Nevertheless, Miss Phillips doesn't think of her novel as explicitly political.
''A lot of that is what the reader brings to it. I think any good work of
fiction is political, because it can be all the more subversive than propaganda
since it connects with people's feelings and emotions.''

With the passage of time such a pervasive presence in her novel, does Miss
Phillips feel a sense of loss, having traveled so far from West Virginia?

''There is a sense of loss,'' she replied. ''But I would call it more a sense of
trying to save what is past, to transform that thing into something that remains
permanently on the printed page, a working against loss.''

Miss Phillips, who originally began writing during college as a poet, has some
plans for her next book. But like other details of her personal life, she
prefers not to dicuss them.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Jayne Anne Phillips

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              441 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

3 VILLAGES ARE DISPUTED ON THAI-LAOTIAN BORDER

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 26


A dispute over three remote villages on the border of Thailand and Laos has
given rise to the latest armed confrontation in Southeast Asia.

As Thai officials see it, the villages of Sawang, Klang and Mai - 330 miles
north of Bangkok and 120 miles west of Vientiane - are in Thailand's Uttaradit
Province.

On Friday the Foreign Ministry distributed a map based on a treaty signed in
1907. It showed the first two villages several miles southwest of the frontier
and the third, Mai, straddling the border but with most inhabitants on the Thai
side.

The Communist Government in Vientiane has insisted that the three villages are
in Sayaboury Province in Laos and has accused Thailand of colluding with China
to open a new war zone in Southeast Asia.

Although Laos recently accused Thailand of shelling Laotian territory, officials
in Thailand have made an effort to play down the tensions over the villages.
Despite some minor clashes in the hill country last week, Thais say the frontier
is relatively calm.

Vietnamese Troop Move Denied

On Monday a Thai military spokesman, Maj.  Gen. Naruedol Dejpradiyudh, denied a
report by the Thai news agency that 1,000 Vietnamese troops and two dozen tanks
had moved into the border area in the last two weeks to reinforce Laotian
forces.

Nonetheless, some Thai Army units in Uttaradit Province have reportedly been put
on alert after a redeployment of several Laotian battalions and an increase in
patrols in the area, which could signal more raids.

The spokesman for Thailand's Supreme Command, Lieut. Gen. Sampao Srikhacha, and
other officials contended that Thai forces could repulse any offensive because
Laos would need to move troops across the Mekong River. Further, they stressed,
tanks cannot move through the region's heavily forested hills.

The confrontation reflects national alliances that have characterized other
disputes in the region. Vietnam supports the Communist Governments in Laos and
Cambodia with its armed forces. China has promised to help Thailand if it is
attacked by Vietnam.

Last spring the Vietnamese offensive against Chinese-backed Cambodian guerrillas
spilled over briefly into Thailand, provoking the Thais to fight back. China and
Vietnam continue to exchange charges about aggression along their border.

Only 1,800 People in 3 Villages

The political significance of the three villages has grown out of proportion to
their size. They have a combined population of about 1,800 Thais and Laotians
who live by subsistence farming. The total area under dispute is less than 1,000
acres.

According to Thai officials, Laotian troops attacked construction workers last
month while they were building a road through the region, and then moved up
artillery to force the Thais to withdraw.

Last Thursday paramilitary Thai border police units, supported by the army,
returned in force and occupied the three villages.

The secretary general of Thailand's National Security Council, Squadron Leader
Prasong Soonsiri, charged at a news conference Friday that Vietnam was
deliberately provoking tension to drive a wedge between Thailand and Laos and to
divert attention from its own presence in Laos and military occupation of
Cambodia.

China has charged Vietnam with similar motives in creating incidents along the
Chinese-Vietnamese border.

After repeated critical statements from both Vietnam and Laos, the Thai Foreign
Ministry briefed diplomats in Bangkok Friday to back up its claim to the
villages. The chief Soviet diplomat stayed away, pleading illness, but East
European and Vietnamese diplomats attended.

The Laotian Government has accused Thailand of shelling its territory and of
conducting two incursions in which, it charged, Thai soldiers abducted or raped
village women. Laos has offered no proof.

Vietnam Uneasy Over Talks

The tension along the Thai-Laotian border comes at a time when Vietnan has shown
unhappiness with increased military consultations between Thailand and China.

Last month the Thai Commander in Chief, Gen. Arthit Kamlangek, visited China,
and was soon followed by the naval commander, Adm. Praphat Chanthaviraj. The Air
Force commander, Marshal Prapan Dhupatemiya, also went to Peking last week.

China and Thailand, acting separately, have dismissed as fraudulent an
announcement by Vietnam that it was withdrawing 10,000 soldiers from Cambodia,
which it invaded five years ago. Western diplomats believe the withdrawals are
part of a routine troop rotation.

Radio Democratic Kampuchea, which says it speaks for the Cambodian guerrillas,
charged earlier this week that 3,000 Vietnamese troops arrived in Cambodia
during the last month.

Western and Thai estimates are that Vietnam has about 45,000 troops in Laos and
up to 180,000 in Cambodia.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: map of Thailand

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              442 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAZZOLI BILL IS NOT HELPING AT HOME

BYLINE: By JAMES BARRON

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 698 words

DATELINE: LOUISVILLE, Ky., June 27


One thing about a city 373 miles from the nearest foreign border is that
immigration is not a hot topic on the local cocktail circuit. So while
Representative Romano L. Mazzoli, a Democrat, has been in the news for writing
the immigration bill the House passed last week, his constituents here have been
talking about Cissy and the college degrees.

Cissy is the nickname for Elaine Musselman, a 40-year-old Republican whose
aggressive campaign against Mr. Mazzoli had attracted Democrats and women. They
did not see much value for the district in Mr. Mazzoli's immigration work, his
first major piece of legislation in 14 years in the House, and did not share his
strong antiabortion views.

But three weeks ago a television station disclosed that Miss Musselman, the head
of an insurance company who is a former president of the Louisville Chamber of
Commerce, had never received the two college degrees she had said she held.

That same week, after attending a fund-raising party in Washington, she lost
control of a rented automobile she was driving and suffered a concussion and a
neck injury.

A Lull in Campaign


With Mr. Mazzoli in Washington to shepherd the immigration bill through the
House and Miss Musselman recuperating out of town, there was a lull in the
campaign that lasted until today, when Miss Musselman came home for the first
time since the accident.

In a statement to 50 supporters at the Louisville airport, she called her
misstatements about her educational background ''a foolish and immature
mistake'' that she had made to get her first job, as a lobbyist with the
Bristol- Myers Company in Washington. She said the company had kept her on the
payroll after discovering that she did not have a bachelor of arts degree from
the University of Louisville and a masters in international relations from
American University in Washington, as she had asserted.

Saul Loeb, her campaign spokesman, said that she had not decided whether to
continue the race and that her decision would depend on her health.

''Everything that's happened has brought back Ron's basic virtues,'' said
Russell Riggs, a Louisville lawyer who is a former local Democratic chairman.
''His hard work didn't appeal to trendy people, and he'd lost some of them.''

The district hugs the Ohio River and includes this city of Louisville and the
powerful, wealthy suburbs to the east, where Democratic voters outnumber
Republicans by 3 to 1. Mr. Mazzoli, who is 51 years old, won his seat in 1970 by
running as the peace candidate in what was seen as a referendum on the Vietnam
War.

Stand on Rights Amendment


Mr. Mazzoli is a Roman Catholic and has consistently opposed abortion. But until
last year he had generally supported the proposed equal rights amendment to the
Federal Constitution. Karen Bybee, his spokesman in Washington, said he cast a
no vote last November because he disapproved of the procedures used to bring the
amendment to the floor.

''When he voted against the E.R.A., a lot of women were disturbed,'' said
Lucretia Ward, coordinator of the 1,500-member Women's Alliance, who is a member
of the Kentucky Commission on Women.

As for immigration, some of Mr. Mazzoli's constituents are not sure that the
Government can administer Mr. Mazzoli's bill. ''It sounds like it will be a real
bureaucratic wingding,'' said Betty Ann Miller, a Democrat.

His sudden national prominence has made some people in Louisville wonder whether
he is more in touch with affairs in Washington than with his district. ''I don't
care how many weekends you fly back,'' Mr. Riggs said, ''it's not like living
there.''

Miss Musselman, by contrast, had become a visible community leader and was
planning a well-financed campaign. Mr. Loeb said she had expected to raise
$500,000. Whether she can raise that much now is an open question. So is whether
she can still defeat Mr. Mazzoli.

''The public has an enormous capacity to forgive, but this is like the Tylenol
case,'' said Jessica Schikler, a partner in a Louisville advertising company who
was an early Musselman supporter. To turn something like this around takes great
skill and total honesty.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Romano L. Mazzoli; photo of Elaine Musselman

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              443 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CONGRESS;
THE THING TO FEAR IS TOO MUCH SECURITY

BYLINE: By MARTIN TOLCHIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 961 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 27


The lines have become routine now, snaking back from the metal detectors,
outside the Capitol and across the open plaza.

On three blistering hot days last month, for example, 100,000 people stood in
line awaiting admission to the Rotunda to view the coffin containing the remains
of the unknown soldier of the Vietnam War.

Until last winter, such lines were rare. Visitors poured into the Capitol
through all entrances and wandered at will through what the lawmakers proudly
call ''the people's building'' and ''a living museum.'' But all that changed
with a bomb explosion outside the Senate chamber last November; just a few days
earlier a bomb- laden Israeli had been arrested in the House press gallery.

Although no one was wounded, the events shattered the lawmakers' sense of
security. Some say it also did violence to the concept of representative
government, by reducing the access constituents had to their lawmakers and
further insulating the denizens of Capitol Hill from those they serve.

The New Restrictions


Entrances were closed, access was restricted, metal-detectors were installed and
identification tags must now be worn by staff members, reporters and lobbyists
to gain entry to areas barred to the public.

The new restrictions initially produced some Keystone comedy. For example,
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat, found himself looking
down the barrel of a 12-gauge shotgun in the hands of an officer who barred him
from the Capitol when President Reagan was delivering his State of the Union
Message.

Similarly, Senator Jeff Bingaman, Democrat of New Mexico, was prevented from
using a senators' entrance during a vote. And Senator Howard H. Baker Jr. of
Tennessee was denied admission to a Capitol Hill reception for President Reagan,
as security officers ignored his loud and repeated protestations that ''I'm the
majority leader.''

Last winter reporters were unable to enter the Capitol after 7 P.M., and two
women in the press corps were forcibly removed from a corridor long used by
reporters, just off the Senate floor. These restrictions were relaxed shortly
after Senator Moynihan took the floor the next day to warn: ''To cut off access
- free, spontaneous, adventitious and often calamitous - between senators and
the accredited members of the press gallery would be to change our institution.
It would begin to cut us off from the people who send us here.''

'We Know We're Not Immune'


In the six months since the restrictions were imposed, the lawmakers, reporters,
lobbyists and visitors appear to have accepted the new regulations, but not
without qualms.

''It's a sad day for the American Government when any constituent has to go
through a security guard to see a Congressman,'' said Representative Robert H.
Michel of Illinois, the minority leader. ''But when you see one incident after
another - attacks on our President, bombs in the Capitol, the conscious effort
made by some governments to promote terrorism - we know that we're not immune.''

Indeed, the 1,200-member Capitol Police force has arrested an average of two
visitors a month on charges of carrying concealed weapons. There have been
pistol-packing grandmothers, knife-carrying youths and one man who arrived with
a pair of brass knuckles. It is a felony to carry concealed weapons on the
Capitol grounds, and these visitors have been taken downtown, booked, charged
and either fined or taken to St. Elizabeth's hospital, a Federal mental
institution.

''We used to pick them up in the galleries,'' said Larry Smith, the Senate's
sergeant-at-arms. ''Now we pick them up at the door. The majority are
well-meaning citizens. They've heard that crime is bad here, so they bring in
firearms.''

Jack Russ, the House's sergeant-at- arms, said: ''There's no way of telling how
many people we deter. The rule of thumb is that for every person you pick up,
you're turning away 10 times that number.''

More Threats, More Bodyguards


Detection of these firearms is important, these officials say, because of an
increase in the number of threats on members of Congress. This has led to an
increase in the number of bodyguards on Capitol Hill, some providing
round-the-clock service, depending on the seriousness of the threat and after
consultation with the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Secret Service.

But some lawmakers say the measures are mostly for show. The Capitol is still
insecure, they say.

''We all recognize that if someone is determined to do damage to us physically,
there are sufficient opportunities to achieve that objective,'' said Senator
Howard M. Metzenbaum, Democrat of Ohio.

Hyde Murray, minority counsel in the House of Representatives, is among those
who believe that something very precious is being lost in the new security
procedures. ''In the name of 'security' we are destroying something that the
whackos and terrorists have been unable to destroy,'' Mr. Murray said. ''We are
eroding the right of a free people to petition their elected representatives for
a redress of their grievances.''

Nevertheless, most of the Capitol regulars have accepted the new security
regulations. Tom Raum of The Associated Press, chairman of the Standing
Committee of Correspondents, said, ''It was terrible in the beginning, but now
the rough edges have been smoothed out.'' Similarly, David Brody, a veteran
lobbyist, said: ''I haven't heard any complaints lately. People are generally
resigned to it.''

''If we let it deter access, the terrorists have won,'' said Senator Patrick J.
Leahy, a Vermont Democrat. ''But that hasn't happened. The galleries are still
full, my office is still filled with constituents, and that's the way it should
be.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of Capitol

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              444 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 28, 1984, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RABE AND THE WAR AT HOME

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1258 words


David Rabe built his reputation as a playwright in the 1970's with a trilogy of
dramas about the Vietnam War. His acclaimed new work, ''Hurlyburly,'' is a
dispatch from a different front - the sexual battlefields of Hollywood. And
while Mr. Rabe's subjects may appear wildly different, they share one of his
common concerns: the difficulty of manhood.

''It's such a weird thing society asks of men,'' Mr. Rabe said in a recent
interview in his Upper West Side apartment, not far from the Promenade Theater,
where ''Hurlyburly'' is playing. ''It asks them to go into a domestic thing and
yet it nurtures this other thing. Most guys are given the double message by the
society. 'Be hard, think clear, don't let emotion muddy your thoughts, sleeping
around is a good thing.' And at the same time, you're told to have your feelings
available, be a good father. So you take the guys in this play, who have all
been flung out of their marriages. They're all back in this adolescence. They
have the bitterness and disappointment of having failed.''

Those failures - actors and agents by trade - meet in a bungalow that bears no
small resemblance to the barracks of Mr. Rabe's Vietnam plays; the playwright
calls their apartment ''an aid station in a jungle.'' They are bachelors anew,
but with a meanness, a self-indulgence they didn't have the first time around.
''There's this primal part of them, like this creature from the black lagoon,''
Mr. Rabe said. ''It runs through all my plays.''

It ran through Mr. Rabe's upbringing in Dubuque, Iowa, too. He recalls youth as
a series of tests - walking a thin ledge, leaping across the gap between two
cliffs, shooting birds and rabbits. A photograph of Mr. Rabe in a high school
football game still sits on his mantelpiece. ''There is that whole process of
testing,'' Mr. Rabe said, ''and it necessitates a certain type of control of
your feelings - the feelings that you think of as 'weak.' ''



Break With Catholicism

The other theme that runs consistently through Mr. Rabe's work is the loss of a
moral center in life. For the soldiers in the Vietnam trilogy (''Streamers,''
''Sticks and Bones,'' ''The Basic Training of Pavlo Hummel''), the values of
patriotism, loyalty and courage - almost a secular religion in America - were
put to brutish purposes. For the men of ''Hurlyburly,'' most particularly the
casting director Eddie, the political idealism of the 1960's has given way to
chic cynicism and to quick fixes of drink, drugs and sex. When Mike Nichols was
rehearsing the cast, Mr. Rabe recalls, he spoke often of Yeats's poem ''The
Second Coming,'' with its lines, ''Things fall apart/ The center cannot hold.''

Those words also resonate for Mr. Rabe. His plays have well documented his
disenchantment with serving in Vietnam. Less obvious is the break he made with
Roman Catholicism - after attending a religious high school and college and,
like the character of Billy in ''Streamers,'' giving thought to the priesthood.

''I wrestled with my Catholicism for a long time,'' said Mr. Rabe, who is 44
years old. ''It took a long time to escape. It began with a sense that it was
repressive, stern, judgmental. It was passionate, but it was terrifying. There
were individual priests and nuns who were helpful, but the religion was cold.
And somewhere along in college, I began to see fissures. I remember in an ethics
class, the priest said he would justify every religious stand on the basis of
reason. And by the end of that year, the priest and I had had several
disagreements where he had to admit he was wrong or to change his mind. And
that's the beginning of it seeming possible to get out.''

If leaving the faith was liberating, it was also frightening: Mr. Rabe was
suddenly without the standards by which he had lived. Whether consciously or
not, he has searched for a replacement ever since. Most recently he has studied
Hinduism, spending up to a month at a time in an ashram.



'Insane Terror of the Place'

''Hurlyburly'' shows people outside any moral orbit. And because of the play's
power, many viewers deem it autobiographical and consider the narcissistic Eddie
a veiled Rabe. Such conclusions, Mr. Rabe suggests, have elements of truth but
are not wholly accurate. He did move to Los Angeles in 1974, after his first
marriage had ended in divorce (although he is now married again, to the actress
Jill Clayburgh). He did work in the film industry as a screenwriter. He did see
- and presumably indulge in - some of the vices his characters favor.

''To the extent that Eddie is the hub of that group of men, there's none of me
in him,'' Mr. Rabe said. ''To the extent that he has a fascination with
self-destruction and an anger with it, there is some of me. I was very alienated
from where I came and from most of the people in Hollywood. I had an insane
terror of the place.''

There is also in the play - particularly in the person of Phil, a bit actor and
former convict - some of John Aquino, an actor friend of Mr. Rabe. Aquino died
two years ago at age 34 from the combination of heavy drinking and an
undiagnosed alcohol intolerance. Mr. Rabe had tried to steer Aquino into therapy
and various alcoholism clinics. But the only time the actor stayed sober for
long was during a six-month period of rehearsing Mr. Rabe's play ''Goose and
Tomtom.''

''John was simply wild,'' Mr. Rabe said. ''He was this South Philadelphia street
kid combined with this talented actor. And if he could've gotten this thing
under control. . . .'' He leaves the sentence unfinished. ''I was always
positive he had this great future. He'd do 'Goose and Tomtom' or get into some
alcoholism program. I was just so convinced. But he had that wild side. Things
would spring it loose and off he'd go. He'd drink a lot. It's adolescent. I
don't know what it is. You can't get rid of it. Or you don't want to.''

Mr. Rabe worries, however, that too much attention is being paid to the
real-life coordinates for ''Hurlyburly.''



'Eddie Is the Hub'

''A lot of what's dark in the play doesn't come from California,'' he said. ''It
comes from being in the world today, being barraged with information -
philosophies that aren't philosophies, answers that aren't answers, one
pharmaceutical solution after another.

''Someone like Eddie is trying to make sure he isn't what he used to be - an
extreme idealist. He's making a dark version of that. That rage he's holding is
very destructive. The way he disguises it, the machinations - all in the service
of hiding his rage. I would never show up at anybody's house and behave like
Eddie does. It's more of an inner struggle than that; Eddie is the hub, the
center line of a struggle I have.''

While Eddie roars and thrashes, Mr. Rabe exhibits all the self-control one would
imagine from someone molded by parochial school, the Army and the small-town
Middle West. Mr. Rabe's own fervor bubbles deep inside and the process by which
it emerges in his plays remains mysterious, even to him. Plays tend to erupt
from Mr. Rabe and not until rehearsals does he begin to understand what he has
written.

''Choosing to write a play is some kind of surrender,'' Mr. Rabe said. ''I don't
make an outline. I sit and work and suddenly the door opens and out it comes. I
used to be scared of it. And what I've learned over the years is not to try to
shape it or control it. Not that I don't go through fashioning it later. But
it's better for the writing to burst out that way, rather than torturing
yourself by holding it in.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: photo of David Rabe

TYPE: INTERVIEW

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              445 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

G.M. ENTERING COMPUTER FIELD ON MAJOR SCALE

BYLINE: By JOHN HOLUSHA, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, June 28


The General Motors Corporation moved today to take a major role in the
electronics industry by agreeing to pay $2.5 billion for the data-processing
company founded by H. Ross Perot, the Dallas billionaire.

The acquisition of Mr. Perot's company, Electronic Data Systems Inc., would be
G.M.'s biggest ever, and its first in the computer-services area. Roger B.
Smith, G.M.'s chairman, has said several times in recent months that the huge
auto maker intended to diversify out of its primary business.

The auto maker has more than $9 billion cash on hand as a result of the recent
sharp upturn in auto sales, giving it the means for the deal.

Mr. Smith said last month that G.M., already heavily into computer-aided design
and manufacture of cars, and burdened with huge worldwide accounting, payroll
and data processing needs, had found a perfect partner in Electronic Data.



To Operate Independently

Under terms of today's accord, Electronic Data will continue to operate as a
largely independent unit and will remain in its Dallas headquarters with Mr.
Perot as chairman, he said.

''We plan to maintain E.D.S. as an independent subsidiary in much the same way
that the General Motors Acceptance Corporation has been able to enjoy an unusual
degree of operating autonomy,'' Mr. Smith said in a statement, referring to the
auto maker's consumer financing arm.

G.M. said it would offer $44 a share in cash for the approximately 58 million
outstanding E.D.S. shares, or $35.20 in cash plus one-fifth of a share of a new
Class E stock that is backed up by a seven-year promissory note.

If all of E.D.S.'s 58 million shares of common were exchanged for the cash
offer, the deal would be worth an indicated $2.552 billion. Mr. Perot, who with
his family owns about 45 percent of Electronic Data's stock, would receive
between $900 million and $1.1 billion for his holding, depending on how much of
the new stock he accepts.

Mr. Perot, a former salesman for the International Business Machines
Corporation, founded Electronic Data 22 years ago with an investment of $1,000.
He used the money to lease time on other companies' computers, which he then
used to perform data-processing services for other concerns.

Analysts generally applauded the acquisition as good for General Motors. In
addition to providing the huge auto maker with a profitable subsidiary, they
said, the deal gives G.M. its own advanced computer-services company.

''First of all, E.D.S. is a self-supporting, free-standing and growing
business,'' said Maryann N. Keller, an investment adviser at Vilas Fischer
Associates. In addition, she said, it fits into the pattern of buying technology
and expertise that has been demonstrated in G.M.'s robot-making joint venture
with Fanuc of Japan and its arrangement with Toyota to produce subcompact cars
in California.

The auto maker also paid $3 million in April for a stake in Teknowledge Inc., a
small software company based in California.

David Healy, an analyst with Drexel Burnham Lambert, said E.D.S. should help
General Motors ''clean up its data systems within itself.'' But Mr. Healy
pointed out that the acquisition would have little noticeable impact on G.M.'s
financial outlook because E.D.S.'s revenues of about $800 million are only about
1 percent of G.M.'s total.

Even though General Motors has been careful to treat E.D.S. as a separate and
independent business, it remains to be seen how the highly individualistic and
action-oriented Mr. Perot will fit into a company whose management style
encourages anonymity.

An Eagle Scout and Naval Academy graduate who was president of his class every
year, Mr. Perot has his favorite saying engraved on a bronze plaque: ''Eagles
don't flock. You have to find them one at a time.''

In 1979, Mr. Perot financed a successful raid on an Iranian prison to free two
of his employees. Earlier, an attempt to deliver a planeload of supplies to
American troops being held prisoner in North Vietnam was rejected by Hanoi.

In more orthodox philanthropies, he has donated sizable sums to Dallas schools,
both public and Roman Catholic (although he is a Presbyterian), to the Girl and
Boy Scouts and to programs to help drug addicts.

He has said he intends to use his wealth for the benefit of society, rather than
leave it to his four children. ''The saddest thing that could happen to me is to
raise weak children as a result of my financial success,'' he said.

In a statement today, Mr. Perot said: ''I am excited at the prospect of playing
such an integral role in reshaping the information-processing aspects of G.M.'s
business as well as keeping E.D.S.'s traditional business expanding at a rapid
pace.''

General Motors officials said the new Class E stock would be tied to the
earnings and dividends of E.D.S. alone, and would have no connection with G.M.'s
other business. ''We hope it would be viewed as E.D.S., as against any part of
the automotive operation,'' said John R. Edman, G.M.'s vice president for
finance.

E.D.S. will operate as a separate company and will have its own profit and
dividend potential,'' Mr. Edman said. ''We would expect the price of the stock
to go up accordingly.''

According to a source close to the negotiations between the two companies, the
cash and stock plus guarantee offer is an attempt to retain E.D.S. employees by
allowing them to participate in the growth of their business. In addition,
''G.M. wants to create a new security, a kind of G.M. high-tech stock,'' the
source said.

In addition, E.D.S. shareholders opting for the cash and stock will receive a
note from G.M. guaranteeing that they can trade their shares in for a guaranteed
cash payment if the market price is below the levels prescribed in the note.

As outlined by G.M., after three years, holders of the stock will be able to
turn it in for a cash payment of about $69. Every six months for the next four
years they will be given the option at a steadily increasing price until the end
of seven years, when they are assured a payment of $125.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              446 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
69 Amerasian Children Leave Vietnam for U.S.

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 93 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, June 28


Dozens of children fathered by American soldiers in the Vietnam War left with
their relatives today after a compromise between Hanoi and Washington over
refugee quotas.

The 69 Amerasian children and 124 accompanying relatives flew to Bangkok,
Thailand, for final processing before heading for their new homes in the United
States.

Their departure raised to 1,372 the total number of chilren leaving Vietnam
since the special flights began Sept. 30, 1982. Another 1,624 relatives of the
children have also gone to the United States under the program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              447 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Takes 2 Goalball Titles

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 239 words

DATELINE: UNIONDALE, L.I., June 28


Reni Jackson and Jim Neppl each scored a goal in the shootout today as the
United States retained its world championship in men's goalball with a 2-0
victory over Egypt at the International Games for the Disabled at Mitchel Park.

The United States and Egypt played through two five-minute halves and a pair of
three-minute overtime periods before going into the shootout. Goalball, a sport
for blind athletes, is played with three competitors to a side - left and right
wings and a center - and a soccer- sized ball with bells inside that is rolled
along a 60-foot floor toward a net 27 feet wide.

The Americans also won the women's title, 5-2, from Canada as Angie Garlick of
Macomb, Ill., scored three goals. Miss Garlick scored five times in the 8-1 rout
of Denmark in the semifinals. Eva Sager led Canada to the final with seven goals
in a 12-1 triumph over West Germany.

To gain the men's final, the Americans edged Italy, 2-1, in one semifinal, with
Neppl, a 42-year-old lawyer from Rock Island, Ill., and Jackson, a courthouse
employee from Louisville, Ky., each scoring. In the other semifinal, Egypt beat
Yugoslavia, 1-0, in a shoot-out on a goal by Abdou Sheriel.  The semifinals were
all played today.

In another event, Jim Martinson of Puyallup, Wash., a 37-year-old who lost his
legs in Vietnam, advanced to the quarterfinals of the 1,500-meter wheelchair
race with a time of four minutes 17.90 seconds.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              448 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 29, 1984, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THREE-STATE WARM-UP FOR THE FOURTH OF JULY

BYLINE: By NICOLE SIMMONS

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 4676 words


YACHTS, fishing boats, lifeboats and all other manner of seagoing vessels will
be the focus of attention this weekend - with a few runners thrown in for good
measure - at Harbor Festival '84. The eighth annual festival, as well as other
historical, patriotic and artistic events, will start the metropolitan area's
celebration of Independence Day, which does not arrive until next Wednesday.

The weekend's highlight is the Liberty Cup, the first world-class yacht races in
New York Harbor in more than 60 years. The series of head-to- head match races,
which will feature the yachtsmen Gary Jobson and Ted Turner from the United
States, and six competitors from other countries, begin tomorrow and continue
through Tuesday. Races tomorrow and Monday will pit the United States against
Australia, the competition that decided last year's America's Cup, which was won
by Australia II.

The races, to be sailed in the Lower Bay and Raritan Bay to the south of Great
Kills Harbor, will run from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. each day. The pairs of huge
spinnakers puffed out in the wind, can best be seen from the starting gate, at
the Richmond County Yacht Club on Staten Island or from the water. The telephone
number for a race schedule and information about other festival events is
759-7570.

For those who prefer the waterfront to the water, food and entertainment await
from noon to dusk tomorrow and Sunday at the Great Fourth of July Lawn Festival
at Liberty State Park near Jersey City. Picnickers can watch dance groups, bands
and an open-air circus, hear reggae music and tour the sloop Clearwater, a
reproduction of the 19th-century vessels that once plied the Hudson.

Liberty State Park is also the best spot to watch the New Jersey women's
lifeboat races, which begin tomorrow at 11 A.M. off the south embankment.

Metropolitan-area runners can join 5,000 others in the festival-sponsored road
race, the Diet Pepsi 10,000- meter national championship (about six miles). It
begins at 8:30 on Sunday morning from the New Jersey side of the George
Washington Bridge and winds through Manhattan to Inwood Park.

Runners may register for the race, which will feature the winners of Diet Pepsi
events around the country, at the New York Road Runners Club, 9 East 89th Street
(860-4455), or by arriving at the starting gate between 5:30 and 7:45 A.M. on
Sunday. The best places to watch are the finish line at Gates Field in Inwood
Park, Seaman Avenue, between Dyckman and 218th Streets, and the pedestrian
overpass that crosses the Henry Hudson Parkway at 183d Street.

At a slower pace, the 18th century will return in the wee hours this weekend
with an early-morning walking tour through Lower Manhattan. Accompanied by a
fife-and-drum corps in full colonial regalia, a parade of insomniacs will leave
from City Hall at 2 A.M. on Sunday, visit sites important to the American
Revolution and proceed, by candlelight, through Federal Hall, on the site of the
nation's first capitol, where George Washington was inaugurated on April 30,
1789. The tour, led by Joyce Mendelsohn, an art historian from the Municipal Art
Society, and sponsored by the 92d Street Y, costs $7 and those interested must
register by calling 427-6000, extension 179.

Afrikan Street Carnival '84 is a five- day celebration of black American
history, music and dance. The carnival at Boys and Girls High School Field, 1700
Fulton Street in Brooklyn, runs from noon to midnight today through Wednesday,
with entertainment by groups from Africa, the United States and the Caribbean,
including the Nigerian conga drummer Babatunde Olatunji and his dance and
drumming group, Drums of Passion, as well as a marketplace of food and crafts.
Admission is 50 cents; 25 cents for children. Information: 453- 0172.

Another ethnic jamboree will take place tomorrow at the Snug Harbor Cultural
Center in the Livingston section of Staten Island. The third Irish Traditional
Music Festival, which runs from 1 to 10 P.M., features the ancient a cappella
art of sean-no singing, as well as ballad singing, folk dancing and instruction,
traditional- instrument workshops and sales of Irish crafts.

An afternoonlong ceili (pronounced KAY-lee), or Irish square dance, will be
followed, at 7 P.M., by an evening concert of all the day's performers. Tickets,
which are $5 in advance or $7.50 at the gate, can be purchased at the Irish Arts
Center, 553 West 51st Street, and other locations around the city. More
information from the Irish Arts Center at 757-3318 or 757-3191.

Lincoln Center will come alive with traditional American wares this weekend and
next with the American Crafts Festival, from noon to 9 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
Demonstrations of crafts from smithing to sheep-shearing will pass the time
between the jugglers clowns, minstrels and dancers performing in all three
plazas. The parade of giant puppets, led by a 25-foot-long dragon, should not be
missed. Admission is free; information from American Concern for Art and
Craftsmanship, 677-4627 and 201-798-0220.

There's plenty of both history and entertainment at the South Street Seaport,
this weekend and throughout the summer. Programs at the Seaport Museum trace the
history of fish merchants; there are tours of the square rigger Wavertree, an
1880's vessel, daily at 1, and a tour of the unrestored section of the seaport
district at 1 and 3. All tours leave from the museum's gallery at 215 Water
Street. Museum admission is $3.50, and the price for any or all of the tours is
an additional $1.50.

The Pioneer, an antique schooner built in 1885, sails from Pier 16, at the foot
of South and Fulton Streets, into New York Harbor three times daily: from noon
to 2 P.M. and 3 to 5 P.M. ($15), and from 6 to 9 ($20). The schooner goes where
the wind takes her; tickets may be bought at the pilothouse. Ticket prices are
reduced for children, the elderly and Seaport Museum members.

South Street Venture, a multimedia history of the seaport, is offered hourly
from 11 A.M. to 10 P.M. today and tomorrow, and 11 to 9 on Sunday, at the
Trans-Lux Seaport Theater.  Admission is $4.50; $3 for children. The seaport's
marketplace has music, mime and juggling from noon today, 10 A.M. tomorrow and
Sunday, until closing. Seaport information: 608-7888.

The Statue of Liberty, built by the French sculptor Frederic Auguste Bartholdi
some 100 years ago, is robed in scaffolding this Independence Day. Photographs
of the statue's construction, of early-20th-century immigrants on Ellis Island
and recent views of New York Harbor are on display at the New-York Historical
Society's new exhibition ''Visions of Liberty,'' which continues through Jan.
13. In conjunction with the exhibition, two films, ''The Immigrant,'' a 1917
Charles Chaplin picture, and ''The Island Called Ellis,'' a 1967 NBC special,
will be shown at 2 P.M. on Sunday. The hours of the Historical Society, on
Central Park West at 77th Street, are 11 A.M. to 5 P.M., Tuesday through Friday;
10 A.M. to 5 P.M. on Saturday, and 1 to 5 on Sunday. Admission is $2; 75 cents
for children. Information: 873-3400.

Although the statue is shut for a $39 million remodeling, the American Museum of
Immigration at its base on Liberty Island is open daily from 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.,
and the reconstruction work is fascinating. Ellis Island, where ancestors of
more than 100 million Americans first set foot on the continent, is open for
tours starting this Sunday.

Circle Line Ferries runs tours to both islands from South Ferry in Battery Park.
Each round trip costs $2; $1 for children. Ferries leave for Liberty Island
hourly from 9 A.M. to 4 P.M., and return on the half-hours from 9:30 to 4:30,
with an additional sailing at 5:15. Two-hour tours to Ellis Island run at 9:30,
11:30, 2 and 4:15. Information: 269-5755.

Music to herald the nation's 208th birthday abounds this weekend. As part of the
Harbor Festival, the United States Army Field Band and Soldiers' Chorus will
perform tomorrow evening at 6 at the South Street Seaport's Summerpier - Pier
16, foot of South and Fulton Streets. The National Chorale will salute the
''Best of Broadway'' on Sunday at 6 at the New York Botanical Garden in the
Bronx. The Goldman Memorial Band will perform two 8 P.M. concerts of American
music, tomorrow at Seaside Park in Coney Island and Sunday at Damrosch Park in
Lincoln Center, along with a children's handbell choir, while the New Jersey
Pops will strike some patriotic notes Sunday at 3 at the Lawn Festival in
Liberty State Park. This is an embarrassment of musical riches, but all
performances are free.

Westchester

The New Rochelle Country Fair will be a major event in Westchester this weekend,
with free admission and parking. For three days, today through Sunday, it will
hold forth with crafts exhibits, a farmers market, a children's arena and
musical groups pumping out jazz, rock, country, folk and classical tunes.
Attractions include a petting zoo, mimes, clowns, games, a carnival area, and
boxing and karate competitions. There will also be a horse show Sunday with
Eastern- and Western-style competitions. The fair is in the 67-acre Ward Acres
Park at the north end of New Rochelle from 3 to 9 P.M. today; 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.
tomorrow, and 11 to 7 on Sunday. Accessible from the Hutchinson River Parkway,
taking the Weaver Street exit to Quaker Ridge Road.

One of the county's annual favorites is the 10th Old- Time Fiddling Celebration,
sponsored by the Westchester County Department of Parks, Recreation and
Conservation. It takes place Sunday at the Ward Pound Ridge Reservation in Cross
River from 11 A.M. until 5. Among the fiddlers and dancers will be the Green
Grass Cloggers, Roger Sprung and the Irish Crystals, who will perform a
''bluegrass interpretation'' of country, folk and traditional music, and Bud
Snow. The only charge is a $10 parking fee. The park is accessible from Exit 6
of Interstate 684, then east on Route 35 to Route 121.

The County Center Plaza in White Plains will resound to the beat of the
tarantella Sunday from 4 to 8 P.M. during the Italian Heritage Celebration. A
''musical tour of Italy'' in song, dance and narration will be offered by the
Italian Folk Ensemble, and the Jesters of the Square will perform southern
Italian folk music. Folding chairs and blankets are welcome, and admission is
free. If it rains, everything moves indoors. The plaza is across from the County
Center building at the junction of the Bronx River Parkway and Central Avenue.

In Tarrytown Sunday evening, there will be 19th-century marches and patriotic
songs at Sunnyside, the restored home of Washington Irving. The concert, by the
Old Bethpage Village Brass Band begins at 7 P.M. Visitors are encouraged to
bring picnic suppers and to spread out on the grass overlooking the Hudson,
starting at 5. Sunnyside will be open for tours before the concert. Admission is
$4; $2.50 for the elderly and those 6 to 14, and free for under-6's. Just off
Route 9, a mile south of the Tappan Zee Bridge. Information: (914) 631-8200.

The Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts in Katonah will be opening its
concert season tomorrow night, with John Nelson conducting the Caramoor Festival
Orchestra and Horacio Gutierrez at the piano. Compositions by Beethoven, Mozart
and Ellen Taafe Zwilich will be played, starting at 8:30. Ticket prices are $10
to $20. There will be a performance Sunday at 5:30 P.M. by the
Kalichstein-Laredo-Robinson Trio. Prices, $8 to $15. Buses leave Lincoln Center
at 6 P.M. for Saturday evening concerts; details from (914) 232-5035. The best
way by car is Route 22 north from Bedford Village, following the signs after
three miles.

There are some new rides at Playland in Rye this year, where parking is $3,
though admission to the county amusement park is free. Access to the beach is a
separate $2 charge; $1 for under-12's. The pool is $3; $1.50 for under-12's.
Those younger than 5 get in free. The route is I-95 to the Playland Exit.
Information on bus connections: (914) 682-2020.  Edward Hudson

Long Island

On Long Island this weekend, disabled athletes from around the world will be
holding high their bronze, silver and gold medals, ''medieval'' knights will lay
siege to a castle, the Metroplitan Opera will perform Handel's ''Rinaldo'' under
the stars and East Hampton will preview the Fourth of July with fireworks.

The two-week International Games for the Disabled, which drew 1,800 disabled
athletes from 53 countries, will end today with ceremonies beginning at 6 P.M.
in Uniondale. The site is Mitchel Park, a new $11-million Nassau County sports
complex 23 miles east of midtown Manhattan. Tickets, at $5 (free for under 5's)
are available at the Nassau Coliseum box office in Uniondale and at all
Ticketron locations. There is free parking at the Coliseum and free jitney
service to Mitchel Park. The Coliseum is on the Meadowbrook Parkway, south of
the Long Island Expressway and Northern State Parkway, or north of the Southern
State Parkway. The number for more information is (516) 228 6068.

The Metropolitan Opera Company will give its only ''Met in the Parks''
performance outside New York City this season tomorrow night in Eisenhower Park,
just east of the Coliseum, at the Harry Chapin Lakeside Theater in East Meadow.
Handel's ''Rinaldo'' begins at 8:30, and admission is free. More information
from the Nassau County Office of Cultural Development, (516) 484 9333.

For music lovers who enjoy concerts similar to those heard on Long Island in
Stephen Foster's day, there will be afternoon performances tomorrow and Sunday
of mid- 19th-century music at the Old Bethpage Village Restoration, in Old
Bethpage. The village, a working farm community of the mid-1800's, is open from
10 A.M. to 5 P.M. The music will be from 1 to 4 P.M. Abram C. Williams, Nassau
County Recreation and Parks Commissioner, says it will ''reflect a wide variety
of tastes, including traditional fiddle tunes, popular sentimental ballads,
flute music and genteel Victorian parlor songs.'' Among the performing groups
are the 11-piece Old Bethpage Village Brass Band and the Old Bethpage Singers.
The village is on Round Swamp Road, south of the Long Island Expressway, Exit
48. A cafeteria and gift shop are on the grounds. Admission is $3; $2.50 for
Nassau County residents with a leisure pass, and $1.50 for children. Parking is
free. Information: (516) 420 5280.

Anyone looking for a 14th-century European tournament and fair this weekend will
find just the thing in the Medieval Festival at the Sands Point Preserve. Set
amid expansive green lawns and stone castles is a jousting arena, where armored
knights and bowman will engage in mock combat, using copies of swords, maces and
battle-axes. Madrigal singers, puppeteers, a magician and jugglers will add to
the carnival atmosphere tomorrow and Sunday from 11 A.M. to 5:30 P.M. Fees are
$2; $1 for those 5 to 12 years old. The Sands Point Preserve is on Middle Neck
Road in Sands Point, north of the Long Island Expressway, Exit 36. Information:
(516) 883 1612.

At the Vanderbilt Planetarum in Centerport tonight, there's a sneak preview of
the summer sky show, ''Return to the Moon.'' The performance begins at 8:30.
Tickets are $2.50; $2 for children. The planetarium is on Little Neck Road,
north of the Long Island Expressway, Exit 51. Information: (516) 757-7500.

And for those seeking a traditional welcome for the Fourth of July, East Hampton
will celebrate with fireworks tomorrow night. The show will begin at dusk on the
main beach. Admission is free. East Hampton is on the South Shore on Montauk
Highway, near the eastern tip of Long Island.  John T. McQuiston

New Jersey

New Jersey offers something unusual for racing fans, for browsers and for
pageant watchers this preholiday weekend.

In an age when speed is king, the Great Chester Turtle Race is proving that
excitement can be generated by competition at a lumbering pace. Begun 10 years
ago by some fathers who noticed that youngsters were being ignored in the town's
Fourth of July celebration, which is built around the firemen's parade, the
turtle race has grown to one of the state's most popular family outings. Last
year, more than 4,000 people came to Chubb Park to watch 700 turtles clamber up
the sides of a saucer-shape ''Turtledrome'' in a series of heats that eventually
decided division champions and the overall winner. People can bring their own
turtles or rent them. For weeks, members of the sponsoring Chester Optimists
Club have been scouring the woods for talented turtles. Registration is 50 cents
and turtles are rented for $2, plus a $3 deposit to insure that they are
returned to their natural surroundings once their brief racing careers are over.
The races will begin at noon Sunday. The best way to Chester from Manhattan is
by Route 80 from the George Washington Bridge to Route 287 south, then Route 206
north to Route 24 in the center of town, turning left on Route 24 to Chubb Park.
From the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge, the way is by the Outerbridge Crossing to
Route 287 north to Route 206. The still-popular firemen's parade will begin
tomorrow at noon.

Stamp collectors may want to visit the Greater New Jersey Stamp Expo tomorrow at
the Holiday Inn on Routes 1 and 9 in Elizabeth near Newark International
Airport. Billed as the largest one-day show in the country, the event has
attracted 57 exhibitors from Maine to California as well as the United States
Post Office. There will be some rare stamps on display, valued between $10,000
and $30,000, when the doors open at 10 A.M., according to the promoters. There
is a $1 admission charge, and each visitor will receive a shopping bag
containing stamp-collector periodicals, as well as a chance on a set of Scott
catalogues, valued at $80. The Holiday Inn may be reached by the New Jersey
Turnpike to the airport exit, following the signs to Routes 1 and 9 south.

Tomorrow and Sunday, there will be a folk-dance and music festival at Rutgers
University, sponsored by the American-Hungarian Forklore Centrum. The festival
is not connected with the university, but the site has particular significance
for Hungarians, many of whom lived in Camp Kilmer as refugees in 1956 after the
Hungarian Revolution. The university has since expanded to include part of the
former Army base. Tomorrow from 2 to 6 P.M. in the gymnasium on College Avenue
there will be folk dances by groups from Hungary, Canada and the United States.
There will also be a dance party in the gym from 8 to 11. On Sunday the
activities will move to the university's Busch Campus, across the Raritan River,
between 1 and 4 P.M. for exhibitions of men's solo and couple dancing, choir
singing and Hungarian crafts - pottery, embroidery and folk art - as well as
books for sale. Tickets each day are $5; $4 for the elderly and those younger
than 12 years. The best way is by the turnpike to Exit 9 at New Brunswick and
Route 18 west.

In nearby East Brunswick, the museum on Maple Street will have a new exhibition
of the country's military history from Civil War to Vietnam War, along with
Victorian furnishings, Indian artifacts and examples of the pottery and tile
once manufactured locally. The museum is open tomorrow and Sunday between 1:30
and 4 P.M. On Sunday, in the Gazebo in the civic center, there will be an
old-fashioned band concert starting at 7. Route 18 east from New Brunswick.

In Historic Cold Spring Village, near Cape May, there will be an antique-auto
show Sunday to complement the village's standing attractions, buildings moved
from other locations like the Rio Grande (Lower Township) railroad station,
which dates from the mid-1800's, and the Cape May Point jail, built in 1882. The
village, which is operated by a nonprofit foundation, also has restored Colonial
as well as Victorian buildings and a number of working artisans - a blacksmith
and broom and basket makers among them. There is a $1 charge (50 cents for those
6 to 12 years old) for a card that is good for admission over the entire summer.
The village opens at 11 A.M. Garden State Parkway south to the last exit before
its terminus, from there following the signs to the ferry and the village.

A few miles north on the parkway, at North Wildwood, there will be a four-mile
''Freedom Run'' on Sunday along the beach at the high-tide line where the sand
is wet and firm. The runners will leave from 15th Street and head south two
miles to the Wildwood Crest fishing pier and return. The run was started a few
years ago by some lifeguards to mark the Fourth of July holiday and has become
an annual event, with 200 participants expected this year. There is a $6 entry
fee with ribbons and medals for the top finishers. the race starts at 6 P.M.
Joseph F. Sullivan

Connecticut

From avant-garde music to the Miss Connecticut pageant, from an antique-car show
to the Tokyo String Quartet, Connecticut is offering something for just about
everyone this weekend.  Tomorrow night, there will be two outdoor concerts. At 8
o'clock on the New Haven Green, the New Haven Symphony Orchestra will give a
free performance of pieces by Dvorak, Tchaikovsky, Vivaldi, Gershwin and Bizet.
In Waterford, at Harkness Memorial State Park, the Tokyo String Quartet will
perform at 8:30. Admission is $5 for lawn seating. The park can be reached by
taking Interstate 95, getting off at Exit 75 and following signs.

But the big musical event begins Sunday, when the Amtrak New Music America
Express leaves Manhattan's Pennsylvania Station for Hartford. The train will be
carrying composers and performers - as well as members of the public - to the
New Music America Festival, a seven-day celebration of avant-garde music. More
than 100 composers will attend the festival, which will include the premieres of
10 works. Musicians will perform day and night throughout Hartford, everywhere
from the Cathedral of St. Joseph to the city's streets and barges in the
Connecticut River. The Sunday train ride begins at 1:30 P.M., with musicians
performing for the two-and- a-half-hour trip to Hartford. A one-way ticket costs
$19 and may be bought at the station up to an hour before departure. Once the
troupe gets to Hartford, the city's Union Station will be the backdrop for a
peformance of Joseph Celli's ''Snare Drum for Camus.'' Afterward, there will be
a parade through downtown streets. Further information can be obtained from
(203) 525-5521.

For those with a quieter weekend in mind, antique cars will be on display at the
Portland Fairgrounds from 8 A.M. to 6 P.M. on Sunday. The show will include
antique bicycles and tricycles as well as ''collectible'' cars - not necessarily
antiques. The fairgrounds are on Route 17A in Portland, just north of
Middletown, in central Connecticut. Admission is $3.

For those who want to be present at a coronation, Miss Connecticut will be
chosen tomorrow night at Bulkeley High School in Hartford. Evening gown,
swimsuit and talent competitions will be held both tonight and tomorrow night,
starting at 8. Tickets, available at the door, cost $8 for tonight and $12 for
tomorrow, or $16 for both nights. Information: (203) 628-5431.

On a sunny summer's day, it's hard to find a better place to take the family
than the Mystic Seaport and Museum. More than 40 buildings make up a recreated
whaling village of the 1800's that comes to life with demonstrations of sail
furling and net making and knot tying. There's even a sea chantey or two to be
heard while strolling the deck of a tall ship. The museum, off Exit 90 of
Interstate 95, is open 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. and costs $8.50; $4.25 for children.
There are also ''extras'' - a steamboat ride, for example, costs $2 and, for
children, $1.25; admission to the planetarium is an extra 75 cents; 50 cents for
children.

The Trolley Museum in East Haven is another popular summer-weekend attraction
for families. The museum, off Exit 52 of Interstate 95, features a three-mile
trolley ride. More than 100 trolley cars are on display in the car barns,
including a special parlor car that the president of the Connecticut trolley
line used in his travels around the state. Admission is $3; $2.50 for the
elderly, and $1.50 for children.  Jeffrey Schmalz

Hudson Valley

An arts-and-crafts fair is being held today, tomorrow and Sunday from 10 A.M. to
7 P.M. at Rhinebeck, with 350 exhibitors showing work. Admission is $4; $3.50
for the elderly, and free for those younger than 12. The best way there is by
the Taconic State Parkway north to Route 199, following it and Route 208 into
Rhinebeck and then Route 9 one mile north to the Dutchess County Fair Grounds.

A retrospective of the works of the landscape and marine painter Albert Insley
(1842-1937) opens tomorrow at 4:30 P.M. at the E. L. Henry House in Cragsmoor, a
hamlet in Ulster County near Ellenville. Cragsmoor was one of the country's
earliest art colonies, dating back to the 1870's, when painters like Henry,
George Inness Jr., Charles C. Curran, Helen Turner and Frederick S. Dellenbaugh,
as well as Insley, went there for the views of the Catskills. A $5 donation is
requested at the opening, although there is no admission charge on other days.
The show will be on daily 10:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M. through July 15. The best way
there is by the Gov. Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, then Route 17 and Route 209 into
Ellenville, turning south there on Route 52.

A different kind of art, ''Contemporary Triptychs,'' is on exhibit at the Edith
C. Blum Art Institute at Bard College until July 15. The show examines what it
calls the recent revival of the triptych, a format in which a work consists of
three discrete connected units. Included is workby 33 New York City-based
artists. The institute is open today and tomorrow from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. and
Sunday from 1 to 5 P.M. The best way to Bard by car is on the Taconic State
Parkway north, taking Route 55 into Poughkeepsie and Routes 9 and 9G north to
the college entrance.  An exhibition of graphic design work by the International
Business Machines Corporation is open at the Mid- Hudson Arts and Science
Center, 228 Main Street in Poughkeepsie, which is also the manufacturing home of
I.B.M. The display, which includes examples of main- frame computers, work
stations, office architecture and posters, is open 11 A.M. to 4 P.M. today and
tomorrow and Mondays through Saturdays until July 20. The best way there is up
the Taconic State Parkway to Route 55 in Dutchess County, and then to Main
Street.

A festival of Asian theater opens tonight at an amphitheater overlooking a lake
on the campus of Vassar College in Poughkeepsie. The East-West Fusion Theater,
which combines Eastern dance techniques with English words, is presenting a
performance of ''The Frog Prince,'' known in Bali as ''The Godogan,'' at 8:30
tonight and tomorrow night; on July 13 and 14, ''The Harlot and the Monk,'' a
seventh-century Sanskrit comedy, and July 27 and 28, several comic Kabuki plays.
Tickets are $10 a person; reservations: (203) 364-5220. The way to Vassar is by
the Taconic State Parkway north, then Route 55 and a left turn on Raymond Avenue
to the campus.

For a nautical weekend, the Hudson River Maritime Center, at 41 Broadway in
Kingston, has an exhibition of ferryboats of the Hudson, consisting of photo
murals, maps, artifacts and videotape inteviews with retired ferry employees.
Open today, tomorrow and Sunday 1 to 5 P.M. with no admission charge, although a
small donation is requested. The way there is by the Thruway north to Exit 19,
then Routes 28 and 587, and Broadway to the center.

Closer to the metropolitan area, the Museum Village in Monroe in Orange County
is offering a ''steam and gas'' weekend tomorrow and Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5
P.M., with exhibits of early working engines, tractors and other farm equipment.
Admission: $4.75; $2.75 for children older than 6. Thruway to Exit 16 and Route
17 to Exit 129 in Monroe.  Harold Faber

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: drawings

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              449 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GULF RAIDS:U.S. WEIGHS FFLEET BUILD-UP

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 979 words


Iraq's recent intensification of air attacks against oil tankers in the Persian
Gulf may force a re-examination of the size and mission of the United States
Navy squadron in the Indian Ocean, military and civilian analysts say.  They
feel that the Iraqi attacks - the latest was Wednesday, when a Swiss- owned
supertanker was hit by a missile, causing the death of eight crewmen - could
result in retaliatory Iranian action against Kuwait and other vulnerable Persian
Gulf targets.

The analysts say they do not believe that the replacement of four United States
Air Force Awacs aircraft in Saudi Arabia by more advanced electronic
surveillance aircraft will be sufficient to check any such attack.

Two Awacs sent on June 4 and June 7 are able to detect ships, even stationary
ones, as well as aircraft. Two more of the upgraded aircraft are to follow,
although the strength of the force will not exceed the four first sent to Saudi
Arabia.

One Washington source said that the newer planes can communicate not only with
the Saudi Air Force's ground stations but also with United States naval and
commercial shipping in the region. The planes have a radar range of 200 miles.

Intelligence analysts in Washington, London and Paris say they fear that, in the
long run, any widening of the air- sea war is likely to raise the level of
American and Soviet military strength in the Indian Ocean.

Threat to Industrial Stability

From the United States standpoint, they emphasized, any operations by either
Iran or Iraq that endangered oil shipments to the NATO countries of Europe or to
Japan would threaten military oil stocks and industrial stability.

''In those circumstances,'' said a French analyst, ''we cannot expect the
Soviets to be merely spectators. If you reinforce, they will feel obligated to
do the same, if only for reasons of national status. And if one or the other
combatant falls apart, well, the Russians are adept at fishing in troubled
waters. Remember, they went into Afghanistan to restore 'stability.' ''

The United States Navy's force in the northwest reaches of the Indian Ocean
appears adequate to cope with the present situation. But analysts emphasize that
the situation is volatile and that before peace returns to the region more ships
may be needed. Some civilian analysts argue that the first step should be the
formation of a Marine Corps-Navy task force for use in an emergency.

Airborne Units 6,000 Miles Away

''You just can't wait for an airborne regiment to be flown 6,000 miles from the
East Coast,'' said one specialist. ''There should be troops much closer to the
gulf than that.''

The Navy's combat strength in the Indian Ocean now centers on the attack
aircraft carrier America and 11 cruisers and destroyers in a covering screen.
The squadron is served by seven auxiliaries.

Since 1982 the Soviet Navy has maintained a force in the region varying from 25
to 32 ships. However the ratio of auxiliaries is much higher than in the
American squadron. A normal mix would be 10 combatants and 17 or 18 support
ships.

Alvin J. Cottrell and Michael L. Moodie, two civilian analysts associated with
the National Strategy Information Center, estimate that the deployment of these
two squadrons draws down naval strength elsewhere. American Navy sources agree
but add that the Navy's command and logistical organizations are the more
flexible of the two services.

The Soviet naval combatants are drawn from the Pacific Fleet (70 percent) and
the Black Sea Fleet (30 percent.) The aircraft carrier Kiev has been included in
some recent deploments. The Navy's view is that the Kiev is not a match for an
American attack carrier because it carries only short-take-off-and-landing jets
and antisubmarine helicopters.

The Navy's practice is to alternate one carrier group between the Indian Ocean
drawing it either from the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean or the Seventh Fleet
in the Western Pacific.

Navy Weakened Elsewhere

As a consequence of the Indian Ocean deployments, intelligence analysts said,
the Navy is weaker in the eastern Mediterranean, a politically unstable area,
and around the Philippine Islands, where the buildup of a Soviet sea and air
force at Cam Ranh Bay in Vietnam is being carefully watched.

The naval strength of East and West, analysts emphasized, is something that
would become pertinent only if the Persian Gulf war entered a new and wider
stage.

Most analysts believe this stage could take two forms. Continued attacks on
tankers and the effective elimination of Kharg Island as a oil- shipment center,
many believe, could lead to Iranian air attacks on Kuwait and other almost
defenseless Gulf nations and to the start of the final land offensive so often
threatened by Iranian spokesmen.

Iraq Said to Provoke Iranians

Some European, United States and Middle East analysts have concluded that one of
the objectives of the present Iraqi air offensive is to provoke the Iranians
into unleashing the army of about 500,000 men now marshaled along Iraq's
frontiers.

Their reasoning is that Iraq has had adequate time to build defenses against the
attack - that it has more tanks, artillery, missiles and combat aircraft than it
had when an offensive was first threatened by the Iranians in April. Also, the
Iraqis have completed a network of secondary roads for the front.

''In that situation, the Iraqis probably believe that they can destroy the
offensive, especially since it may be launched during the hottest period of the
year,'' a British analyst said.

''Iran's losses would be prohibitive and the gains marginal. In that case, Iraq
could look forward to a period of relative stability on the front and hope that
the internal situation in Iran eventually would swing against the ayatollah and
toward peace.''


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              450 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SATURDAY NEWS QUIZ

BYLINE: By Linda Amster

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 608 words


Questions are based on news reports in The Times this week. Answers appear on
page 14.

1. This is the way it ended, not with a bang but a whimper. Explain.

2. Cuba released all the United States citizens in its prisons, except for those
detained for (airplane hijacking/espionage/murder/all of the preceding).

3. ''To give the people of my city a window in every room and a bit of sunshine
in every window,'' was how a former Mayor of the city that established the
nation's first public housing authority described its mandate. What housing
authority is it and why is it in the news?

4. A playwright who built his reputation with a trilogy of dramas about the
Vietnam War has written in his latest work, ''Hurlyburly,'' a dispatch from a
different front, the sexual battles of Hollywood. Who is the playwright?

5. ''I find such statements or comments to be reprehensible and morally
indefensible,'' said the Rev. Jesse Jackson, in reference to some, but not all,
of the remarks recently broadcast by Louis Farrakhan, a Black Muslim leader.
What remarks did he condemn and which did he not?

6. An automotive tail fin in California is causing a tailspin in Texas over a
copyright issue. Explain.

7. USA Today, the colorful national newspaper started in 1982, has the
(third/fourth/fifth/sixth)largest circulation of the nation's daily newspapers,
according to the Audit Bureau of Circulations.

8. Television viewers in East and West Germany saw people crowding into and
being turned away from a building on Hannoversche Strasse in East Berlin. What
building is it and what were the circumstances?

9. ''It probably means that we are not going to get to the bottom of
'Debategate,''' said a lawyer about the unanimous decision of a Federal appeals
court. What was the decision?

10. A new screening test that might cost only $1 or $2 might have an important
effect on dealing with a form of cancer of the (kidney/liver/pancreas/spleen)
that is relatively uncommon in the United States.

11. The Supreme Court struck down an arrangement of long standing in college
sports. What was it?

12. A historic exchange returned 6 and 211. What happened?

13. ''There may be a substantial change occurring in the social attitudes and
customs concerning drinking, whether at home or in taverns,'' a State Supreme
Court justice wrote about the potential effect of a decision. What was the
decision?

14. A topic that had been largely shunned as an academic subject on America's
campuses for almost a decade is increasingly becoming part of the college
curriculum. What topic is it?

15. A Saudi Arabian businessman has acquired an interest in Jazz. Explain.

16. A report by the General Accounting Office substantiated charges by some
House Democrats that the Reagan Administration bypassed Congress, using the
ongoing military exercise in Honduras as a shield for building permanent
military installations there. True or false?

17. In Japan, there are fears that the country may slowly become contaminated
because of the calculators, cameras, watches, and electronic gadgets that it
produces. What is the reason?

18. ''We're finally freed of this paralyzing obsession,'' said an observer,
speaking of the resolution by the European Common Market of a five-year old
dispute. What was at issue?

19. The Senate approved a bill that would reward states that enacted this
legislation and penalize states that did not. What legislation is it?

20. Ending a monthlong deadlock, the Senate cleared funds for summer youth jobs
by deleting from an emergency spending bill money intended for a different
purpose. What purpose was it?

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              451 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANSWERS TO QUIZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 14, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 408 words


Questions appear on page 12.

1. Engines on the space shuttle Discovery ignited and then shut down immediately
as a result of a malfunction only 4 seconds from liftoff.

2. Airplane hijacking.

3. New York City's Housing Authority celebrated its 50th anniversary.

4. David Rabe.

5. He condemned the description of the creation of Israel as ''an outlaw act,''
but his statement did not condemn the description of Judaism as ''a gutter
religion'' because he was not certain Mr. Farrakhan had used those words.

6. The Hard Rock Cafe in West Hollywood has incorporated the tail end of a 1959
Cadillac in its facade. It is being sued for copyright infringement by Ant Farm,
a radical architectural group that planted 10 Cadillacs in the ground, fins up,
at the Cadillac Ranch near Amarillo a decade ago.

7. Third.

8. As Bonn effectively closed the West German diplomatic mission to East Germans
who were seeking refuge and emigration to the West, many East Germans went to
the building, apparently hoping to join 45 others who had taken up residence in
it.

9. The ruling reversed a decision last month that ordered Attorney General
William French Smith to have an independent counsel investigate how the 1980
Reagan campaign obtained documents from the Carter White House and campaign.

10. Liver.  11. In a 7-to-2 decision, the Court ruled that the National
Collegiate Athletic Association's 33-year-old exclusive control of televised
appearances of football games was ''an unreasonable restraint'' of trade.

12. For the first time in 10 years, Israel and Syria exchanged prisoners of war,
with Israel handing over 291 soldiers and 20 civilians in return for 3 soldiers
and 3 civilians.

13. The New Jersey Supreme Court ruled that someone who ''directly serves''
liquor to a guest and allows him to drive away drunk can be held liable for
injuries to others if the guest has an automobile accident.

14. The Vietnam War.

15. Adnan M. Khashoggi, who has many interests in Salt Lake City, purchased a
half-interest in the National Basketball Association's Utah Jazz franchise.

16. True.

17. Mercury, a toxic metal used in most batteries in the devices, is starting to
seep into the soil around garbage dumps where the batteries have been left.

18. A budget dispute centering on the size of Britain's contribution to the
Common Market treasury.

19. Mandatory sentencing for drunken drivers.

20. Aid to Nicaraguan rebels.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company


                              452 of 452 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 30, 1984, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

104 Medals to U.S. as Games Close

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 118 words

DATELINE: UNIONDALE, L.I., June 29


Nancy Anderson of Lansing, Mich., set a world record of 17.78 seconds in the
Cerebral Palsy 200-meter dash today as the third International Games for the
Disabled closed at Mitchel Park.

The United States, with the largest entry in the 44-nation competition that
started June 17, won 5 gold medals today, raising its final total to 104.
Britain followed with 76 and Canada was third with 51.

Jim Martinson of Puyallup, Wash., a 37-year-old who lost his legs during Army
service in Vietnam, won the 100-meter wheelchair dash in 17.13 seconds. Youlanda
Barker of Westbury, L.I., completed the Americans' gold-medal performances by
placing first in the amputees 60-meter wheelchair sprint in 0:14.01.


LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1984 The New York Times Company
