
                               1 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 1, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM DROPS SIX FROM RULING BODY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 440 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, March 31


Vietnam dropped six members from the ruling Politburo today, including Gen. Vo
Nguyen Giap, who is credited by the Vietnamese with defeating the French at Dien
Bien Phu and the United States in the Vietnam War 20 years later.

The official Vietnam News Agency, which announced the changes, said that four
newcomers to the Politburo included the commander of Vietnamese forces in
Cambodia and a specialist in party organization. The announcement came on the
final day of the fifth Vietnamese Communist Party congress in Hanoi.

A diplomat here who closely follows Vietnamese affairs said he thought that
General Giap and former Foreign Minister Nguyen Duy Trinh, who also was dropped
from the Politburo, had actually retired.

Yielded Defense Post in '80

General Giap, now 71 years old, was generally believed to have been the chief
strategist in the Vietnamese victory over the French colonial forces at Dien
Bien Phu in 1954, and then in the conflict with the United States. He is
believed to have been ailing during the last years of the Indochina war. Two
years ago he was replaced as Defense Minister by Gen. Van Tien Dung, who has now
risen to sixth place in the Politburo.

Retaining their rankings in the 13-member body were Le Duan, the party chief,
President Truong Chinh, Prime Minister Pham Van Dong, Gen. Pham Hung, the
commander in southern Vietnam, and Le Duc Tho, the chief ideologist.

During the congress, Mr. Duan attributed Vietnam's acute economic problems to
mistakes of party and state agencies at all levels. He indicated that more
purges and economic changes were ahead and voiced complete support for the
foreign policy objectives of the Soviet Union.

Former Economic Chief Dropped

Ousted from eighth position and from the Central Committee was the former
economic planning chief, Le Thang Nghi. He was replaced by Nguyen Lam as
chairman of the planning commission in 1980, at the same time as it was
announced that Vietnam's 1976-80 five-year plan had failed.

Tran Quoc Hoan, a former Interior Minister, was dropped from the No. 10
position.  A new appointment was Lieut. Gen. Le Duc Anh, who holds the 12th spot
in the new lineup. He is commander of Vietnam's 200,000-man force in Cambodia
and, according to the diplomatic analyst, reinforces the hard-liners in the
Politburo headed by Le Duc Tho.

Another newcomer is Nguyen Duc Tam, who is believed to be the chairman of the
organizational department of the Central Committee.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vo Nguyen Giap

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               2 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 1, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR-ARMS OPPOSITION WIDENS IN NEW YORK AREA

BYLINE: By ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1531 words


Through such activities as petition drives on the Staten Island Ferry, church
meetings in the New Jersey suburbs, a high school essay contest in Rockland
County, efforts to halt the nuclear arms race are spreading in the New York
metropolitan region.

With both a political and spiritual thrust, the efforts have gained the backing
of diverse local groups - from Quakers and Roman Catholic bishops to the latest
supporters, several Reform synagogues in Manhattan.

The issue is stirring a variety of political activity at the local level, and
participants say it is attracting people who never got involved in politics
before. They are being drawn to the campaign through strenuous educational
efforts by religious organizations, which are offering numerous lectures and
workshops on nuclear disarmament.

A Response by Legislatures

The aim of the groups is a mutual freeze on the testing, production and
deployment of nuclear weapons by the United States and the Soviet Union.
Responding to the mounting concern by many of their constituents, the
legislatures of New York, New Jersey and Connecticut are taking up the question
of a nuclear freeze.

In Woodstock, Conn., on Tuesday night, the town meeting passed a nu@clear-freeze
resolution by 166 to 9. The Woodstock vote follows similar actions in town
meetings in Hampton, Lyme and Old Lyme last year. Local groups in Connecticut
plan to bring the resolution before 43 other town meetings this spring, as well
as the legislative bodies of 14 other municipalities.

Citing the need for local action on an issue usually reserved for national
leaders, Dr. David H. Bates of Woodstock said, ''We have to explain to them that
we do not wish to be incinerated.''

''This crowd here is just one slight splinter of the whole deal,'' said Dr.
Bates, who predicted similar votes elsewhere.  With the movement for a
nuclear-arms freeze gaining momentum nationally, President Reagan last night
proposed sharp reductions in stockpiles of nuclear weapons. The proposal came in
the President's nationally televised news conference.

Last month, the Connecticut General Assembly passed a resolution calling on
President Reagan to initiate negotiations with the Soviet Union leading to a
bilateral freeze on nuclear weapons.

''There is a tremendous fear of annihilation coupled with the destruction of
social services,'' said Councilwoman Miriam Friedlander, Democrat of Manhattan,
who has introduced a resolution calling for a freeze on nuclear arms. ''This is
the first time I've seen protest against a war before the war happens. People
are getting angrier faster.''

Local political action has also taken the form of a petition drive to collect at
least 5,000 signatures from every Congressional District in the region. It is
being coordinated by a variety of groups loosely associated with a national
umbrella group - the Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign.

New Jersey petitioners recently reached the goal in 13 of 15 Congressional
Districts, according to O'Brien Boldt, one of the coordinators of the efforts in
that state. A lobbying effort is now under way to place a nonbinding referendum
question concerning a nuclear weapons freeze on the November ballot in New
Jersey. In New York, eight Congressional Districts so far have reached the
5,000-signature level, according to Patricia Leake at the Manhattan office of
the American Friends Service Committee, a national Quaker group that is taking a
leading role in coordinating the freeze campaign.

In January, the New York State Assembly approved a resolution calling for a
nuclear weapons freeze and the application of the funds saved to ''civilian
purposes.''

While the breadth of activity in the region to curtail nuclear arms production
is difficult to measure, it has not reached the magnitude of protest in Europe,
where 250,000 demonstrators took to the streets of Bonn last October.

Several reasons are given by organizers for the latest growth in the antinuclear
movement in the United States, including the Reagan Administration's proposals
to finance a military buildup while constricting budgets for social programs.
Mr. Reagan contends a freeze on nuclear arms production would leave the Soviet
Union with a strategic advantage.

'What Grass Roots Can Do'

Nationally, protesters say the movement got a significant boost with the recent
news that petitioners in California had collected enough signatures to place a
proposal for a bilateral nuclear freeze on the November ballot there.

''We remember what California did with Proposition 13,'' said Chad Murdoch,
coordinator of the nuclear ''Freeze Campaign'' in New York's Rockland County.
''It shows what grass roots can do.''

The hope is to persuade elected officials, through the petitions, to support
local and national ''freeze'' resolutions such as the one introduced this month
in Congress by Senators Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Mark
O. Hatfield, Republican of Oregon. That resolution is now being co-sponsored by
23 Senators and 155 Representatives.

Although the nuclear peril has been a fact of life since the 1940's, many people
recently joining the disarmament movement say they have been made more aware of
the issue through the efforts of religious leaders.

A Mass Demonstration

The efforts of these leaders have been intensifying recently with the aim of
drawing people to a mass demonstration in New York City on June 12 to support
the United Nations's second special session on disarmament, which opens that
week.

The major religious groups behind the movement in the New York area are such
national organizations as the American Friends Service Committee; the Fellowship
of Reconciliation, a group of religious pacifists; Clergy and Laity Concerned,
an interfaith peace group, and Pax Christi, a Roman Catholic peace organization
whose membership includes scores of bishops. Those active in the New York area
include Bishop Joseph Sullivan of Brooklyn and Bishop Peter Rosazza of Hartford.

The Riverside Church on Manhattan's West Side has been a center of nuclear
education activity under the Rev. William Sloane Coffin. Cora Weiss, a peace
activist from Vietnam War days, runs the church's disarmament program.

Mr. Murdoch, the Rockland County organizer, like many others new to the
nuclear-freeze campaign, was not active in the earlier peace movements of the
1960's and does not consider himself ''left wing'' in his beliefs.

''I'm a pretty straight sort of character,'' said the 54-year-old Mr. Murdoch, a
cancer research chemist at Lederle Laboratories. He is from Pearl River, N.Y.,
of which he says: ''It's about as conservative a town as you'll find.''

'Like a Light Turning On'

He said he got involved about 13 months ago after hearing the Rev.  Jan
Orr-Harter, the pastor of the West Park Presbyterian Church in New York City,
speak at a church in Montclair, N.J.

''It was the first time I'd heard of the nuclear freeze campaign,'' said Mr.
Murdoch. ''I had felt numb and helpless in the face of the nuclear weapons
threat all of my adult life. The freeze was something practical that didn't
threaten national security, something that could get broad support. It was like
a light turning on at that point. My life hasn't been the same since.''

Among the Rockland campaign's efforts is a high school essay contest, with a
$100 prize, on the topic ''How Can We Stop the Nuclear Arms Race?''

In Representative Charles B. Rangel's district, signatures were collected by the
Harlem Peacemaking Community, a coalition of five Presbyterian churches working
with other peace groups in the neighborhood. Mr. Rangel is a co-sponsor of the
Kennedy-Hatfield resolution.

Cutbacks and Money

''We're trying to tell Harlem, what with cutbacks in jobs and housing, that the
money that should be coming into our community is going into the military,''
said Frances Park, an elder at Mount Morris Presbyterian Church.

Last Sunday a rally that the Harlem coalition helped to organize heard Dr.
Jonathan Lorch, president of the New York chapter of Physicians for Social
Responsibility, and other speakers.

Nine Reform synagogues in Manhattan are sponsoring a conference April 25 at the
Steven Weiss Free Synagogue on ''Disarmament, Judaism and the Jewish
Community.''

Rabbi Balfour Brickner, the senior rabbi at the Free Synagogue, said it was the
first time that Jewish groups had directed themselves in an organized way to the
nuclear arms issue.

He said that the nuclear disarmament movement was gaining ground ''because of
the anger and the fear that the people of this country and the world feel as
they see the pseudo leaders of our political system rearming us for
Armageddon.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of town meeting in Woodstock, Conn. photo of Lula
Ann Johnson and Hyacinth Stevens at rally sponsored by Harlem Peacekeeping
Community

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               3 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 1, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DR. HELENE DEUTSCH IS DEAD AT 97; PSYCHOLOGIST ANALYZED BY FREUD

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN

SECTION: Section D; Page 22, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 606 words


Dr. Helene Deutsch, who in 1918 began her psychoanalysis with Sigmund Freud,
died Monday in Cambridge, Mass. Dr. Deutsch, who was 97 years old, was the first
woman analyst to be analyzed by Freud and before her death had become the oldest
psychoanalyst analyzed by Freud.

To the public, Dr. Deutsch was perhaps best known for her twovolume work, ''The
Psychology of Women,'' which was published in 1944 in the United States. The
first volume is on girlhood and the second on motherhood. For many years it was
regarded as the most comprehensive psychoanalytical account of the subject.

To psychoanalysts, Dr. Deutsch was probably best known for describing what she
called the ''as-if'' personality, a concept focusing on people whose lives seem
to them to be lacking in genuineness. Thus, her work can be seen as
foreshadowing much of the current study of borderline and narcissistic
personalities.

A prolific writer, she published her last book, ''Confrontations With Myself,''
in 1973.

A Political Activist

She was a political activist throughout her life. As a socialist in Europe in
the 1900's, she worked for the rights of women. As an American citizen in the
United States in the 1960's and 1970's, she marched against the Vietnam War.

Helene Rosenbach Deutsch was born on Oct. 9, 1884, in Przemysl, in what was then
the Polish part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. She attributed her sense of
social justice to her father, a lawyer who consistently championed the poor. She
attributed her rebelliousness to her struggles with her mother.

''She was a mean woman, and I did not want to be like her,'' Dr.  Deutsch said
in an article published in The New York Times Magazine on July 30, 1978.

At the age of 12, when her mother forbade her to obtain the education she needed
to pass her university entrance examinations, she ran away from home. Discovered
by police officers, she returned home and made her father sign a paper promising
her an opportunity for a university education.

In Love With a Socialist

Four years later, as a rebellious 16-year-old, she fell in love with Herman
Lieberman, head of the Polish Social Democratic Party, who was twice her age,
and had two children and a wife who would not divorce him. For eight years Miss
Deutsch and Lieberman carried on a love affair.

In this period, she organized strikes of working women and sometimes threw
herself in front of police officer's horses in the name of the revolution.

When Lieberman was elected delegate to the Parliament in Vienna in 1907, Helene
Deutsch went with him. She was one of three women then enrolled as medical
students, and had planned to become a pediatrician.

After she broke with Lieberman, her political activities lapsed and she became
more involved in psychiatry.  In the 1920's, after a stay in Berlin, she
returned to Vienna to start the Vienna Psychoanalytic Institute. She remained as
a director of the institute until 1935, when she moved to the United States with
her husband, Felix Deutsch, a psychoanalyst to whom she was married in 1912.

In recent years, her association with Freud and her championship of his theories
made her a target of feminists who regarded those theories as justifying the
subjection of women.

She is survived by a son, Martin, who is a professor of theoretical physics at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and two grandsons, Peter and
Nicholas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               4 of 330 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 1982 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

PRYOR IN 'SOME KIND OF HERO'

BYLINE: By Vincent Canby

SECTION: Section C; Column 3; Weekend Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 763 words


AFTER surviving six years in a Vietcong prisoner-of-war camp, Cpl. Eddie Keller
(Richard Pryor) of the United States Army comes home to a hero's welcome in Los
Angeles. He is interviewed on television, treated kindly by doormen and served
champagne on the house. The world adores him.

He also finds that his wife, Lisa, has borne him a daughter but has fallen
inlove with someone else, that Lisa and her boyfriend have lost all of his
savings, that his mother has had a stroke and is in a nursing home that costs
$1,200 a month, that his teeth are falling out and that the Army is withholding
his back pay. It seems that while he was a P.O.W., Eddie signed a ''confession''
to the effect that the United States was conducting an illegal war in Vietnam -
something he did only to secure medical help for his dying buddy, Vinnie (Ray
Sharkey).

''Some Kind of Hero,'' directed by Michael Pressman and adapted by James
Kirkwood and Robert Boris from Mr. Kirkwood's 1975 novel, is mainly concerned
with Eddie's status as a second-class hero. Eddie is a curious, complex
character, being far more optimistic and resilient than anyone else in the
sardonic civilian world in which he suddenly finds himself. He is befriended by
- and falls in love with - a beautiful, high-priced, Beverly Hills prostitue
named Toni (Margot Kidder) and, after a couple of false starts, turns to crime.

''Some Kind of Hero,'' which opens today at the Loews State and other theaters,
is a very engaging, loose-limbed sort of comedy. It's written, directed and
acted with amiability, which doesn't disguise the bitterness immediately beneath
the surface but, like Eddie himself, absorbs it.

The movie is not conventionally neat in its structure. The extended Vietnam
sequences at the beginning, which are necessary to establish motivation for
everything that happens later, effectively cut the film in two. When ''Some Kind
of Hero'' ends, it hasn't built to any sock payoff of humor or recognition. It
has simply ambled to its conclusion.

However, Mr. Pressman and the writers have provided Mr. Pryor with material for
his most complete, most honest characterization to date in a fiction film - as
opposed to his extraordinary solo performance in ''Richard Pryor Live on the
Sunset Strip.''

Eddie Keller is the least hoked-up leading role he has yet played. The
performance, if not the script, is a series of revelations of the singular Pryor
talent as the actor inhabits a particular character. In a way that may
disappoint people who loved him in the disorderly ''Stir Crazy'' or even in the
sentimental ''Bustin' Loose,'' Mr. Pryor plays Eddie Keller straight.

He is very fine indeed, whether he is responding with wary reason to the idiotic
demands of the television cameras, on his tumultuous arrival home, or is
attempting his first, unsuccessful bank heist. In this film, Mr. Pryor displays
a dramatic intelligence, wit and method that are completely new, though they are
very much the extensions of the personality he reveals in ''Live on the Sunset
Strip.''

Miss Kidder is direct, funny and charming as the somewhat idealized prostitute,
and Mr. Sharkey, whose leading roles in ''Willie and Phil'' and ''Love and
Money'' have not shown him to advantage, is excellent as the doomed sergeant in
the prisoner-of-war camp. So, too, are Lynne Moody, as Eddie's well-meaning but
wandering wife, and Ronny Cox as an Army officer who'd like to help Eddie but
who is, at last, stumped.

''Some Kind of Hero'' is frequently funny but also unexpectedly somber. Vincent
Canby

One War to Another

SOME KIND OF HERO, directed by Michael Pressman; screenplay by James Kirkwood
and Robert Boris, based on a book by Mr. Kirkwood; director of photography, King
Baggot; edited by Christopher Greenbury; music by Patrick Wil- liams; produced
by Howard W. Koch; released by Paramount Pictures. At Loews State, Broadway and
West 45th Street; Orpheum, 86th Street and Third Avenue; New York Twin, Second
Ave- nue and 66th Street; Bay Cinema, Second Ave- nue and 31st Street, and other
theaters.Running time: 97 minutes. This film is rated R.

Eddie Keller . . . . . Richard Pryor
Toni . . . . . Margot Kidder
Vinnie . . . . . Ray Sharkey
Colonel Powers . . . . . Ronny Cox
Lisa . . . . . Lynne Moody
Jesse . . . . . Olivia Cole
Leon . . . . . Paul Benjamin
Kid . . . . . David Adams
Tank . . . . . Martin Azarow
Olivia . . . . . Shelly Batt
Jeanette . . . . . Susan Berlin
Female Teller . . . . . Mary Betten
Honcho No. 2 . . . . . Herb Braha
Base Commander . . . . . Anthony R. Charnota
Mickey . . . . . Matt Clark
Bandit No. 1 . . . . . Judy Farese


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Photo of Richard Pryor

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               5 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A Honduran Suggests Intervention by the U.S.

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 174 words

DATELINE: TEGUCIGALPA, Honduras, April 1


Honduras, facing ''armed aggression from the Soviet Union by way of Cuba,''
would agree to United States military intervention in Central America if it were
the only way to preserve peace, the head of the Honduran armed forces said
today.

The Honduran Chief of Staff, Col. Gustavo Alvarez Martinez, said in a radio
interview that his country was ''tremendously worried'' about the arms buildup
in Nicaragua.

''That situation is cause for worry, and not the presence in Honduras of 90 U.S.
advisers who help us defend democracy in our country and the region,'' Colonel
Alvarez Martinez said.

There are five times as many American military advisers in Honduras now as there
were two months ago.  The colonel said Nicaragua had 4,000 civilian advisers and
2,000 military advisers from Cuba, 80 from East Germany, 30 from Bulgaria, 28
from North Korea, 20 from Vietnam and 10 from the Palestine Liberation Army.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               6 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ISSUE AND DEBATE;
CONGRESS PONDERS BUDGET-BALANCING AMENDMENT

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 2017 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 1


Sometime in May the Senate is expected to vote on a proposed amendment to the
Constitution that would require a balanced Federal budget.

If the sponsors, led by Senators Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah, and Dennis
DeConcini, Democrat of Arizona, muster the twothirds vote that the Constitution
requires for amendments, the matter will go to the House of Representatives,
where the Democratic leadership is opposed to it. The House sponsors are
Representatives Barber B. Conable Jr., Republican of upstate New York, and Ed
Jenkins, Democrat of Georgia.

If a two-thirds majority of the House approves, the amendment goes to the states
for ratification; three-fourths of them, or 38, must endorse it within seven
years for it to become part of the Constitution.

President Reagan expressed support for a balanced budget amendment in general
terms at his news conference Wednesday night. He said such an amendment would
have to include ''a limitation on taxes,'' which the Hatch-DeConcini version
has, ''so that in the future you couldn't just always have a balanced budget by
simply sending a bill to the taxpayers.''

Specific Endorsement Expected

A specific Presidential endorsement of the proposal is expected before the
Senate votes. But to avoid irritating House Democrats who might support it, the
White House is unlikely to wage a vociferous campaign or portray the proposal as
part of Mr. Reagan's program.

The Senate Judiciary Committee, by a vote of 11 to 5, approved the amendment
last May, a direct result of the Republicans' winning control of the Senate in
the November 1980 elections. Although the measure has been a staple on
conservative political menus for years, there has been little public debate of
its merits.

The Background

Year in and year out, in prosperity and in recession, the Federal budget seems
to end up in deficit. Spending has exceeded revenues in every year save one
since 1960, the last year of the Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower. The
Treasury always makes up the difference by borrowing.

The exception occurred in 1969, when an income tax surcharge to finance the
Vietnam War was in effect. Otherwise, three Democratic and three Republican
Presidents have written a record of systematic deficit spending. It is widely
believed that these deficits have been an important cause of inflation, although
some economists regard other factors as equally, if not more, important.

In 1974, Congress passed a budget act that it thought would impose a sterner
discipline on its own spending practices.  Eight years later that proposition is
in doubt. Annual deficits have persisted. President Reagan has dropped his
campaign promise to balance the budget by the fiscal year 1984. Indeed, he and
his budget office now project a string of deficits and no black ink for five
years or more.

Borrowing Driving Debt Higher

In the fiscal year 1982, which will end Sept. 30, the budget deficit is likely
to exceed $100 billion, far above the previous record of $66 billion in the
fiscal year 1976. In the fiscal year 1983, for which Congress is now considering
a budget, the Administration and Congress would like to reduce the deficit
significantly, but the chances for that are doubtful. The White House has
projected the 1983 deficit at $91.5 billion and others have said it could go
much higher.

Meanwhile, borrowing to finance this year's deficit is driving the Federal debt
steadily higher. Within a few weeks the Administration will ask the lawmakers to
raise the statutory ceiling on the debt.  Because refusal to do so would stop
the Treasury from borrowing the money it must have to pay the Government's
bills, the lawmakers are expected to acquiesce. But for some a vote for a bigger
debt is politically risky and a vote for a budget-balancing amendment to the
Constitution would be appealing.

Senate Joint Resolution 58, the proposed amendment approved by the Judiciary
Committee, has several provisions.  Section 1 directs Congress to draw up a
budget for the approaching fiscal year ''in which total outlays are no greater
than total receipts.'' This section authorizes a deficit budget if 60 percent of
the entire membership of each house of Congress votes to accept one.  Finally,
Section 1 declares that ''the Congress and the President shall ensure that
actual outlays do not exceed the outlays set forth in such statement.'' It does
not say how.

Exceptions Are Allowed

Section 2 directs that revenues shall not rise more rapidly than the growth of
national income unless a majority of the entire membership of each house has
approved legislation to do so in separate votes, and such a bill has become law.

Section 3 states: ''The Congress may waive the provisions of this article for
any fiscal year in which a declaration of war is in effect.''

Section 4 lays down sweeping definitions of ''total receipts'' and ''total
outlays'' that are meant to avoid circumvention of the amendment by later
statutory redefinition of receipts or outlays.

Section 5 says the amendment ''shall take effect for the second fiscal year
beginning after its ratification'' by 38 states.

For the Amendment

The essential argument for a budget amendment is that Congress is incapable of
resisting deficit financing without more rigorous discipline than exists now.
''Unless there is some constitutional discipline imposed,'' Senator DeConcini
told the Judiciary Committee in 1981, ''Congress will never by self-imposition
follow a sound policy of fiscal prudence.''

The Judiciary Committee report explains why, in the majority's view, the
discipline must be constitutional. The fiscal system is biased, the report says,
in favor of spending because ''members of Congress do not have to cast votes in
behalf of new taxes in order to accommodate new spending programs.'' New
spending may be financed by borrowing or by an increase in tax revenues that
results from inflation or growth of the economy.

''Members of Congress, thus, are free to respond to the concentrated pressures
of spending interest groups - and reap the political advantages of doing so -
without having to reap concomitant political disadvantages by reducing spending
programs favored by some other spending interests or expressly raising taxes,''
the report declares.

Effect of Lobbying Cited

The report finds, as have many commentators, that lobbying by interest groups is
skillful and often unopposed. ''Spending interests are politically visible and
articulate and able to reward or punish legislators with their organized
electoral support or nonsupport,'' the report states. ''Meanwhile, taxpayers are
politically inarticulate, only barely able to perceive their selfinterest in the
context of isolated pieces of legislation. It is only when these spending
programs are aggregated that the taxpayer begins to feel the full impact of such
spending.''

Consequently, it says, ''spending continues inexorably to rise whatever the
genuine will of the people.'' The report declares, ''It is this institutional
bias that convinces this committee that a constitutional solution is required.''

Its proponents say the Senate resolution is short, simple and flexible in that
it allows for deficits in time of war or, by threefifths majority, in an
economic recession or national emergency.

''This amendment possesses the brevity, clarity and dignity appropriate to an
amendment to the Constitution,'' Senator Richard G. Lugar, Republican of
Indiana, testified.

Against Amendment

The central argument in opposition is that it is inappropriate, and risky, to
elevate a particular economic policy to the status of constitutional command.

''I'm a strong partisan of balancing the budget as quickly as we can,'' Senator
Slade Gorton, Republican of Washington, said, ''but having made that decision in
1982 doesn't give me the feeling that I'm wise enough to make that decision for
the year 2082, or 50 years from now, or for that matter even 10 or 12 years from
now.''

''To put an economic theory into the Constitution is too long a jump for my
taste,'' Senator Gorton said.  Liberal Democrats like the Speaker of the House,
Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., see the amendment as aimed at income-maintenance and
other social programs that primarily benefit low-@ and middle-income families.
There are also fears that such an amendment would lead to balanced budgets in a
weak economy when, it is said, a deficit might help to restore full employment.

One Senator Changed His Mind

Former Senator Henry Bellmon of Oklahoma, who was the ranking Republican on the
Senate Budget Committee before he retired in 1980, said he came to Washington in
1969 in favor of a budget-balancing amendment and changed his mind. Such
constitutional restraints work well now in Oklahoma and other states, said Mr.
Bellmon, a former Governor, but ''at the Federal level it simply won't work
because you have a responsibility for national defense and the economy.''

There is also concern that Senate Joint Resolution 58 is less of a barrier to
deficit financing than it seems. Directors of the United States Chamber of
Commerce decided in February not to endorse it.  Richard W. Rahn, the chamber's
chief economist, said, ''The biggest concern of our board was that if this is
passed, a number of people will regard it as a panacea and that given how easy
it is to get around, it might be an empty gesture.''

Mr. Bellmon and former Representative Robert N. Giaimo, Democrat of Connecticut,
who headed the House Budget Committee, have said that such amendments are
unenforceable. ''What would you do? Throw Congress or its leaders in jail?''
they asked rhetorically in a statement. Other critics have noted that the
Judiciary Committee report said probably no one would have standing to sue for
enforcement because no one person would be directly injured.

Representative James R. Jones, the Oklahoma Democrat who is chairman of the
House Budget Committee, calls the amendment a ''sham'' and a ''diversion'' from
issues such as the Reagan tax cuts and military budgets. ''There is no
substitute for pure discipline and a constitutional amendment won't provide
it,'' Mr. Jones said.

Senator Barry Goldwater, the Arizona Republican who is known as ''Mr.
Conservative,'' has called the resolution ''impractical.'' ''If we haven't been
able to balance the budget any more than we have in the last 40 or 50 years,
constitutional amendment isn't going to help,'' he said.

The Outlook

The early prospects for Congressional approval are regarded as fair to good in
the Senate and weaker in the House. To put pressure on Congress, two
organizations that support the amendment, the National Tax Limitation Committee
and the National Taxpayers Union, have been urging state legislatures to
petition Congress for a constitutional convention. So far, 31 of the 34 required
have done so.

If the amendment to balance the budget fails in the Senate or House, attention
might turn in future years to the proposal of Mr.  Jones and others to amend the
budget act to limit Federal spending to a specified fraction of the gross
national product, or entire American economy. Mr. Jones suggests that the
fraction by 20 percent. Still another proposal is that Congress give the
President greater power not to spend appropriated funds or perhaps even the
power to veto particular items in an appropriation. Allowing veto of specific
items might itself require a constitutional amendment.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               7 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

UNITED STATES VS. THE UNCERTAINTIES OF DEMOCRACY

SECTION: Section A; Page 34, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 759 words


To the Editor:

It cannot be said that there are any surprises in Norman Podhoretz's view of the
Vietnam War (Op-Ed March 23 and 24). It is not the less disturbing for this.

he basic question raised, but not answered, is: What does the idea of ''saving a
country from Communism'' mean? The reason why the U.S. decided not to accept the
Geneva accords on Vietnam was that it was assumed that it would be impossible to
defeat Ho Chi Minh in free elections. (For an authoritative acknowledgement of
this, see the remarks of Walt Rostow in the film ''Hearts and Minds.'')

This decision was the foundation of U.S. intervention in Vietnam.  It also
established the general principle for all such interventions: Saving Vietnam
from Communism overrode the right of the Vietnamese to self-determination
through democratic processes.

That this is not an accidental trait arising from special conditions in Vietnam
is shown by the long list of countries where the U.S. has attempted to, or
succeeded in, installing dictatorial regimes. Saving a country from Communism is
always more important than the survival of democracy.

In 1945, the Vietminh was an alliance for the liberation of Vietnam, in which
the Communists had a leading role. But the Vietminh looked more to the United
States than to the Soviet Union for assistance. Prompt action by the U.S. to
prevent the outrageous attempt of the French Government to resume its colonial
rule in Vietnam would have established friendly relations. The U.S. would indeed
have had to accept a left-wing government in Vietnam, but no vital interest
would have been contradicted by this.

The U.S. would not accept this: the refusal to tolerate leftleaning democracies
in the third world has been the pattern of U.S. policy since 1945. It has also
been by far the single most effective support of Soviet influence and prestige
in the third world.

Edmund Burke, at the end of the 18th century, warned the English of the danger
lest ''the breakers of the law in India become the makers of the law in
England.'' A similar danger threatens the U.S. whenever it denies abroad the
principles of democracy that are its foundations at home.

No such danger threatens the Soviet Union. So long as the U.S.  refuses to
accept the uncertainties of democracy in other countries, it will repeat its
experience in Vietnam or, ''victorious,'' support murderous dictatorships. All
its protestations of saving freedom from Communism will remain the cynical
expression of the pursuit of a stupid and vicious self-interest.

Mr. Podhoretz devotes his second article to demonstrating how much worse life is
now in Indochina than it was during the war. One can understand that he was
unable to resist such a tempting bit of propaganda: The disasters of Communism -
this is what we were fighting to save them from. But he is an intelligent man; I
do not think that he really believes that the war and the peace are discrete,
unrelated, entities.

Vietnam was at war for more than 30 years, against the Japanese, the French and
the Americans. Peace in 1945 - a peace that was almost certainly in the power of
the United States to realize - would have produced a vastly different country
than the one which emerged from peace in 1975.

The most terrible casualty of the war was Cambodia, once a nation with a large
food surplus. Starvation in Cambodia is a direct result of the destruction of
the war, just as the absolute ascendancy of the Khmer Rouge is a result of the
destruction, by the war, of the institutions of political life.

Mr. Podhoretz's attempts to show the superlative evils of Communism are as
morally blind as Communist attempts to show the superlative evils of capitalism:
They have the same source, submission to the certainties of ideology, for fear
of the perplexities of truth.

His descriptions of life today in Indochina are not exaggerated.  But if we are
to avoid such things in the future, it is imperative that we learn from them
their true lesson. The horrors of the peace in Indochina stem directly from the
horrors of the war, the war to save Indochina from Communism, for which France
and the United States must bear the greatest burden of guilt.ROBERT URQUHART
Selinsgrove, Pa., March 24, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               8 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BOSTON DROPS CONCERT WITH MISS REDGRAVE

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 36, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 648 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, April 1


Acting in response to reported protests and threats, the Boston Symphony
Orchestra announced today that it had canceled planned performances later this
month in which the actress Vanessa Redgrave was to narrate Stravinsky's
opera-oratorio ''Oedipus Rex.''

In a terse statement, Thomas W. Morris, the orchestra's general manager, said
that ''due to causes and circumstances beyond its reasonable control,'' the
orchestra had decided ''with reluctance'' to cancel the Stravinsky program. The
statement made no reference to Miss Redgrave's scheduled participation and Mr.
Morris declined to comment on the Boston Symphony's reasons for dropping the
program.

But a source close to the orchestra said that there had been strong protests and
even some threats over Miss Redgrave's role. The 45-year-old British actress has
become a controversial figure for her outspoken support of the Palestine
Liberation Organization.

The source, who did not want to be identified, said the protests had been
particularly strong from Jewish groups in New York. The symphony had been
scheduled to perform the Stravinsky work in Boston on April 15, 16 and 17 and in
Carnegie Hall in New York on April 21 and 22.

Berlioz's 'Requiem' Substituted

Instead, today's announcement said, the Boston orchestra would substitute
Berlioz's ''Requiem'' in both Boston and New York

Miss Redgrave's lawyer, Elliot L. Hoffman, said he had tried to contact the
Boston Symphony ''to ascertain the circumstances which they claim as
justification for cancellation of Miss Redgrave's performances.'' But ''as of
the moment, they have made no explanation to me or to the public,'' Mr. Hoffman
added in a telephone interview from his office in New York.

Mr. Hoffman said he ''will make an appropriate response'' after learning what
the symphony's explanation is.  Miss Redgrave is in Venice filming a television
biography of the composer Richard Wagner with Richard Burton.  The Boston
Symphony's music director, Seiji Ozawa, is in Paris conducting performances of
the Paris Opera.  Since the original announcement last Friday that Miss Redgrave
would read the narration for Stravinsky's opera, written by Jean Cocteau, the
orchestra's board of directors and the symphony's own musicians had been caught
up in controversy. Some members of the board of directors reportedly were
critical of the orchestra's management for engaging Miss Redgrave, but others
argued that music should be above politics and that the symphony should not bend
to public pressure.

Petition From Players

Some of the players, many of whom are Jewish, signed a private petition that
supported Miss Redgrave's right to hold any opinions but criticized the
management for its lack of sensitivity in selecting her.

Miss Redgrave has been engulfed in controversy for years. She has been prominent
in the antinuclear-arms movement, was a leading activist against American
involvement in Vietnam, and ran unsuccessfully for a seat in the British
Parliament as a member of a radical left wing party.

In 1978 she came under criticism for narrating two documentary films sponsored
by the P.L.O. At the Academy Awards ceremony that year, accepting the award as
best supporting actress for playing the part of a German Jew in ''Julia,'' she
used her speech to attack a crowd outside that was protesting her
pro-Palestinian views.

In 1979 she was criticized again when she played a Jewish musician, Fania
Fenelon, in a television film about Auschwitz, ''Playing for Time.'' CBS-TV, the
network that showed the movie, was attacked for hiring her.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                               9 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 2, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Reagan Stays The Course

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 876 words


WHILE seeking to dispel the charge that he is inflexible - ''a great stone
face,'' as he put it - President Reagan made clear in his news conference
Wednesday night that he was sticking to his program of tax cuts and
military-spending increases. The message seemed to be: ''Damn the deficits; full
speed ahead.''

In fact, he appeared to have dug himself in still deeper on his planned military
buildup, declaring: ''We can't accept in the defense field some kind of
reduction that could set us back in the course we've taken to rebuild our
defenses in view of the Soviet superiority.''

The only room he left for possible trims in military outlays would be those
resulting from ''management improvements'' that might be recommended by a
''citizens' task force.'' But that citizens' task force would have no charter to
change the basic nature of the military buildup, with its heavy stress on rapid
procurement of weapons systems and military research and development.

Some economists and defense planners are concerned that the procurement-oriented
nature and rapid pace of the buildup will overstrain the limited sector of
industry that produces for the Defense Department. Charles L. Schultze of the
Brookings Institution, who served as chairman of the Council of Economic
Advisers in the Carter Administration and as director of the budget in the
Johnson Administration during the Vietnam buildup, warns that ''these strains
will give rise to price increases for military goods substantially larger than
those on which the defense budget is now based.''

The planned 80 percent increase in the real volume of military procurement and
research and development within four years, Mr.  Schultze contends, will give
rise to shortages of skilled labor and specialized components within the defense
industries. He predicts that capacity will be strained and managerial oversight
stretched thin, resulting in substantial cost overruns and a need for greatly
enlarged spending if the Administration's defense plan is to be realized.

The main result, he warns, may be to ''squeeze out of the defense budget a large
part of the nonglamorous increases in spending that are essential for the
deployment, readiness and combat capabilities of our conventional forces.'' But
the President is not yielding to such criticism.

In the area of tax reduction, the President also held his ground against
Congressional proposals for scaling back the size of proposed income tax cuts.
Indeed he declared that the 25 percent cut in personal income taxes over three
years ''should have been 30 percent,'' as he originally proposed, ''and maybe we
wouldn't have a recession now, but we couldn't get that much from'' Congress. He
reaffirmed his conviction that ''that tax cut is absolutely vital.'' However, he
indicated that he might take back some business ''tax breaks,'' but not the more
generous depreciation allowances.

In any case, Mr. Reagan added, ''you don't increase taxes in a recession.'' That
principle would once have been labeled Keynesian; it contrasts with the earlier
efforts of President Herbert Hoover and, in the beginning, Franklin D.
Roosevelt, to balance the budget during the Depression by major increases in
taxes. But Mr. Reagan, the supply-sider and monetarist, who would never say, as
President Richard M. Nixon once did, ''I am now a Keynesian,'' nevertheless, has
accepted the principle of not increasing taxes when the economy is slumping.

Nor would he want to accept rising taxes, even if the economy were rising and
the budget unbalanced. He declared his support for ''the concept'' of a
constitutional amendment to balance the budget but said he would want to make
sure that it also carried with it a limitation on taxes. ''It must contain a
limit,'' he said, ''so that in the future you couldn't just always have a
balanced budget by simply sending a bill to the taxpayers for whatever the
deficit might be.''

Existing proposals for a balanced-budget amendment have until now included
limitations on spending increases. But Mr. Reagan apparently thinks it even more
important to set limits on possible tax increases.

But, whatever the longer-run possibility of a constitutional amendment requiring
a balanced budget, the immediate issue is whether the budget deficit for the
fiscal year 1983 will be significantly reduced. If Mr. Reagan sticks to his
guns, as now seems certain, only modest slimming in the projected deficit for
the fiscal year 1983, which the Administration projects at $92 billion but which
is likely to run well above $100 billion, is likely. The financial markets,
which expect high interest rates to ensue, are unlikely to take much cheer from
the President's course. But he has decided to sweat it out, apparently convinced
that staying his present course is less risky than any other, and the markets
will have to make the best they can of that decision. Congress seems unlikely to
overturn it, despite the mutinous rumblings.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 3, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. STRESSES NEED FOR 2 PHILIPPINE BASES

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 650 words

DATELINE: SUBIC BAY, the Philippines, April 2


To underscore the importance of retaining American bases in the Philippines,
Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger today toured the Subic Bay Naval
Station and Clark Air Base.

The installations are vital links in an 11,000-mile supply line to the American
fleet in the Indian Ocean. That line begins in the continental United States and
flows by ship and aircraft to the bases here and then on to the tiny island of
Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean and to the fleet of 20 to 30 ships that are on
station there.

Without the bases at Subic Bay and Clark, the maintenance of that fleet, which
is already costly, would become even more expensive and physically difficult.
Naval officers said that it costs $433,000 a day to keep one aircraft carrier
there.

The bases here would become even more important if the United States should
dispatch the rapid deployment force to the region around the Persian Gulf to try
to protect the oilfields.

Review of Agreement in 1984

Mr. Weinberger said that the Philippine Government, the leaders of which he met
Thursday, had raised no objection to United States use of the bases for the
support of the Indian Ocean fleet. But he said the Filipinos were worried about
the United States commitment to the defense of this region. ''They are very
interested in whether we are going to stay,'' Mr. Weinberger told reporters. ''A
great many people along the line haven't forgotten the pullout in Vietnam.''

Mr. Weinberger said that whenever he had been asked if the United States was
going to stay, the answer was an ''unequivocal yes.'' The United States base
agreement with the Philippines will be open for review in 1984, with a renewal
for seven years if what the Filipinos call ''irritants'' can be cleared up. Mr.
Weinberger said these ''irritants'' included issues such as customs,
immigration, quarantine regulations and the use of force in guarding the
perimeter of the bases.

At Subic Bay, Mr. Weinberger went aboard the fleet oiler and replenishment ship
Roanoke, a 37,000-ton vessel that had just returned from five months in the
Indian Ocean. The ship, which steams at 20 knots and takes eight to 10 days to
reach the fleet, can carry 3.8 million gallons of fuel for ships and another 2.5
million gallons of jet aircraft fuel. Roanoke can also carry - at the same time
- 365 tons of ammunition, 265 tons of refrigerated provisions and 300 tons of
other supplies. Once in the Indian Ocean, the ship serves as a floating supply
base with occasional runs down to Diego Garcia to fill up on materials stocked
there.

World's Largest Supply Depot

Naval officers said that ships like the Roanoke carry 550 tons of spare parts,
770 tons of other supplies and 6,000 tons of food each month to the Indian Ocean
fleet. The naval supply depot here, they said, is the largest in the world.

In addition to the supply depot, Subic Bay has large ship repair plants, a
communications station, an air station and an ammunition magazine. The complex
pumps about $124 million a year into the Philippine economy in employee pay,
contracts and the $44 million that sailors spend on liberty.

At Clark, Mr. Weinberger had lunch with 20 noncommissioned officers and climbed
into F-4 Phantom and F-5 fighters. He also looked into a giant C-5 Galaxy
transport, of which there are three flights a week from the United States.

Air Force officers said that 1,000 passengers a month are carried to and from
the Indian Ocean fleet as sailors are replaced. Moreover, 700 tons of critical
cargo is flown from here to Diego Garcia, where it is taken by ship to the fleet
or flown to the island of Masira off the coast of Oman and then shipped by small
boats, small aircraft or helicopter to the fleet.

----

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Caspar Weinberger at Clark Air Force Base near
Manila

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 3, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SOME REFUGEES LOSE U.S. AID

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 240 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, April 2


Nearly 1,500 Southeast Asian refugees whose Federal support has been cut off
lined up outside a welfare agency here today to apply for local relief.

Refugees who have lived in the United States for more than 18 months were told
several weeks ago that money from the Federal Government, intended to help them
get a start in the United States, would be cut off April 1 and that state
governments would have to provide for them.

The Federal Government previously provided 36 months of financial aid to
refugees from Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia while they learned English, found
housing and looked for jobs.

Some states have obtained court rulings that they do not need to take care of
the refugees until May 1 because they were given insufficient notice.

The new regulation, announced by the Secretary of Health and Human Services,
Richard S. Schweiker, provides support for refugees for only 18 months. After
that, state and local governments must assist those who have not become
self-supporting.

The new regulation leaves mostly single people or childless couples without
support. Familes with children and the blind and the disabled are supported by
other Government programs.

The Federal Government has said it would reimburse local governments for
providing funds to refugees for 18 more months, but they must meet local social
service requirements.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Asian refugees (page 1)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 3, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Going Out Guide

BYLINE: By Carol Lawson

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 770 words


YESTERYEAR'S MUSIC

The New York Renaissance Band is a 12-member ensemble that brings to life the
sounds of a long-ago era with such instrumental curiosities as the krummhorn,
the rackett, the sackbut and the cornetto. The band, often compared in spirit to
a modern Dixieland combo, has two engagements on the West Side of Manhattan
today.

This morning at 11 o'clock the Renaissance Band will play ''A Little Day
Music,'' subtitled ''A Children's Concert for Kids of All Ages,'' at Symphony
Space, at Broadway and 95th Street. The program, featuring the tenor Eric
Benson, will be made up of songs and stories from Shakespeare's plays. Tickets
are $4 at the box office.

In the evening, at 8, the band will be on the stage of Alice Tully Hall at
Lincoln Center for ''A Little Knight Music.'' The program, again featuring Mr.
Benson's tenor, will be a musical tour of the theaters of Renaissance Europe -
vaudeville songs of early 16thcentury France, tunes from Shakespeare's plays,
and so-called ''travesty'' arias from early Italian operas by Monteverdi and
Cavalli. Tickets are $9.50 at the box office.

For information, call 222-5568.
TOYS OF LONG AGO

Once upon a simpler time, before electronics took over the toy industry,
children had to rely on the ingenuity of their elders. And ingenuity there was,
as evidenced by the exhibition opening tomorrow at the Museum of the City of New
York.

The show is called ''Noah's Arks, and Other Animals,'' and is made up of toys
that the museum calls ''not grand,'' but ''simple and cheap.'' Many are
18th-century wooden pieces from the Black Forest in West Germany that were made
by peasants carving and whittling away long winters. There are horses, farmyard
animals, giraffes, elephants and, of course, Noah's Arks, with their animals
lined up two by two.

These toys, now regarded as folk art, will be on display until September. The
museum, at Fifth Avenue and 103d Street, is open 1 P.M. to 5 P.M. Sundays; 10
A.M. to 5 P.M. Tuesdays through Saturdays. No admission charge.
REMEMBERING POE

On April 6, 1844 , Edgar Allan Poe arrived in New York, accompanied by his wife,
Virginia, and his mother-in-law, Mrs. Maria Clemm. This footnote to local
history is celebrated annually by the Bronx County Historical Society. The
festivities start tomorrow and will continue through April 18 -two weeks of
performances and special presentations in what the society calls ''Edgar Allan
Poe Fortnight.''

At 3 P.M. tomorrow the Bronx Arts Ensemble will perform the world premiere of
Russell Currie's ''The Cask of Amontillado,'' a one-act chamber opera based on
the short story by Poe.

The performance, conducted by Arthur Weisberg, will take place in Keating Hall,
on the Bronx campus of Fordham University. Tickets are $5 ($2.50 for students
and the elderly).

Other programs on the schedule are ''Poe in Person,'' on April 16, a one-man
show starring Conrad Pomerleau; and on April 18 ''What Makes Poe a Classic,'' a
lecture by Dr. Alfred Dorn, a Poe scholar.  Special tours of Poe Cottage, where
Poe lived and wrote many of his works, can also be arranged during the
''fortnight.'' The cottage is at Grand Concourse and East Kingsbridge Road in
the Bronx. For information, call the historical society at 881-8900.
VETERANS TURNED ACTORS

The Veterans Ensemble Theater Company is just that - a group of veterns. Vietnam
War veterans, to be exact. They have turned professional actor, writer and
director, and have been working together since 1978. The company is opening its
latest production, a festival of one-act plays, this weekend.

Tonight's program starts with ''Sarge,'' a drama about the reunion of three
Vietnam veterans, by Cleveland Kurtz, who served in the Navy. A couple of Marine
Corps veterans are the authors of the other two plays on the bill - Al Brown,
who wrote ''Dong Lai,'' and Raymond Maslanka, who wrote ''Jackson Pollock.''

The festival, which has another bill of one-act plays, is taking place this
month at the American Theater of Actors, at 314 West 54th Street. Tickets are
$5. For reservations and information, call 977-4217.

The theater company is largely financed by the National Endowment for the Arts
and the New York State Council on the Arts.

For Entertainment Events, see page 17. For Sports Today, see page 22.  Carol
Lawson

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Edgar Allen Poe

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 3, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Observer;
CHECK IT OUT;
by Russell Baker

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 836 words


One thing that angers the White House is this charge that President Reagan has
no compassion. There is a campaign afoot to illustrate that he does, too, have
compassion and in his news conference the other evening Mr. Reagan went out of
his way to act and talk like a man with compas-sion.

From my television examination of him I would have said, if asked for a
professional opinion, that he has an adequate supply of compassion. A television
examination of course is a poor substitute for a full battery of tests in the
lab, so my conclusions are very narrowly based and may be distorted by the fact
that I was eating liver with onions and macaroni and cheese while conducting the
examination.

I was deeply impressed by the fact that the President smiled at me during the
meal. Perhaps it was my personal antipathy to liver and onions coupled with
macaroni and cheese that led me to judge that he was smiling a smile of
compassion.

Nevertheless the question remains hotly disputed and the White House's case is
not strengthened by its refusal to submit the President for scientific
examination. My distinguished colleague in Presidential qualitative analysis,
Dr. J. Finney, could settle the matter once and for all if the White House took
up his offer to accept Mr. Reagan for analysis.

So far it has not replied to Dr. Finney's generous offer. Perhaps it remembers
too well the extraordinary result of his examination of the late President
Charles de Gaulle of France.

I had been called in by French authorities to quiet public accusations that
President de Gaulle had very little compassion, and was so astonished by my lab
data that I asked Dr. Finney to enter the case.

''My tests show not a single milligram of compassion,'' I told him as we worked
over de Gaulle's prostrate form. ''Is that possible?'' ''There must be another
quality so overpowering that it has ejected all the compassion through the
pores,'' Dr. Finney said. ''Let's try to isolate it.''

I was astonished at the substance we finally distilled in our kettles. ''It's
arrogance, Finney, pure unmitigated arrogance!'' I exclaimed.

''No, not arrogance,'' he said. ''Look more closely in the microscope and I
think you'll agree with me. It's grandeur.'' Thus the world learned about de
Gaulle's grandeur. The general was so delighted that he began a long career of
carrying on like Joan of Arc and made life insufferable for the rest of the
world's leaders for the next 25 years.

I hear rumors that the President's refusal to undergo tests for compassion is
because he is afraid of cracking under our methods.  These admittedly can be
trying on a politician of unusually delicate nerves.

However, I have subjected such men as the late Robert F. Kennedy and the present
Henry Kissinger to them without harmful results.  Kennedy came to me many years
ago when he was troubled by charges that he carried a dangerous overload of
''ruthlessness.''

He wanted the issue scientifically tested. ''I want the truth with the bark
off,'' he said. ''If I'm ruthless I want to know about it.'' Such testing can be
done right in my office. Or more accurately in the dungeons under my office
where I keep my large staff employed concocting ideas for newspaper columns,
plagiarizing other columnists' work and turning out highly polished essays while
I am out to lunch.

Periodically I go down among these sluggards and whip them with a knout when
they lapse into slovenliness, graceless prose and whinings about having their
salaries cut.

To test Robert Kennedy I took him down with me and when I had worked my way
through half the staff I said, ''My arm's exhausted. Do you want to finish
beating some get-up-and-go into these louts for me?''

''Not especially,'' Kennedy said.  I instantly certified him ''not ruthless.''
Some years later Henry Kissinger came in. He was a sad case.  ''People say I
don't feel anguish about the sufferings my policies are causing in places like
Vietnam and Chile,'' he said.

''And you do feel anguish?'' ''Am I not a Secretary of State? If Moscow
double-crosses me, do I not feel anguish?'' ''We'll see about that,'' I said,
and took him down to the dungeon with my knout. When I finished with the adults
I started on the children.

''What are you feeling, Mr. Secretary?'' I asked.  ''Anguish,'' he said. No
further tests were necessary.  If President Reagan showed no compassion, of
course, we would need Dr. Finney's more precise examination to identify the
President's contents, but he would surely find the discomfort a small price to
pay for settling the compassion issue once and for all.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 3, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

POLICIES DEMOCRATS SHOULD PURSUE;
by George McGovern

SECTION: Section 1; Page 25, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 875 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Ralph Waldo Emerson has assured us: ''A man may love a paradox without either
losing his wit or his honesty.'' It is good that we have this assurance because
these are certainly days when paradox rules.

There is, for example, the paradox of an allegedly conservative Republican
Administration programming Federal deficits so enormous that if offered by a
liberal Democrat, they would confirm conservative suspicions that liberals have
no respect for the dollar. I'm supposed to be a liberal, but I find the Reagan
deficit astonishing and irresponsible. If, as the Democratic Presidential
nominee in 1972, I had even hinted at the acceptability of a $100 billion
deficit, I would not even have carried Massachusetts!

When people ask me, as they do in growing numbers, ''What do the Democrats offer
as an alternative?'', so sweeping an answer is required as to leave the
questioner dazed or bored.

I can find almost nothing to support in the Reagan economic, military, foreign,
or budget policies. Indeed, except for the first appointment of a woman to the
Supreme Court, I disagree with virtually every action of this Administration.
Mr. Reagan does not appear to understand the simplest economic truths. In
foreign policy, he is splitting the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance
while reuniting the Sino-Soviet bloc and repeating, in Central America, the
mistakes of Vietnam; his military budget is so wasteful and poorly conceived as
to be a threat to the security of the nation; and he seems blind to the greatest
danger of our age - the mounting threat of extinction posed by an uncontrolled
nuclear-arms race.

What can the Democrats do? They can stop drifting along with policies that they
know are weakening the nation and threatening world peace. They can stop
endorsing sweeping tax cuts that feed inflation and unbalance the budget. They
can stop endorsing illplanned weapons, while neglecting our real defense needs.
They can stop supporting budget policies that weaken such productive investments
as education, transportation, energy, agriculture, job training, nutrition, drug
rehabilitation, public assistance, and dignity for our older citizens. They can
stop supporting such nonproductive expenditures as tax relief for the wealthy,
high interest rates for moneylenders, and gold-plated weapons that aren't needed
and won't work under combat conditions.

At the risk of oversimplification, I would say that the proper Democratic agenda
is to oppose Mr. Reagan at every turn and to offer an alternative. In other
words, the Democrats' job is to offer tax justice and a balanced budget in place
of tax concessions and a $100 billion deficit; to reverse the arms race and
press for the ratification of a verifiable nuclear-arms agreement with the
Soviet Union; to reduce the sky-high interest rates that are choking the
economy; and, instead of encouraging the merger mania, take steps to buttress
small business and family farms. The Democrats' job is to increase the
productivity and usefulness of our people by investing more in such human
capital as education, training, and whatever is necessary to provide work for
everyone willing and able - in the private sector where possible, and in public
works where that is the only recourse - instead of drifting along as we now are
with nearly one out of 10 workers idled.

There is no excuse for a great nation such as ours failing to provide a job
opportunity for every able worker. Nothing can be more wasteful than idleness
when there are houses to be built, railways to be modernized, topsoil to be
preserved, and young people to be redeemed from ignorance, drugs, and crime.

Franklin D. Roosevelt, perhaps our greatest President with the possible
exception of Lincoln, led us through the Great Depression and World War II.
Today's issues are of course different from those that faced F.D.R. The nuclear
peril, the energy crisis, the environmental challenges, the decline of
industrial productivity - these were not the problems that engaged F.D.R., but
his innovative, pragmatic spirit may well be required to solve them. Right now,
we could use the vision of Franklin D. Roosevelt, the bluntness of Harry S.
Truman, the inspiration of John F. Kennedy, the Congressional leadership skills
of Lyndon B. Johnson, and the essential fairness of Jimmy Carter. I yearn, too,
for the wit and courage of men who were not elected President - Adlai E.
Stevenson, Hubert H. Humphrey, Robert F. Kennedy.

In short, I'm not yet ready to surrender the New Deal, the Square Deal, the New
Frontier, the Great Society -or the hope that America will again become the
great land it can be when it is faithful to its founding ideals.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
George McGovern, former Democratic Senator from South Dakota, is chairman of
Americans for Common Sense, a nonprofit public-interest organization.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The World;
The Errors of Vietnam's Ways

BYLINE: By Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 316 words


Communist regimes usually save their bursts of self-critical candor until after
the old guard has safely been changed, but at Vietnam's Fifth Party Congress
last week the recriminations just wouldn't keep. Vietnam gets $3 million a day
from Moscow, according to Western estimates, but Prime Minister Pham Van Dong
said it suffers from shortages of nearly everything - energy, materials,
transport, clothing, housing, medicines and even paper.

Lee Duan, the party secretary, blamed the ''many acute problems'' in part on
''shortcomings and mistakes of the party and state agencies, from national down
to grass-roots level.'' Among unworthy members to be ''resolutely expelled from
the party as soon as possible,'' he listed ''all opportunists, exploiters,
smugglers, speculators, people involved in corruption and bribery and oppressors
of the masses.''

In an even sterner indictment sent last year to members of the National
Assembly, Nguynen Khac Vien, editor of the foreign language periodical
Vietnamese Studies, blamed ''the hasty leap-forward mentality'' for Vietnam's
plight. The Far Eastern Economic Review reported his criticisms included ''rank
inefficiency'' in the Government, which is permeated by ''intellectuals who
specialize in opportunism and crudely flatter the leadership.'' He called for
those responsible for errors to resign.

Last week, Lee Duan, Pham Van Dong and the influential Le Duc Tho held onto
power. However, Vo Nguyen Giap, the ailing 71-year-old general who was credited
with defeating the French at Dienbienphu and United States forces 20 years
later, was retired from the Politburo along with five others.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Barbara Slavin and Milt Freudenheim

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Foreign Affairs;
THE NUCLEAR DILEMMA

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 19, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: PARIS


After nearly a generation of somnolence, the debate on nuclear weapons has
suddenly fully emerged in the U.S. The arguments aren't new. The underlying
strategy of using money to buy a doomsday threat instead of manpower for a large
standing army goes back to John Foster Dulles's dread promise of ''more bang for
a buck.''

As technology developed, so did the idea of smaller, short-range nuclear weapons
and limited nuclear war, which is the meaning of John Kennedy's doctrine of
''flexible response.''

Bertrand Russell's ''better Red than dead'' was the slogan of the first
unilateral disarmers, and it remains the menace inherent in the idea of
abandoning defense.

Three elements in the situation are new. One is Soviet acquisition of a nuclear
arsenal that threatens the U.S. and the rest of the world just as much as the
U.S. can threaten. The question of superiority doesn't mean much. It is a
political, not a military, calculation having to do with whether perceptions of
risk are more or less likely to achieve what Americans call deterrence when
speaking of their own policy and nuclear blackmail when speaking of Soviet
policy.

The second change is the sheer quantity of nuclear weapons now in existence and
the increased sophistication of delivery methods.  Nobelist Linus Pauling has
calculated that the total stockpile amounts to 500,000 megatons, which is about
100,000 times the total of explosives used during the whole of World War II. And
the U.S.  Administration now wants to build another 17,000 warheads for better
weapons.

This has led to the third change, which is the reawakening to danger. The
buildup (how can a nuclear warhead become obsolete ?) has been going on all this
time without attracting much attention because the political climate seemed to
be improving and the assumption grew that nobody would ever use atoms for
destruction again.

Increased tensions, fierce talks and what appears to be Washington's new
enthusiasm for arms-racing in contrast to an aura of reluctance surrounding
previous procurement have undermined that always fragile, uncertain assumption.

So now, people are prepared to argue the question of apocalypse again, at a
level of danger far higher than it was during the first big debate.

It is not a simple question, or it would have been answered long ago. The
complications do not stem from any wish for nuclear war.  Fools cried ''nuke
'em'' during the frustrations of the wars in Korea, Vietnam and even the 1973-74
oil crisis. But nobody listened because everybody else understood, despite the
passion of the conflicts, that we cannot consider these weapons a usable part of
the armory.

The complications are there because peace is not the only issue.  Security means
more than peace and the outbreak of World War II showedthat even peace can be
lost if security is neglected. The record indicates that Hitler really wanted
war. No doubt Moscow doesn't, anymore than the U.S. But there are possibilities,
of internal upheaval, panic, desperation, which could sweep away the restraints.

There are profound reasons to refuse a choice limited to Red or dead - and that
way of putting it sacrifices fact to rhyme because the issue isn't Communism but
Soviet power. The desire to resist is legitimate and compelling. There hasn't
been any war between the members of NATO and those of the Warsaw Pact, and while
we can't be sure that is because nuclear weapons exist, deterrence does seem to
have worked.

Now some decisions must be made. The overwhelming moral argument for survival
cannot be challenged. But what becomes of deterrence and the capacity to resist
unacceptable pressure, the moral argument for security, if the West discards its
weapons or promises never to use them first while refusing to mount effective
conventional defense?

A simple freeze on all nuclear weapons at current levels would probably be
impossible to verify, and I cannot reject the argument that some technological
improvements can reduce rather than increase the chance that the weapons might
ever be used. There is merit in distinguishing between ''stabilizing'' and
''destabilizing'' types.  It is an intricate thesis but it is persuasive that
submarinelaunched missiles are in the first category and sea-launched cruise
missiles in the second, for example.

A sense of approximate force balance is important, not only to security but to
the confidence needed to reverse the arms race and contain peripheral conflicts.
There is not, and won't be, any balance of debate because it simply isn't
possible for the Soviet public to participate and to influence its leaders on
these issues. That puts an extra burden on the American public.

The answer has to be an urgent, determined effort to reduce arsenals by
agreement. It means accepting Soviet security concerns, being selective about
new weapons and not trying to unsettle the Soviet regime, however hateful. The
task of reforming it belongs to its own people. Ours is to maintain peace and
win time for them to find a way.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RETURN OF THE BATTLESHIPS

BYLINE: By William H. Honan; William H. Honan, the editor of the Arts and
Leisure section of The Times, has frequently reported on naval affairs.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 27, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5940 words


The 57,500-ton battleship New Jersey - which blasted 20 Japanese warplanes out
of the sky and scarred the beaches of Okinawa and Iwo Jima a generation ago - is
rumbling along the Navy's firing range a few miles off the California coast. The
time is later this year and the 39-year-old battlewagon is out here to test-fire
her heavy-caliber guns. She is making 15 knots, signal flags cracking in the
breeze. The decks have been cleared because the blast of a 16-inch gun is enough
to blow a man's head off if he is too near the muzzle. Even on the bridge, 35
yards from the closest gun, Capt.  William M. Fogarty runs the risk of ruptured
eardrums. ''Mickey Mouse ears'' are the order of the day, although old sea dogs
are prone to stuff wads of cotton into their ears. Suddenly, a Klaxon sounds the
warning - ''Aoo-ga! Aoo-ga!'' The guns are about to fire. Out leap enormous
orange balls of flame and mustard-colored smoke. The battleship shudders. Then a
thunderclap - more a boom than a bang. A blast of hot air smacks our faces, and
the steel casing of the ship's funnel ripples as if it were a sail. From below
comes the tinkle of breaking glass -any object not secured is likely to take
flight.

The starboard guns of the fore and aft turrets have fired. Two bullet-shaped
chunks of steel, each weighing as much as a Ford sedan, are burning holes
through the atmosphere. They soar as high as the peaks of the Rocky Mountains
and then plunge into the sea, producing two glistening fountains which seem to
hang in the air for several seconds. It takes only a few such salvos before the
spotting officer reports a ''straddle'' - two shells have fallen to either side
of the target. The order for rapid fire is given, and all nine of the New
Jersey's guns start pumping out a stream of steel at the rate of 16 tons per
minute. The ship quakes and lashes the sea to foam.

Along with the New Jersey's phenomenal capacity to take punishment and keep on
fighting, this ability to throw the greatest possible weight of metal with the
greatest possible speed is what made the battleship mistress of the seas from
the late 1860's until the middle of World War II. The object of such firepower
was memorably captured by Lord John (Jackie) Fisher, First Sea Lord of the
British Admiralty, often called the father of the modern battleship. ''If you
are insulted at the dinner table,'' said Lord Fisher, ''don't throw the decanter
stopper at the offender. Throw the decanter!'' Jackie Fisher would have been
pleased with the New Jersey. She can throw the dinner table.

Decanters and dinner tables, indeed! This is the 37th year of the nuclear age,
the era of the killer satellite and the Trident submarine. Wasn't the battleship
proved to be a weak-kneed giant at Pearl Harbor, and outmoded by the aircraft
carrier at the Battle of Midway?  Last year, when Congress approved President
Reagan's program to ''rearm America'' - which included funds for the B-1 bomber
and the MX missile - it appropriated $325 million for reactivating the New
Jersey and starting the process with her sister ship, the Iowa.  Ultimately, the
other two Iowa-class battleships, the Wisconsin and the Missouri (on which the
Japanese surrender was signed in 1945) are likely to rejoin the fleet at a cost
variously estimated at from $1.5 billion to $3.5 billion. The New Jersey passed
an important stage last month when, with great fanfare, the one-time World War
II flagship of Adm. William (Bull) Halsey was refloated from her West Coast dry
dock. The Iowa will start undergoing modernization later this year, but will
retain the square bathtub installed for President Franklin D. Roosevelt when he
traveled to Casablanca for the Teheran Conference in 1943. The Iowas are to be
armed with both offensive and defensive missiles in addition to all of their
original 16-inch guns.

There has been no shortage of critics of the battleship reactivation plan.
''It's like reactivating the horse cavalry,'' snorts Senator Dale Bumpers,
Democrat of Arkansas. ''It's ridiculous,'' says Norman Polmar, former United
States editor of Jane's Fighting Ships and a prominent naval authority. ''With a
navy short of people with critical skills, it makes no sense to bring back ships
which require a crew of 1,800 men.'' And, of course, the old battlewagons have
be-come the butt of a good many jokes.  ''Modernize 'em?'' sayc a young Pentagon
staff member. ''Oh, sure.  They're gonna throw away the oars.''

Yet for all the criticism, battleship proponents have prevailed.  Even so
vigorous an opponent of the battleships as Senator Ted Stevens, Republican of
Alaska, acknowledges that the program appears to be safe from Congressional
budget cutters.

The story of how the battleship made its dramatic comeback reflects important
changes in American society. To begin with, there was a recognition in military
circles that air power is not the decisive weapon at the battlefront it was long
thought to be, and this in turn led to an amazing reversal in the
air-power-versus-sea-power debate.  Suddenly, aviators championed battleships
and admirals scoffed at them. Second, the seizure of the United States Embassy
in Teheran and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan aroused the American
Government to prepare for possible future conflicts in the third world -limited
conflicts in which the battleship might play a significant role. Third, the
realization that four battleships equipped with sophisticated missiles could
quickly increase the number of capital ships the Navy can deploy at any one time
by an astonishing 40 percent has altered strategic thinking about a global war.
Furthermore, the tale of the battleship amply demonstrates the persistence of
interservice rivalries. It also sheds light on the logrolling process whereby
Congress normally arrives at defense appropriations - and on how a stubbornly
determined former Navy pilot became the Hyman Rickover of the born-again
battleship.  How did battleships come to be regarded as dinosaurs? Almost as
soon as ironclad-turret ships began to dominate the seas - following the
spectacular duel between the Monitor and the Merrimack in March 1862 -critics
argued that the torpedo would put an end to their reign. Sure enough, at the
Yalu River in 1894 and at Port Arthur in 1904 daring Japanese torpedo boats made
short work of several Chinese and Russian Goliaths. During World War I, German
U-boats scored impressive victories against British and American surface
warships.  Nevertheless, the battleship held its own by such means as the
''blister'' (an exterior hull added to serve as a shield against underwater
attack), honeycomb construction (to limit flooding if the hull was breached) and
the development of submarine tracking techniques.  In the period between the two
world wars, the battleship encountered a new threat, the airplane. Some
analysts, including Brig. Gen. Billy Mitchell, the famous pioneer Army aviator,
began preaching that the battleship was a thing of the past. To prove it,
Mitchell staged a series of publicity stunts in which aircraft bombed and sank
the former German battleship Ostfriesland and later the obsolete United States
battleships Virginia and New Jersey - a predecessor of the present New Jersey.
The first round of the air power-versus-sea power controversy was inconclusive,
although it did lead to the rapid development of a hybrid, the aircraft carrier.

In the early days of World War II, the remarkable success of British Swordfish
torpedo planes against Italian battleships at Taranto and of Japanese warplanes
against American battleships at Pearl Harbor seemed to vindicate everything
Billy Mitchell had prophesied. On the other hand, battleships prevailed at the
Battle of Santa Cruz Islands in 1942. For example, the South Dakota, which had
been slathered with antiaircraft guns, brought down 26 Japanese planes.

The controversy was resolved at last at the Battle of Midway in June 1942 - the
first naval engagement in history in which the fleets never came within sight or
gunshot of each other, and the decisive blows were struck by naval aircraft.
Midway conclusively demonstrated that the real issue was not whether airplanes
could destroy battleships or vice versa, but, rather, which of the two weapons
could project armed might the farthest. Naval gunfire was limited to a range of
about 23 miles and the aircraft carrier could send its planes many times that
distance. The battleship might possess special advantages in certain tactical
situations, but the naval war in the Pacific, and all forseeable naval wars as
well, would be decided by the aircraft carrier.

After Midway, unfinished battleships throughout the world were hastily converted
into aircraft carriers, and existing battleships were ignominiously used as
oilers, as taxis for three-star admirals and - a far cry from sinking the
Bismarck - for shore bombardment.

The four American Iowas lobbed shells at the shore during the Korean War. In
1958, the Wisconsin and the Iowa, the world's last battleships on active
service, were decommissioned. The New Jersey emerged from mothballs in 1968 for
duty off Vietnam. There, her 16-inch guns fired 5,688 rounds - compared with
only 771 in all her engagements during World War II. Battleship critics said
that all this shelling had caused only 113 confirmed enemy deaths and 74
probable deaths. Proponents of the battleship accounted for these numbers by
pointing out that enemy soldiers had evacuated areas within range of the New
Jersey's guns. In any event, after a four-month tour of duty, she was sent home
and was put back to sleep in a cocoon of fiberglass at the Puget Sound Naval
Shipyard in Bremerton, Wash.

From time to time, someone in the defense establishment would float a scheme to
reactivate the battleships, but inevitably such notions were dismissed as
impractical. The day of the battleship had passed.  In the spring of 1978,
Charles Myers Jr., a bald, jovial former fighter pilot and test pilot in his
early 50's, invited an old friend to lunch at the Portofino, a gardenlike
Italian restaurant in Arlington, Va. His friend, Charles Haskell, was an
Annapolis graduate and student of naval history who had recently retired from
the Navy.  At one point, Myers, a defense consultant and recognized authority on
tactical aviation, said, ''Tell me everything you know about battleships.''
Haskell started by recalling his first sea duty as a midshipman aboard the
battleship North Carolina. He said that the battleship had been ''a useful
gadget'' during World War II in both Atlantic and Pacific theaters. And he noted
that a catastrophe had been averted during the Korean War, thanks to
heavy-caliber gunfire laid down by the Missouri at the evacuation of the First
Marine Division from the port of Hungnam.

A few days later, Haskell introduced Myers to the library at Annapolis, where
Myers began making photocopies of pages from Dulin and Garzke's classic
two-volume ''Battleships'' and other technical treatises. Soon, Myers was flying
to Wilmington, N.C., to visit the North Carolina, where it is berthed as a
floating museum. He spent hours crawling through the turrets and work spaces.

What made a specialist in tactical aviation so curious about these decrepit
monarchs of World War II? Myers was beginning to believe that the battleship
could perform vital functions in the kinds of wars that the United States might
have to fight in the years ahead - functions beyond the capability of any air
force, no matter how powerful. That growing conviction would soon launch him on
a crusade that led to the return of the battleship.

Like most airmen of his generation, Myers had started out believing that air
power was superior to surface sea power in virtually every situation. He entered
the Army Air Corps on his 18th birthday in 1943. Flying a B-25 in the Pacific
theater, he frequently attacked Japanese shipping. ''The thing that always
impressed me,'' he recalls, ''was how vulnerable ships were to air attack. We
sank every ship we ever went after.''

By 1951, Myers had transferred to the Navy and was flying a Grumman Panther
F9F2, an early jet fighter, from the deck of the carrier Bon Homme Richard on
station off the east coast of Korea. ''It was around then,'' he says, ''that I
began to have misgivings about the way we used tactical aviation. We kept
getting assigned to attack targets which were heavily defended, and we kept
losing some pretty nifty fellas. I was sent out again and again to attack the
Sindok Lead Mines in North Korea. If such targets had to be gone after at all,
it seemed to me, there must be a better way to do it.''

Rotated back to the States, Myers became a test pilot for the Navy and, later,
Convair, a division of General Dynamics. In 1973, he went to work for the
Pentagon as a tactical air-warfare specialist and it was there that he first
began to develop the contacts and the political deftness that would serve him
well in the fight for the battleships. He became involved, for example, in the
Pentagon debate over Stealth, the program devoted to minimizing the ability of
an enemy to detect United States aircraft and other combat equipment. At first,
the majority wanted to continue building great numbers of large aircraft
designed to charge through an enemy's defenses. Myers was a leader among those
who argued that it would be worth sacrificing some payload capacity if aircraft
could be made undetectable - and eventually his view prevailed.

Myers left the Pentagon in 1978 to work as a private consultant specializing in
what he calls ''tactical-weapons conceptual development.'' There are many sorts
of defense consultants in Washington - retired admirals and generals who trade
on their personal contacts in one of the services, physicists and engineers who
sell their expertise in a narrow field such as radar or electrooptics. Myers
became one of the relatively rare breed that deals in ideas - and how to
translate ideas into concrete programs.  ''Very often,'' he explains, ''I look
into prominent military problems that might call for hardware which is
manufactured by one or another of the half-dozen big corporations for which I
consult. But I also make broad studies which may serve to help my clients
reorient their thinking. They want to know the market, and that means total
defense problems. I can't be narrow in my thinking. Lots of times, my clients
don't agree with me. They don't expect to.''

One of the first of these broad studies was an analysis of the Navy. ''At
first,'' he says, ''I had some trouble trying to understand the value of the
surface Navy. Sure, I could understand it in 1941, when the war was global, but
if you're working a presentday, land-war problem of NATO versus the Warsaw Pact,
it becomes less clear. What I finally discovered is that, at a time when we have
to worry most about conflicts in the third world, the most important nonnuclear
function of the Department of the Navy - and that includes the Marine Corps -is
forcible entry.''

In naval parlance, forcible entry entails the insertion of combat troops into
hostile territory. The Department of the Navy, Myers felt, is equipped to
transport the troops, deliver them, provide them with logistics and fire support
and then withdraw them gracefully. No other military service under one command
has that capability.

Yet, as Myers pictured the Navy, it was woefully deficient in one of the
elements essential to forcible entry. ''We didn't have a sturdy firepower base
to support the troops once they were inserted,'' Myers says. ''I worried a lot
about that. Many people, of course, said that tactical aviation could do the
job. Well, Tac-Air is my thing. I knew what it could do, but I thoroughly
understood its limitations. It's vulnerable to attack, it's easily interrupted
by the weather, and it's not continuous. When you need support on the
battlefront, you need it continuously, not just now and then. The biggest thing
I learned from my study was the valuable contribution of naval gunfire to some
of the most successful military operations this country has ever staged.''

At the Salerno landing in September 1943, he points out, 100 German tanks
threatened the beachhead. Aircraft from five carriers plus another 3,700 planes
flying out of Sicily supported the landing, but they were unable to repulse the
tanks. The German commander, Marshall Kesselring, later declared that it was
Allied naval guns that finally forced him to order the tanks to withdraw.

Myers quickly concluded that, if firepower was what the Navy needed, battleships
were the answer. He set out to learn everything he could about them, starting
with lunch at the Portofino with Charles Haskell. A key question was whether the
Iowas were fit for recommissioning. Haskell introduced him to Adm. J. Edward
Snyder, the captain who had taken the New Jersey to Vietnam in 1968. The New
Jersey, Admiral Snyder said, was not an old rust bucket. The steel she was made
of contained a high nickel content and was nearly impervious to rust.

Myers next spoke with Capt. Robert C. Peniston, the New Jersey's last captain,
who had presided over her decommissioning. Captain Peniston pronounced her fit
for service. A ship's life, Peniston explained, is determined by the time of
actual service, not age. And the New Jersey had been in use only 13 of her
allotted 30 years.

Furthermore, Myers learned that battleships were a relative bargain. The Navy
could reactivate a 57,500-ton battleship for about the cost of constructing a
new, 3,000-ton frigate or about a dozen new aircraft.

Now convinced that the Iowas should - and could -be reactivated, Myers took the
next step. He set about lobbying in Congress and the defense establishment for
funds to bring back the battleships.

Myers denies that he was motivated by an expectation of profit, for himself or
his corporate clients, and his peers in the defense world see no reason to doubt
him. He says he acted out of conviction, although he acknowledges that a
consultant's personal convictions and the commercial interests of his clients do
sometimes coincide. For example, one of his clients, Martin Marietta, might
eventually sell its missile-launching system for use on battleships, but Myers
says, ''That's conjectural, and, in any case, the dollar figures would not be
significant.''

Myers explains his involvement as a natural outgrowth of his normal work, the
development of defense ideas and the effort to see them adopted. ''It's much
better for me professionally,'' he says, ''if I test my beliefs by trying to
push them through.'' Decisions about defense spending are among the most highly
politicized and frequently wasteful that Congress makes. New proposals are
initially examined by staff experts on both the House and Senate Armed Services
Committees, and testimony is taken from military leaders and civilian
specialists, but the final decisions result from the most blatant and unabashed
logrolling. For example, a senator from Connecticut inevitably favors more
submarines because they are built by the Electric Boat Company of Groton, Conn.,
but he will also support funding for Texas-built fighter-bombers in return for
his Texas colleagues' support for submarines. Of course, most Congressmen desire
a strong national defense, but they cannot escape the narrow self-interest of
their constituents and will frequently fund weapons that even the uniformed
chiefs say are not needed. This process strongly favors the procurement of
hardware at the expense of funds for maintainance, repair work, training and
operations - much to the exasperation of the professionals.

Myers well understood the workings of Congress, and he recognized that the fight
for battleship reactivation would be special. To be sure, he reckoned he could
count on such big-Navy enthusiasts as Senator John W. Warner, Republican of
Virginia, a former Secretary of the Navy whose home state includes the major
shipbuilding complex at Newport News, and Senator John Stennis, Democrat of
Mississippi, the former chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee who has
long steered juicy Government contracts to the vast Ingalls Shipbuilding center
in Pascagoula, Miss. The senators from the state of Washington might be won over
because the New Jersey and the Missouri were mothballed at Bremerton, Wash., and
might be reactivated there, and the senators from Pennsylvania would perhaps be
swayed because the Iowa and the Wisconsin were berthed at the Philadelphia Navy
Yard.

Yet Myers realized that few members of Congress would have any real stake in
battleship reactivation. There were, after all, only four ships involved. It
simply did not compare with Chrysler's getting an order for 7,000 tanks, or
General Dynamics' receiving a $40 billion contract for F-16's. Furthermore,
Myers knew that the big shipbuilders who could influence votes in Congress would
probably oppose his plan. ''Why spend all that money on old ships?'' they would
argue. ''Look at the new ships we could sell you instead.'' Thus, Myers saw that
he had a major selling job to do.

Accordingly, he set forth his proposal in a 50-page report entitled
''Reactivation of Iowa-Class Battleships: A Basis for Advocacy'' and sent 50 or
60 copies to members of Congress, the armed-services experts on their staffs and
key people in the defense establishment.  Myers knew some of them from his days
at the Pentagon - Representative J. Kenneth Robinson, for example, a Republican
from Virginia, and Don L. Lynch, a professional staff member of the Senate Armed
Services Committee. But in most cases he was taking pot luck.  ''I started
reading the biographies in the Congressional Directory,'' he recalls, ''I looked
for members of Congress who had had a taste of land combat in World War II. If
they'd been at Salerno or Omaha Beach, I figured they'd know what I was talking
about.''

Myers followed up with personal visits. He was well known to defense experts in
Washington, and people were willing to see him.  ''The first thing I had to
do,'' he remembers, ''was pick them up off the floor after I told them I was
serious about battleships. I said, 'Look, I'm the vice president of the Fighter
Pilots' Longevity Society. We want the battleship because it can do the job
without risking anybody's life. Do you realize that 80 percent of our targets in
Vietnam were within main battery range of the New Jersey? The same would be true
in the Middle East. ...' ''

As Myers had hoped, Senator Warner lent his support almost immediately, although
Senator Stennis stayed on the fence until, as Myers puts it, ''he could collect
a few beads.'' Such World War II combat veterans as Senators Strom Thurmond,
Republican of South Carolina, and Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, became
vigorous proponents. Some Congressmen, on the other hand, were unconvinced.  For
example, Senator William Proxmire, Democrat of Wisconsin, opposed battleship
reactivation; however, he agreed to meet with Myers because he found him ''a
very bright and engaging person.'' For a moment, Myers thought he had the
Wisconsin Senator on the ropes when he pointed out that it was inconsistent for
Proxmire to favor funding for the LSD-41 amphibious landing craft and then to
vote against battleships, which could soften up the beaches for the LSD's.

''No,'' Proxmire recalls saying, ''those are two very different matters. The key
thing is that with each battleship you would need air defenses, maybe a couple
of cruisers, picket ships and a submarine - a whole task force. And that's
precisely what I'm trying to get the Navy away from. My philosophy is that we
need vessels designed so that they can operate independently rather than in task
forces.'' He refused to budge.

Meanwhile, Myers's report was winning the support of influential staff people.
Russell D. Hale, a former aviator like Myers and then the senior staff member of
the sea-power subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee, sent copies of
the report, along with a strong endorsement, to powerful members of Congress and
also to W.  Graham Claytor Jr., then Secretary of the Navy. Claytor, in turn,
was so impressed that he forwarded the report to his Chief of Naval Operations
with a note that read: ''Please look into the potential for utilization of one
or more of our battleships. ... Today, with no major-caliber guns in service, it
seems appropriate to re-examine the utility of this 'almost free' heavy-gun
asset.''

But the uniformed Navy was not interested. Indeed, its aversion to battleships
was of long standing. As far back as 1966, Adm. David L.  McDonald, then the
Chief of Naval Operations, was implacably opposed to the reactivation of the New
Jersey for service in Vietnam. The chief proponent of reactivation at that time
was Senator Richard B.  Russell, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee
and a great believer in battleships. To avoid a public row, the Government and
Senator Russell waited until the very day of McDonald's retirement to announce
that the New Jersey would rejoin the fleet. And when the battleship returned
from Vietnam, the Navy contrived to have the underwater openings in her hull
welded shut immediately, at a time when the Senate was not in session. The
object was to make sure that the New Jersey could not be recommissioned without
first being worked on in a dry dock for at least 120 days -and that would give
the Navy time to mobilize Congressional opposition to any attempt by Senator
Russell to put the ship in service again.

What made so many Navy officers turn against the battleship? For one thing, in
the late 1960's, the Navy was obliged to deactivate ships because of budgetary
pressures, and in that atmosphere the admirals did not want to risk losing an
aircraft carrier. Even in 1980, when the Navy had fewer money worries, Adm.
Thomas B. Hayward, Chief of Naval Operations, hesitated to bring back the Iowas
for fear that they might jeopardize the reactivation of the aircraft carrier
Oriskany.

Interservice rivalry also contributed to the Navy's change of heart about
battleships. ''The atrophy of naval gunfire over the last 20 years is a
tragedy,'' says a general officer with long experience in Washington. ''In the
early days, when the naval gun was used to fight opposing ships, the Navy
supported it wholeheartedly. But now that it is used primarily for shore
bombardment, the provider - the Navy - is no longer the beneficiary. You don't
hear the Navy saying we must have gunfire to help you fellows in the Army and
Marine Corps. The Navy discovers that it has other competing requirements for
its services, such as carrier aviation, submarines and so forth.''

If the admirals forsook the battleship, another arm of the Department of the
Navy did not. Early in his campaign, Myers lunched with two retired Marine Corps
officers at the Portofino restaurant, and, on the strength of their
recommendation, got an appointment to see Gen. Robert H. Barrow, the Louisianian
who serves as Commandant of the Marines. Barrow proved to be an outspoken
proponent of the battleship. At a Congressional hearing in February 1980, for
example, he was asked to comment on testimony just offered by the Secretary of
Defense. The Secretary had said that air power was a perfectly adequate
substitute for the kind of naval gunfire with which a battleship could support a
Marine landing. Barrow proceeded to contradict his boss. ''No, sir, I do not
agree,'' he said. ''Only a few of our aircraft have all-weather capability. ...
If we are bringing in airplanes where there is a greater SAM (antiaircraft
missile) threat, for example, we would like to reduce the risk to our airplanes
by engaging more targets with naval gunfire.'' Today, General Barrow minimizes
his own role in the campaign. ''The major player,'' he says, ''was Chuck Myers.
He never gave up.''

The seizure of the United States Embassy in Iran in 1979 and the Soviet invasion
of Afghanistan a month later gave the battleship an unexpected boost. These
events made many Americans nostalgic for an earlier era when the nations of the
world were far more respectful of this country's power and fearful of its anger.
Iran and Afghanistan also underscored the fact that nuclear submarines and MX
missiles were no substitute for strong conventional forces to defend American
interests in the third world.

In this atmosphere, Congress was receptive to a wide variety of military
projects, but the battleship benefited especially. Clearly, here was a symbol of
the days when America went largely unchallenged in the world. Furthermore, with
its outward ferocity, the battleship seemed the perfect instrument for striking
terror into the hearts of leaders of small nations who might trifle with the
United States.

By a stroke of luck, a condensation of Myers's report on battleship reactivation
appeared in the November issue of the Proceedings of the United States Naval
Institute just a few days after the hostages were taken in Teheran. Myers
received dozens of enthusiastic letters, some of them from members of Congress
and others in the defense establishment whom he had not contacted on his first
rounds. Suddenly, with the new focus on limited warfare and conventional
weapons, his crusade for the return of the battleship seemed to make a lot of
sense.

In the spring of 1980, for the first time, funding for reactivation of the New
Jersey was included along with money for the B-1 bomber in a bill before
Congress. This $6.2 billion supplemental defense authorization bill was passed
by the House and presented to the Senate Armed Services Committee. President
Carter opposed the bill.  The battleship proposal was high on a list of items he
attacked in a letter to John Stennis, the chairman of the committee. It was
''inefficient,'' he wrote, ''to apply hundreds of millions of dollars to
resurrect 1940's technologies.'' The President was also motivated by the fact
that, after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, he had produced a revised
military budget, the largest in peacetime history, and he had no taste for
further spending.

In May, the Armed Services Committee voted down the supplemental authorization
by a margin of only three votes. ''We lost,'' says Myers, ''because we were
fighting the President.'' And the President's put-down of the battleship as
''1940's technologies'' had a lasting effect. ''That hurt us,'' Myers says.  But
the battleship proposal was far from dead. A powerful new advocate would soon
arise. Among the people Myers had pitched his idea to was a 38-year-old defense
intellectual named John Lehman who was chairman of the Republican Party's
committee on defense and was destined to become Ronald Reagan's Secretary of the
Navy. Lehman - yet another naval flight officer - had first been intrigued by
battleship reactivation in 1973, when a proposal was made to use the New Jersey
to patrol the Demilitarized Zone in Vietnam. But Myers's battleship plan
contained an element that Lehman found particularly compelling - the addition of
Tomahawk cruise missiles to the ship's armament.  These missiles, with a range
of up to 1,500 miles, could make the battleship one of the most potent of all
capital ships, Lehman believed. And, unlike an aircraft carrier, which might
take eight years to build, four battleships could be reactivated in about four
years - rapidly strengthening the nation's defenses, and doing it, not
incidentally, while the Reagan team would still be in office to reap the
political benefits. Furthermore, battleship reactivation would be cheap compared
with the cost of constructing any new warship.

In December 1980, Lehman and Richard V. Allen, who would soon become the White
House national security adviser, jointly proposed reactivating the Iowas to
President-elect Reagan at a meeting at Blair House. Mr. Reagan was ''very
enthusiastic,'' Lehman recalls, and that led to the inclusion of an
appropriation for the New Jersey and the Iowa in the fiscal 1982 defense
appropriations bill.

''As we faced that big vote on the floor of the House,'' says Lehman, ''I
naturally did a lot of proselytizing in Congress to see that we got what we
needed. Whenever I talked about battleships, it was clear to me that somebody
had been up there on the Hill selling the idea. Myers was certainly very
persistent with me. I presume he was the one who did it.''

Meanwhile, battleship reactivation was beginning to have an easy time of it for
other reasons. The Republican Party platform had pledged to build up the Navy to
600 ships - an increase of about 150 bottoms - and that promised plenty of new
construction contracts.  ''The lobbyists for Todd Shipyards and Litton opposed
the battleships,'' says one Pentagon official, ''but they never went to the
wall. They knew their yards would be kept busy with new construction.''

The Navy mellowed, too, when it became clear that battleship reactivation would
not jeopardize the building of new aircraft carriers. ''Some of the top people
still opposed battleships privately,'' says Russell Hale, ''but when they
testified before Congress this time, they gave at least lukewarm approval.''

In the spring of 1981, Congress appropriated $237 million for the New Jersey. A
request for funds to refit a second battleship, the Iowa, came before Congress
last November, but the proposal inspired an unusually heated debate - until
still another naval aviator played a crucial role.

At one point, Senator Bumpers was ridiculing battleship armament.  ''If 16-inch
guns are so great,'' he said, ''why have we not put one on a ship for the past
35 years?'' Senator Jeremiah A. Denton Jr., Republican of Alabama, rose to
respond. As his colleagues well knew, Denton had been shot down over North
Vietnam in 1965 and had spent seven and a half years as a prisoner in the
''Hanoi Hilton.'' Most of his listeners assumed that, as a former pilot, he
would have little use for battleships.

''I know the question from the Senator is sincere, and I give him a sincere
answer,'' Senator Denton began. ''In Vietnam, we lost hundreds of aircraft at a
great cost in lives, as well as dollars, that could have been saved had a
battleship been on station. A battleship could have knocked out the Thanh Hoa
bridge that I was bombing at the time I was shot down. We lost five planes in
one day on that one target. I point out that the Thanh Hoa bridge was only 12
miles inland, well within the range of the 16-inch guns on the Iowaclass
battleships. There is a reason for those ships and thank God the Navy is coming
forward asking for them again.''

Word of Senator Denton's remarks spread rapidly around Capitol Hill. A num-ber
of Denton's colleagues told the Senator that they had changed their minds on the
basis of his speech. A few days later, the appropriations bill, whose future had
been uncertain, breezed through by a vote of 51 to 29.

Myers and his old Navy buddy, Charles Haskell, were jubilant. And when they read
that the Navy had appointed Capt. William M. Fogarty, a destroyer squadron
commander, to be captain of the New Jersey, they called him up and invited him
to lunch. Naturally, they met at the Portofino, where it had all begun. ''We
filled him in on the background,'' says Myers with a chuckle, amused at the
notion of a couple of pilots telling a sea captain how they saved his ship.
Billy Mitchell must have been doing barrel rolls in his grave.

NEXT WEEK The return of the battleship offers naval strategists new options for
the exercise of American power around the world.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Billy Mitchell (page 83) photo of 'Broadway'
passage inside Iowa (page 72) photo of Carles Myers Jr.(page 29) photo of the
Wisconson (page 28) photo of Iowa's conning tower (page 28) photo of New Jersey
in the Vietnam War

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

NEW LIFE AFTER 'THE LAST PICTURE SHOW'

SECTION: Section 6; Page 43, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4855 words


William K. Stevens is chief of The Times's bureau in Houston. By William K.
Stevens Only the shell of the old picture show still stands. Its projector is
long gone, and all the seats and the roof. The ticket window is long since
shattered. The crumbling marquee is no more than a graying wooden skeleton, and
the light blue paint that once brightened the theater's facade is past peeling.
For years, no neon has glowed in the crowning sign that reads, ''Royal.''

Some nights, when a stiff norther blows down from Canada, across Oklahoma and
into North Texas, Archer City's lone traffic light swings in the relentless
wind, blinking above the intersection of Main and Center Streets, casting its
beams on a deserted courthouse square, on empty sidewalks and streets, on a town
where no life seems to stir.

At such times, it is easy to imagine that, come morning, teen-age Sonny Crawford
will get into his beat-up 1941 pickup parked on the town square, that it will
cough uncertainly to life, and that Hank Williams's plaint, broadcast by KTRN in
Wichita Falls, 25 miles away, will twang from the truck's radio: ''Why can't I
free your doubtful mind and melt your cold, cold heart?'' Just as it happened at
the beginning of ''The Last Picture Show,'' the hit movie that put Archer City,
with its nearly 2,000 inhabitants, on the cultural map and established it in the
minds of millions as the very paradigm of small-town life in interior America
during the 1950's.

It is the place where a native son, Larry McMurtry, set his grittily evocative
novel, and where, a decade ago, the movie based upon it was mostly filmed. The
town was called Thalia in the book and Anarene in the film, but it was Archer
City, Tex. in real life. The story McMurtry set there dealt with the stuntedness
of existence in a confining world of limited options and limited ambitions; with
the difficulty of trying to be a free spirit in such a place; with both the
caring and the mean-spirited callousness that the place fostered; with love and
loss, yearning and fulfillment in a Victorianfundamentalist moral climate. Its
protagonists, Sonny and his buddy Duane Jackson, groped uncertainly toward
maturity in a stark land whose sparse economy hobbled almost everyone's
prospects and fostered a kind of unspoken resignation.

And in the imagination, on those nights when the wind rocks the traffic light,
you would swear that you could hear the boys' crimped horizons mocked by a
phrase from another popular song of the time: ''Fly the ocean in a silver plane
... .'' Swear that you were about to witness that poignant night in 1951 when
Sonny and Duane go to see John Wayne and Montgomery Clift in ''Red River,'' the
last film to be shown at the Royal, after which the picture show closes for
good, a victim of changing times.

And you would come away with the impression left at the end of ''The Last
Picture Show'' - that Archer City is a place of desolation, a dying prairie town
with a disappearing way of life. And you would mourn.  Well, things have not
turned out exactly that way. A full generation - 30 years - has passed by since
the era that McMurtry wrote about, and Archer City has not died. It has thrived
and entered the world of the 1980's in a big way. A number of contemporary
economic and social currents have, in fact, converged there: The shift of wealth
to the Sun Belt. The rise to power of the Oil Patch states, especially Texas,
Louisiana and Oklahoma, in the wake of the meteoric rise of petroleum prices
during the 1970's. The resurgence of small towns generally, as the flow of
population toward the cities and suburbs begins to reverse itself. And, not
least, the sexual and feminist revolutions. Yet the Protestant, fundamentalist
core remains largely intact. And for this reason, Archer City, which is perhaps
representative of hundreds of other places like it, is possibly a better
barometer of the relative permanence of social change than bigger cities where
trends are set and fashions come and go. Change comes less easily in Archer
City; but when it does, it is more likely to stick.

Tangible, tantalizing hints of the difference wrought by a generation lie
everywhere. At the Archer Recreation Center, a successor to the pool hall where
Sonny and Duane hung out, video games supplement the pool tables in competition
with the Pac-Man and Asteroids Deluxe machines at Curtis's One-Stop grocery and
liquor store. Just outside town, backyard dish antennas point toward unseen
satellites, linking minds and imaginations to the wider world through a rich
array of television programming, just as conventional cable television connects
those who live in the town itself, making the old picture show more obsolete
than ever. KTRN, which beamed Hank Williams to Sonny's pickup, now carries
Colorado and New Mexico ski reports to the rich of Archer City and neighboring
towns.

Yes, rich. Of all the changes, the two biggest have to do with money and morals.
These also happen to be the two themes that underlay McMurtry's original vision
of the town, a vision whose accuracy does not appear now to be a matter of
serious local dispute. Archer City is flush today in ways never dreamed of in
1951. Oil is the reason, as it is for many another town, big and small, in the
Oil Patch states. At least ten millionaires, and perhaps as many as 15, are
believed to live today in or around the town of only 1,862 residents.

That much is easily discoverable. Much more elusive is the extent to which
attitudes and values have changed.  In the book and movie, Duane Jackson was a
big, bluff sort of guy, a high-school football player who worked on an oil rig
after school, just as nearly all boys worked at something in those days. He and
his buddy, Sonny, would drink illicit beer occasionally, go to the picture show
with their girls, neck with them in the cab of the pickup afterward, head to the
bordellos of the Mexican border towns 250 miles away every once in a while and
sometimes resort to what was called ''devilment'' to relieve their boredom. As
L.B. (Buster) Boren Jr., who is now the town's city manager, remembers it,
devilment in real life then included such things as throwing tomatoes at cars
and taking off the younger boys' pants and running them up the flagpole.

Carlton Deen could have been Duane. Although, at 39 years, he is a bit younger
than Duane would be by now, he grew up in Archer City in the 1950's,
roughnecking at the oil rigs and, he says, generally living the kind of life
portrayed in the book and movie. His father was an oil operator, but with oil
selling at $3 a barrel and the big refiners buying most of it abroad, not many
of the small, independent drillers who worked the fields hereabouts made much
money in those days. Oilmen and oil workers were scorned as trash in some
quarters.  The cattle ranchers, although no financial giants themselves, were
the local aristocrats.

''Well, the Deens are the aristocrats now,'' says Larry McMurtry, who still
writes fiction and now is co-owner of a bookstore in Washington but who returns
to Archer County, whose seat Archer City is, for a week at a time once a month,
''just because I like to,'' and because it refreshes him. The oil company
operated by Deen, his father, Obie, and brother, David, is not the biggest in
town. But, with a gross of $2 million a year, it is certainly one of the
biggest; and the Deens, says McMurtry, ''are undoubtedly one of the most
powerful and respected economic forces around here now.'' Only half-jokingly, he
says that he's thinking of writing a sequel to ''The Last Picture Show'' called
''Duane Gets Rich.'' If John Updike can do it with Rabbit Angstrom, he says, why
not? Carlton Deen, who happens to be McMurtry's brother-in-law, could easily be
the model for the main character.

Not only has he become wealthy, but his attitudes and life style have evolved a
long way. With a brown beard and moderately long hair, Deen still dresses in
down-home style -plaid shirt and jeans. But he is likely sometimes to be seen in
Dallas or Southern California on business or, once a year, at play on the ski
slopes at Taos, N.M. He is independent in outlook in a town that still sometimes
tries to enforce conformity.

Vietnam, he says, ''radicalized'' him, at least by comparison with Archer City
at large. He was one of the few men from the town to be drafted during the
Vietnam War. Though he escaped being sent to the war zone (only because of a
clerical error, he thinks), Army friends of his were killed in what he came to
believe was a futile cause and a waste of life. His views about race changed
drastically at Fort Hood. Growing up in Archer City, where only one black person
has lived for the past several decades, Deen says, did not exactly foster racial
tolerance and understanding, he says. At Fort Hood, he grew to respect black
soldiers and even to seek out their company.

He has since been active in environmental causes. And he has expressed
disapproval of the local passion for high-school sports, because he believes
that athletics are emphasized at the expense of academics. In his own
high-school days, he was a football player. A running back, like Duane Jackson.

He is convinced that socialism is coming in America, despite President Reagan's
initiatives, and he worries about the future of the free-enterprise system. But,
he says, if a situation like Vietnam arises again and his son, Chad, now 13
years old, is drafted, ''I'll send him to Mexico or Canada rather than let him
go.''

Deen says he has a personal problem in coming to grips with the fact of his new
wealth. ''I can't get used to it,'' he confesses. He and his wife, Sue, and
their son live modestly in a white frame house at least 50 years old. He keeps
bees and is trying to train a Labrador retriever. But mostly he works. ''I'm by
the telephone or radio seven days a week,'' he says, in constant touch with his
drilling crews. He explains that he has ''seen a lot of real bad times in the
60's, and I don't want a repetition.''

Few people in Archer City display such a range and mixture of attitudes. But it
appears, nevertheless, that at least in terms of tolerance and openness to new
ideas, many among the younger generation are moving Deen's way.  Archer City
lies on the southern edge of the Great Plains, which in these parts roll
tawny-grassed and endless toward the horizon, marred now by an invasion of the
twisted gray scrub trees called mesquite, but otherwise much the same as when
the Comanches ruled the region.  After their defeat in the 1870's, Archer City
was founded, largely by cattlemen, Larry McMurtry's grandparents among them. The
town developed as a collection of undistingushed, mostly one-story stores
flanking the four sides of the courthouse square, with equally undistinguished
frame houses lining the streets beyond.

Archer City was not exactly destitute a generation ago, although livings were
often sparse. Some of the most prominent local cattlemen were in debt most of
their lives. As elsewhere in small-town and rural America just after World War
II, stagnation and contraction had set in. By 1970, the population of Archer
City had regressed from a peak of 1,974 in 1960 to 1,722, almost its 1940 level.

The ''Last Picture Show'' film crew brought perhaps the greatest single infusion
of money the town had ever known. And also the most excitement, as the actors
became part of the local scene. For a time, Archer City became a tourist stop
for movie buffs. Even today travelers occasionally go out of their way to see
the town.

Not everyone in Archer City was thrilled by the book or the movie.  The Baptists
set the tone of public morality, and there was some protest against the movie's
treatment of sex and profanity. Still, when the movie came out, some Archer City
residents drove two hours to Dallas to see it rather than risk the public
disapproval they feared might come if they were observed going to see it in
nearby Wichita Falls.

Even now the first sign you see driving into Archer City from the north says,
''Home of the Wildcats,'' Archer City High's sports teams. The second says,
''The First Baptist Church Welcomes You.'' They are reasonably accurate
reflections of the town's traditional centers of activity and two of its main
priorities. The First Baptist Church, whose members account for about a third of
the town's population, was founded in 1880, the same year as the town itself.
And although McMurtry didn't treat it at length in his book, morality as
interpreted by the Southern Baptist Convention has historically set the
standard. This means no drinking, no smoking, no provocative clothing, no
premarital sex.

Public morality also enforced a strict code of marital behavior.  Divorcing
one's spouse was just not done, however unbearable a relationship might become.
In the movie, the football coach's wife, who out of hunger and frustration
carries Sonny a long way toward his own maturity in matters of the heart,
loathes her loutish spouse.  Sonny wonders why she stays with him. ''I wasn't
brought up to leave my husband,'' she answers, simply. ''Maybe I'm just scared
to.''

Fear largely enforced such conventions in real life, even on those not stolidly
in the church. In a town small enough to constitute, in effect, an extended
family, everyone literally did, and still does, know what everyone else is
doing. What people think is of overriding importance to a degree unimaginable to
someone reared in a big city.  Unacceptable thought or behavior can easily
become cause for ostracism. Such a place, says Sue Deen, becomes very good at
enforcing guilt feelings.

And yet, for those who passed the test of hard-working decency, the town could -
and still can - be very supportive. A family, unasked, takes in a young,
pregnant woman whose husband has left her. Or townspeople, unbidden, set up a
hospital fund for a boy who accidentally wounds himself with a shotgun.

For most of the young people of Archer City in the 1950's, the future appeared
to hold more of the same. They might go off to the Korean War, as Duane did at
the end of the movie, and some of the smarter and better-off might go away to
college and stay away. But for most, life meant hard work for not much money,
generally low horizons and continued immersion in the Archer City minisociety.
And then came the 1970's.  Events a world away propelled the town out of its
economic torpor.  When the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries kicked
world oil prices up in 1973 and 1974, it set off a spiral that saw the price of
a barrel of oil rise tenfold. Decontrol of domestic oil prices enabled prices to
rise to world levels, with obvious results: It suddenly became not only
profitable, but enriching, for small, independent domestic drillers and
producers to drill wells and pump oil.

The richest man in town a generation ago may, by McMurtry's estimate, have had a
net worth of $200,000. He made it in oil, even then, from the shallow fields
lying around the edges of Archer City.  Today it is not just the dozen or so
operators whose net worth puts them in the million-dollar class who have
prospered, it is the whole town. Deposits at the First State Bank stood at just
under $3 million in 1970. In December 1980 they had ballooned to $14 million,
and by February 1982, had leaped to more than $18 million.

That, generally, is the way it is in town after town, city after city, in the
Oil Patch states. It is the economic success story of the day, even in this time
of deepening recession.

There is little evident ostentation in Archer City, however. A few of those who
have struck it rich have put in a swimming pool or a Jacuzzi and done it up like
J.R. Ewing, according to one townsman in a position to know. But they are said
to be the exceptions, the grasshoppers who do not realize, as Carlton Deen says,
that the oil boom will not last forever. Most, says Deen, do realize it, and
behave like ants. ''That's why so many live simple.''

The center of Archer City looks, at first glance, much as it did in the movie.
The old three-story sandstone courthouse still dominates the square with its
magnificent big cedar trees, touches of grace in a town that for the most part,
even according to some residents, offers little by way of physical beauty. But
the cafe that once might have been the center for town gossip has been replaced
by a spanking modern Dairy Queen at the southern edge of town that sells not
just ice cream but cheeseburgers and enchiladas, chicken-fried steak and tacos.
The town has been spruced up a little by modern structures in glass, brick and
plastic.

There are three flourishing food stores, four gasoline stations, three drilling
and production companies, numerous small oilfield suppliers. Thriving little
businesses, including a pharmacy, a hairstyling salon and an elegant jewelry
store, flank the courthouse square. Both in town and two or three miles out,
modern brick homes that look like kissing kin to those in the glossy suburbs of
Dallas or Houston have sprung up. Visiting oil promoters from all over the
country bring to town yet another touch of the world beyond North Texas.

Accompanying the rise to affluence, and in some ways fueled by it, has come a
considerable shift in ideas about what is moral and what is not. To defenders of
the old ways, morals are looser. To adherents of the new, they are more
liberated.

Make no mistake about it: old-time morality is still very strong.  The Baptists
are still widely perceived as the most powerful force in town, not only morally
but in some ways politically. The Rev. Bill Potts, pastor of the First Baptist
Church, acknowledges this. ''I think the church should have a strong voice in
any community,'' he says, and then adds, ''I don't have any problem with what
Jerry Falwell and the Moral Majority are doing nationwide.''

The difference today is that the Baptists don't always win. In 1975, Archer City
voted - 334 to 295 - to legalize the sale of liquor for the first time. And when
the town celebrated its centennial two years ago, the forces of old-time
religion were thwarted in their attempt to prevent the presence of beer on the
courthouse lawn. When the antibeer forces in the City Council prevented the
granting of a concession for the beverage, many of the town's affluent young
simply bought beer and gave it away. No more sub rosa beer drinking, as in the
old days. According to Larry McMurtry, who was there, ''the street was
absolutely littered with beer cans. It was a wonderful scene,'' he says, of open
''riotous drunkeness.''

The greater, although quieter, shift in values promises to strike to the very
foundation of the town's structure, the family. The concurrent movements toward
sexual equality and the new sexual freedom, though lagging behind, say, New York
or Houston, appear to have taken firm hold among people under 40.

The frustrated high-school coach's wife in ''The Last Picture Show'' would have
been amazed at Donna Trigg, class of 1970. Like many of her contemporaries,
Donna married a boy from Archer City.  They moved to Lubbock, where he was
attending Texas Tech University.  After graduation, he insisted that they move
back to Archer City. ''I begged him not to,'' says Donna, who felt that
returning home would bring them too much under the domination of both sets of
in-laws.  That, she says, is one way Archer City enforces its codes of behavior.

For six years after they moved back, Donna lived that way, she says, and for six
years she had a constant headache from keeping her frustration bottled up inside
before she finally gave up and got a divorce. But she stayed on in town, working
for an oil company. Some townspeople stopped speaking to her. ''They were
judging me,'' she says, ''and it bothered me at first.''

Now, she says, it no longer upsets her, and she feels as if she is out from
under the town's psychological thumb. ''And I love it,'' she says with a smile.
''If they like me because I'm Donna, that's fine.'' If they don't, says Mrs.
Trigg, now 30 years old, divorced for almost two years and the mother of a
5-year-old daughter, so be it.

One reason she may have found it easier of late is that some of the people who
criticized her have since gotten divorces themselves.  In fact, says Sue Deen,
there have been two waves of divorces in town in recent years: one among younger
couples who, following what is still common practice, got married right out of
high school; and another among people in their 30's and early 40's, belatedly
affected by the revolution in relationships. As a further indication of the
erosion of the town's strict morality, Mrs. Deen points out that it is no longer
unusual for unmarried couples to live together. And, she says, others ''may
sleep together a time or two, you know, and then they're still friends.'' No
right or wrong is attached, and the inevitable disapproval of some townspeople
is ignored.

Women, especially, have more choice in life than in the past, says 68-year-old
Margaret Ellen Slack, who has raised four children, all of whom now live
elsewhere. Before, she says, ''women had to put up with whatever because they
had children and no way to make a living.  Now they have more options.'' One
reason for that is affluence.  Thanks to the booming local economy, women now
have an easier time finding jobs. Another is the infusion of ideas through the
mass media.

Mr. Potts of the Baptist church asserts that many, and perhaps most, young
people in town remain chaste until marriage. He is not unmindful, he says, that
some townspeople criticize the Baptists for negating the spirit of
live-and-let-live. ''I can appreciate their feelings,'' he says. ''Maybe we
haven't taken the time to get acquainted with each other. Let's face it. Even in
a family, communication is hard, let alone in a town.'' In many ways, the
teen-agers of Archer City seem to have changed little since the days of Sonny
and Duane. Though the old pool hall and cafe are gone, the Dairy Queen and
Curtis's One-Stop seem to have taken their place as hangouts. More youths have
cars now, and simply cruising between the two places, or sitting in a parking
lot and talking, is a common pastime.

No youths, however, congregate at night on the courthouse lawn, as they used to,
in search of devilment. Instead, teen-agers stay home and watch cable-television
movies or, like townspeople in their 20's or 30's, drive to the mall in Wichita
Falls to attend first-run films or they go to dinner at McBride's steakhouse, or
to dance at Rodeo West. Sometimes, it is said, a group of 15 or 20 teen-agers
from Archer City and other nearby towns will rent a motel room in Wichita Falls,
buy a lot of beer, play drinking games and indulge in other diversions.

The kids' musical tastes are eclectic, running from heavy-metal rock to country
and western and, lately, to 50's pop classics by performers like Buddy Holly and
Fats Domino. Marijuana is conceded to be not uncommon, and some teen-agers say
that Quaaludes are around. No serious drug problem exists, however, say others,
among them City Manager Buster Boren. Traditional pursuits such as sports still
loom large in everyday teen-age life. Last year the high-school basketball team
won 30 games and lost only three.

Sex, perhaps the most sensitive touchstone of changing ways, seems to be viewed
much more matter-of-factly by today's teen-agers. Again, however, change has
proceeded only so far. An informed assessment within the high school divides the
students into four groups: churchgoers who are dead set against premarital sex;
churchgoers who are not, but don't talk about it; nonchurchgoers who don't
believe in it and nonchurchgoers to whom sleeping together is natural. The last
group is said to account for as much as a third but less than a half of the
student body. No one, according to Carlton Deen, who knows a lot of teen-agers,
goes to the Mexican brothels anymore.

Among young parents of Archer City, there is concern that the new generation is
the town's first to grow up in danger of not learning the value of hard work or
the worth of money. ''They don't know what want is,'' says David Wright, a
divorced, 34-year-old oil-rig supervisor. ''My little boy, who is 7 years old,
at any time he's carrying his billfold, is going to have $10 or $15 in it.''

As everywhere, youths in Archer City are seen as generally wiser in the ways of
the larger world than their parents were. Their horizons have widened, too.
Perhaps half the graduating seniors now go to college each year. A generation
ago, only a handful went. Fear of the unknown used to dissuade many students in
small Texas towns, says Gerald (Judd) Gray, a high-school math teacher. That
fear is no longer so prevalent or so powerful.

Still, small-town conformity and small-town outlooks die hard.  Ambitions are
not easily expressed. ''They all have dreams,'' one high-school junior says of
her classmates, ''but it's not something you talk about. Other kids will say,
'You think you can do that?' '' She herself, she says, has never admitted to her
friends that she wants to be a fashion designer.

For years, the brightest and most capable young people have wanted to get out of
Archer City for no more complicated a reason than because, in the words of the
would-be fashion designer, the town ''bores you out of your skull.''

But now some of those who left in earlier years are coming back, just as people
are flocking back to small towns all across America.  Money -greater economic
opportunity - is one thing that draws them, but not the only thing.

Buster Boren, the 42-year-old city manager, left Archer City to join the Marine
Corps, worked as a baker and bakery manager in West Texas and New Mexico, and
finally wound up on the assembly line at a General Motors plant in Fort Worth.
The money was good, but he says he ''wanted my children to have the opportunity
I had of growing up in a small town.'' Big-city danger and turmoil, he says,
made up his mind. Archer City has virtually no crime, he says, and Wichita
Falls, an easy drive, ''is as big a city as I need.'' It is also possible to
have more control over your children in a small town, he adds.

''Ten years ago, I would have told you it would horrify me to go back there to
live,'' says Ceil Cleveland Waldrip, Margaret Slack's 43-year-old daughter, who,
though she now is an editor in Manhattan, gets back home frequently. ''But now I
might like it. It's a good place to think and write.'' As for growing up in a
small town, she says, it has big advantages for the bright and the ambitious.
''I was a big fish in a little pond. That gave me a great deal of confidence. I
felt very early that there wasn't anything I couldn't do'' - a feeling less
likely to develop in a big city, with its overwhelming competition. Even if you
find out later that you have limitations, she says, the basic sense of
self-confidence remains.

Maybe, as David Wright and others believe, the contemporary oil boom has reached
its peak. If that turns out to be true and Archer City eventually finds itself
no longer a wealthy town, it will nevertheless be a transformed one. ''This
ought to be a pretty liberated little place in 10 years,'' says the girl who
wants to be a fashion designer. Whether, on balance, that is for better or worse
is a question yet to be answered, not only here but almost everywhere else in
America. Are human relationships richer or poorer for all the new freedom? Is
family life as a whole strengthened or weakened?  Perhaps, in another
generation, the grown-up sons or daughters of Sonny and Duane will be able to
tell us.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Fred Edge with horse photo of teenagers (page
44) photo of Rev. Bill Pott (page 45) photo of Royal Theater (page 45) photo of
Carlton and Sue Dean (page 58)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

REMEMBERING JACKIE ROBINSON

SECTION: Section 6; Page 46, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 3752 words


Robert Curvin is an editorial writer for The New York Times. By Robert Curvin I
was 13 in 1947, the year Jackie Robinson joined the Brooklyn Dodgers and became
the first black man to play major-league baseball. We lived in New Jersey at the
time, one of a handful of black families in the Italian working-class community
of Belleville, near Newark, and in that neighborhood either you were a Yankee
fan or you kept your mouth shut. The passion for Joe DiMaggio, the great Yankee
center fielder, was fanatical. Tommy Henrich, Charlie Keller, Yogi Berra and
Phil Rizzuto were idolized. But not by me. The identification was not there.

A great day arrived when I went with my mother and a group of her friends to
Ebbets Field in Brooklyn to see Jackie Robinson. A car had been hired for the
occasion, something long and old that looked like an airport limousine, and I
was tucked in between my mother and another hefty woman. In our homebound
family, any excursion was rare. There was never a vacation, not even dinners
out. So a trip to a ball game was something special, more a pilgrimage than a
baseball outing.

Frankly, I don't remember much about that particular game except that it was
against the Phillies, and the Dodgers lost. I do recall that my mother, who was
not a baseball fan, spent the afternoon talking with her friends about
everything but the game. What mattered to all of us, though, and particularly to
me, was seeing Jackie Robinson. I tracked his every move - on the field and in
the dugout.  He was ebony, and he looked strong. I noticed with some concern
that he was pigeon-toed. My toes point out. I determined to work on this defect,
the better to emulate my new hero, and I spent the ride home in the kind of
fantasy every kid feels after watching a real game.  But I felt something more.
I felt proud. I was inspired.

As another baseball season cranks up, I find myself thinking again about Jackie
Robinson. This year marks the 35th summer since the national pastime made room
for him, its first nonwhite player - a momentous event, really, that altered
more than the game of baseball. The impact of Jackie Robinson's breakthrough was
felt by black kids all over the nation, in the ghettos of the North as well as
the rural areas of the South. Franklin Thomas, now the president of the Ford
Foundation, remembers that when Robinson joined the Dodgers there was ''sheer
electricity'' in Bedford Stuyvesant, where he lived.  Arthur Ashe, the tennis
star, was 5 or 6 at the time and living in Richmond, Va., which was then
segregated. ''Jackie Robinson,'' he recalls, ''became the instant boyhood hero
of every black kid I knew.'' Others remember waiting along railroad tracks in
the South, hoping to get a glimpse of Robinson when the Dodger train headed
north after spring training.

Although Robinson was followed into professional sports by many other black
players, it was his courage that thrilled us, inspired us and held us to him
even after he had moved on. His spirit had entered the bloodstream of a
generation.  My father left home when I was 6. There were nine children. Mother
suffered from arthritis, diabetes and a heart ailment. She worked when she could
as a presser in a clothing factory. She was amazingly gentle and patient but
firmly in control of the family. My two older brothers and the eldest of my six
sisters quit school to work when they reached 16. They helped to support the
family. When times were especially hard, we received welfare, which was called
relief in those days.

Ours was not a ghetto existence, but there was isolation. We lived on the second
floor of a multifamily house with only black families.  We did not have central
heating, and in the bitter cold we heated flatirons on the coal stove, wrapped
them in towels and put them in the beds to keep warm.

A child in such circumstances needs heroes, and Jackie Robinson came at just the
right time for me. Through him, I was able to indulge in the same fantasies as
white kids. I became devoted to box scores, making daily checks on my hero's
stats. When Robinson became the Dodger second baseman, I switched my favorite
position from the outfield to second base. An older white boy who had had a
tryout with the Yankees spent an afternoon teaching me how to throw from the
hole, pivot on the double play and cover first base on a bunt. I was Jackie
Robinson in my mind, and some of my friends occasionally called me by his name.

My major-league fantasies were replaced eventually by the hard reality that I
would never become an athlete like Jackie Robinson.  That is the way it is for
most children. But I know that my life was enriched by my attachment to him; the
level of my expectations was raised by his example.

Robinson's breakthrough made me more aware of the barriers America erected
against blacks - and of the need to strike them down. I am certain Robinson is
one of the reasons I joined a youth chapter of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People when I reached 17. In retrospect, the group did
not do very much. We spent a lot of time discussing what to do about housing
discrimination and a skating rink that was open to blacks only one night a week.
The civil-rights movement had not arrived yet.

If there is one attribute that stands out in Jackie Robinson's character, it is
courage. He had the courage to take the plunge, to become the first black
ballplayer despite doubt and hostility. He also demonstrated another kind of
courage: the courage to endure insult and humiliation without rising to the
bait. Restraint did not come naturally to him. He was a proud man with enormous
talents. At the University of California, he had been an outstanding athlete in
basketball, football, baseball and track - he was, in fact, the school's first
four-letter man - and he had never made a secret of his feelings on the playing
field. Indeed, before signing Robinson to a contract on the club's Montreal farm
team in 1945, Branch Rickey, the Dodger president, had to satisfy himself that
his ballplayer could take the heat he knew would follow. In a now-famous scene
in Rickey's office, Robinson was asked how he would respond to a hypothetical
barrage of racial attacks. ''Mr. Rickey,'' Robinson pleaded, ''do you want a
ballplayer who's afraid to fight back?'' To which Rickey replied, ''I want a
ballplayer with the guts not to fight back.'' And that was the bargain they
made: You can't fight back.

When Robinson moved to the Dodgers in 1947, he had more than enough provocation
to test his guts. Tales of his ordeal, both on the field and off, were reported
in great detail in the black press: the high spikes, racist remarks, threats of
harm. I am convinced that these stories helped to politicize blacks in this
country. For Robinson to abide by Rickey's injunction at that point took
enormous courage. A fight would have doomed the experiment.

Robinson's restraint rubbed off on me. As a child, I had played and gone to
school with white kids, and racial animosity was not usually on the surface. But
when a fight occurred, the words ''Nigger'' and ''Wop'' flew back and forth, and
I remember once being told to go back to Africa by a kid whose family had
arrived from Italy only two years earlier. I encountered a more serious kind of
bigotry when I entered Officer Candidate School at Fort Sill, Okla., in 1954. I
was the only black person in my platoon, and some of the other candidates were
simply unable to treat me fairly or provide the support I might have expected.
But I knew I had to play the game and do my job with people I did not respect. I
persevered and became a commissioned officer.

Jackie Robinson, too, persevered, and by 1949 he had become an established star.
He was fully accepted by his teammates, even those who had vehemently opposed
him when he was brought up. Robinson had helped to make the Dodgers winners. By
that time, too, he had won the affection of a large segment of the American
public. Thus, it might have been easiest for him to just play baseball and keep
quiet.  Instead, he began to argue with umpires. He shouted at opponents.
Robinson became combative, even argumentative. He also became outspoken about
racial injustices.

The public change in temperament caused Robinson to lose support among fans and
the press. It became routine to compare Robinson with Roy Campanella, the black
catcher who joined the Dodgers in 1948 and who had a conservative view about
racial matters. Campanella had spent his prime years in the Negro leagues, and
he was grateful to be a Dodger. ''I'm no crusader,'' he said. Many blacks, of
course, applauded Campanella's position. In fact, I can recall blacks expressing
chagrin at Robinson's tantrums.

Speaking up about injustices was not universally popular. That is why Robinson's
transformation to a fighter was so important. In a way, his outspokenness might
have helped to prepare blacks for the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.'s nonviolent
struggle that was just beginning to develop.

I certainly learned from Robinson that there was a time to be angry. I had heard
him say, ''I do not care if I am not liked. I want to be respected,'' and I
tried to operate that way myself.  Jackie Robinson is not my only black hero. I
was never taught about black history in high school. But while in service I read
about brave men like the former slave Frederick Douglass. And W.E.B. Du Bois,
through his writings, gave me an early understanding of the role of race in
America. In the 1960's, I was an officer in the Congress of Racial Equality and
worked with James Farmer, who was brave and intelligent. And like many other
Americans, I considered myself a disciple of Martin Luther King. It may seem odd
to some, but I place Jackie Robinson the baseball player on a par with those
black leaders I have mentioned.

Neither was Robinson my first black sports hero. Our entire family crowded
around the radio to listen to the Joe Louis fights, and we shouted and danced
after his victories. But boxing and baseball represent different things. The
Princeton sociologist Marvin Bressler points out, for instance, that individual
sports such as boxing often affirm the separation of the races. Joe Louis's
victories showed that a black man could beat white men. But when a black man
joined a baseball team it meant that a black man was joining mainstream white
America.

Moreover, in personal ways, Joe Louis was not the symbol that Robinson was.
Louis was not well educated. He did not express himself well. And it became
apparent that he was manipulated and exploited by his white managers. He was a
powerful but vulnerable champion. Jackie Robinson was intelligent and
articulate. He was in a tough fight, but he seemed to be in control. He was a
perfect role model for an aspiring black child, particularly one who did not
have a father at home.  Another great thing about Jackie Robinson was his
humility.  Whenever he spoke about his success, he was quick to give credit to
others, especially Branch Rickey. It has been said that Rickey was simply being
practical when he signed Robinson; he wanted to bring blacks into the ballpark.
It was not so simple.

At the time, there was considerable political pressure to integrate major-league
baseball in New York. In 1945, a state humanrights commission tried without
success to get the presidents of the three New York baseball clubs to sign a
pledge that they would not discriminate. And in the same year, Mayor Fiorello La
Guardia formed a subcommittee to the Anti-Discrimination Committee to press for
the integration of major-league baseball. In fact, Rickey and Larry MacPhail,
president of the Yankees, were members of the group.  Rickey, however, resigned
from the committee.

The pressure might have inspired Rickey to move faster. But Arthur Mann, in his
biography of Rickey, convincingly argues that, more than anything else, Rickey
signed Robinson because he wanted to win.  Rickey had already indicated in 1942,
when he went to the Dodgers, that he might hire black ballplayers to make the
Dodgers a winner.  Still, it is hard to believe Rickey could have made
integration - which Robinson referred to as the ''Rickey experiment'' - work if
he did not have a commitment to it beyond winning and filling the stands.

In retrospect, one has to admire not only Rickey's courage but his cunning.
Throughout Robinson's first game in Philadelphia as a major leaguer, Ben
Chapman, the Phillies' manager, led a chorus of racist name-calling. Chapman's
performance was so disgraceful that almost every major newspaper condemned him.
He later apologized. Rickey then persuaded Robinson that it would be good for
baseball and for the experiment if Robinson would have his picture taken with
Chapman. For Robinson, it was another kind of humiliation and it took courage to
do it.

Black people were also important to the experiment. As early as February 1947,
Rickey summoned a group of black ministers and civic leaders from Brooklyn to a
dinner. The community leaders expected to hear that the decision had been made
to bring Robinson from the Montreal Royals up to the Dodgers. But that was not
the purpose of the gathering. Rickey bluntly told the group that the black
community could make or break the experiment. ''If you parade and dine Robinson
too much, you will make him fat and futile,'' he warned. ''If you get drunk at
the ball park and see Robinson as the conquest of one race over another, the
experiment will fail.''

The terms were accepted. The word spread all over the city from black pulpits,
taverns and neighborhoods. ''When Robinson joins the Dodgers, leave your liquor
outside the ball park. Don't ruin his chances.''

Thus, the experiment had many aspects. It was, most of all, a test of Robinson.
And it was a test for major-league baseball and for the black community. But it
was also a test for America.  In the fall of 1956, the Dodgers traded Jackie
Robinson to the New York Giants, but he never played for them. Having already
started negotiations with Chock Full o'Nuts to become a corporate vice
president, he announced his retirement from baseball in 1957.

By the end of Robinson's 10-year career, baseball and society had changed
tremendously. Black ballplayers were on the roster of every major-league team.
Blacks were playing in far greater numbers in professional basketball and
football. The United States Supreme Court had ruled that segregated public
schools were unconstitutional. The Montgomery, Ala., bus boycott, from which
Martin Luther King first emerged as a national leader, had begun in 1955.

Like most people who reach stardom, Robinson had to descend from the heights.
But, unlike those who never reach the top again, Robinson was not satisfied with
making public appearances and signing autographs. He delved into corporate
affairs and became a key official in personnel and labor matters for his
company.

When he was asked by Roy Wilkins to head a fund-raising drive for the
N.A.A.C.P., he agreed. But again, he did not fit the usual pattern of famous
people simply allowing their names to be used for a cause. Jackie Robinson
insisted that he participate in the drive, and he did. He traveled to churches
and meetings around the nation, making civil-rights speeches and asking for
support.

Robinson helped to form the Freedom National Bank in Harlem; he became a member
of the Connecticut Parole Board, and he wrote a column for The New York Post. I
was pleased when Robinson used his column to chastise Roy Wilkins for his
''dictatorial'' leadership of the N.A.A.C.P. I had helped to found a college
chapter of the N.A.A.C.P. at Rutgers in Newark, and it was there that I learned
that the national organization was overly centralized. The youths in the
organization could do nothing without clearance from the national office. The
organization and Roy Wilkins did not seem ready for the times.

I did not agree with Robinson, however, when he supported Richard Nixon for the
Presidency in 1960. Nor did I agree with Robinson's criticism of Martin Luther
King for opposing the Vietnam War. And then he became a critic of the militancy
of black college students.  It is only now that I can appreciate the basis and
complexity of some of Robinson's views. I am convinced that on racial matters he
was as impatient for change as anyone. But at the same time I think he was a
political conservative.

Robinson seemed to believe that blacks had to fight hard for racial justice, but
it had to be done under the existing rules.  Individual effort was the key. I
was selfish. I wanted my boyhood hero's views to be like mine. I remember
thinking, foolishly, that athletes really do not know anything about politics.
What I should have thought and what I know now is that Robinson was just another
human being.

Indeed, when his personal and family tragedies became known, his true humanity
was revealed. The year he left baseball, Robinson was struck by diabetes. His
son Jackie Jr. returned from service in Vietnam to a life of crime and drug
addiction. Robinson had devoted many days of his free time to young people at
the Y in Harlem, in hospitals, wherever he could. His son's problems pained him
more than anything. When his son was arrested, Robinson stood before reporters
and television cameras and said that he had failed as a parent. He joined the
fight against drugs and eventually Jackie Jr. was cured of his heroin habit. But
in 1971 Jackie Jr. was killed in an automobile accident.

I empathized with Robinson's pain. Almost 15 years ago I helped George Hicks, a
former addict in Newark, establish a drug counseling program called the New
Well. Partly because I am a parent, too, I place the problem of drugs at the top
of the list of my concerns. It is an issue that the nation is far too complacent
about. There are too many Jackie Jr.'s who get destroyed.

By the end of the 1960's, diabetes had partially destroyed Robinson's sight. And
in October 1972, he died of a heart attack at the age of 53. I had never met
Jackie Robinson, but I knew him. I wept.  A few weeks ago, I drove to Stamford,
Conn., to visit Rachel Robinson. She had invited me to look at her Jackie
Robinson scrapbooks. As I motored along the Merritt Parkway on a cold and clear
Sunday morning, I could not help reminiscing about my childhood and that earlier
pilgrimage to Ebbets Field. Again I was excited.  Full of anticipation.

I arrived at 11 in the morning and was greeted by Mrs. Robinson.  While she
prepared tea, I browsed in a library just off the living room. There were a
number of books on black history. Pictures of the family lined a wall: Jackie
Jr. in his Army uniform; Sharon, a nursemidwife, who will join the faculty at
Howard University School of Nursing this fall, and David, a ''visionary,''
according to Mrs.  Robinson, who is planning to build a model rural community in
Tanzania, where he lives.

Rachel Robinson is a former nurse and teacher at the Yale Medical School. In
recent years, she has headed the Jackie Robinson Development Corporation and the
Jackie Robinson Management Company, which co-developed and constructed $51
million worth of Government-subsidized housing in Brooklyn, Manhattan and
Yonkers. The management company was recently sold, she said, because ''I
couldn't stand the contradictions involved. People are paying so much of their
income in rent that it is painful.'' She is still president of the development
corporation, which develops real estate and trains people in the management
field. One of her major concerns is the Jackie Robinson Foundation, which
operates a leadership development and college scholarship program for needy
students.

As we began to talk about Jackie, I could sense her love for him, even now. We
talked about the tough times in the late 1940's. She and her husband endured,
she said, because there were so many good people who supported them. She said
she and Jackie owe a lot to the Canadians, who supported them in that year at
Montreal. ''The experiment might not have worked if it had started anywhere
else,'' she said. She described Branch Rickey as ''paternal, but not
paternalistic.'' She told none of the horror stories. There was no bitterness.

Mrs. Robinson seemed to become most serious, almost in an admonishing way, when
she told me that she would prefer that people understand that baseball was an
arena for Jackie Robinson's fight for racial and social justice.

After our discussion, I spent hours reading three voluminous scrapbooks with
articles and clippings from all over the world. I then thanked Mrs. Robinson for
the visit and departed.

As I drove home, I again felt proud and inspired. I wondered how I could sum up
the meaning of Jackie Robinson. I think it is this: He was important to black
youths in a very special way. He made one of the nation's most important
experiments in this century work. He demonstrated that bigotry and racism kept
America from fulfilling its promise. And his success allowed Americans to
recognize that, if given a chance, blacks could be teachers, plumbers,
engineers, lawyers, bankers or anything else. Jackie Robinson was a great man
who arrived at an important time in our history. He never stopped fighting. He
gave America vision.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jackie Robinson with Branch Rickey (page 54)
photo of Jackie Robinson with Dodgers teammates photo of Rachel Robinson,
Jackie, Martin Luther King, and Roy Wilkins

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MEMOIRS OF A MASTER OF SURVIVAL

BYLINE: By MAX FRANKEL; Max Frankel is editor of the editorial page of The New
York Times.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2282 words


YEARS OF UPHEAVAL By Henry Kissinger.  Illustrated. 1,283 pp. Boston: Little,
Brown & Co. $24.95.

HENRY KISSINGER so obviously enjoyed walking the high wire with the world on his
shoulders, it is hard to believe he really minded having to do it with a
crippled President tied to his back. The second volume of his interminable yet
endlessly fascinating memoirs mourns this burden, the ''tragedy'' of Watergate
that ruined his six-ring act. But in the telling, the book cannot help
celebrating the incomparable Kissinger feats of survival. Indeed, it belongs
among those feats. It carries on the performance, aiming to demonstrate that
survival is ethic enough in a lawless world, and that people who master the art
are obliged to keep teaching it, to save the planet from both the ignorant and
the innocent.

As Richard Nixon's Presidency expired, Kissinger's already great influence
soared. This volume recounts that incredible year, between the summers of 1973
and 1974, in which the refugee from Nazi Germany became the most glamorous and
probably most powerful man in America.  The book begins with his baptism as
Secretary of State by a grudging President floating in a swimming pool at San
Clemente; it ends with that President on his knees at the door of the Lincoln
Bedroom, beside a Secretary of State who can now remember awe - but not his own
posture or prayer.

It was the year of the Yom Kippur war and of collapse in almost every arena.
Lost, in 1973-74, besides a President and Vice President, were the ''peace with
honor'' purchased at horrendous cost in Vietnam; the sense of shared purpose
among the Western allies; the domestic consensus for taming Soviet power with
the carrots and sticks of detente; the momentum toward nuclear arms control; and
the cheap oil that made the West rich.

Kissinger demonstrates the ways in which he nonetheless turned the Middle East
war to American advantage and toward the possibility of Arab-Israeli peace. Yet
he argues, incessantly, that everything else went sour because America
dismantled its President's ''authority.'' And he blames that - with due
appreciation for the ''darker side'' of Nixon's character - on stupid White
House flunkies and, more passionately, on a feckless American ''establishment.''
Guilt-ridden about its misadventure in Vietnam, this establishment, he insists,
allowed a handful of radicals to dominate the antiwar movement and thus bait an
insecure President into adopting the radicals' methods of political warfare.
How's that for ''linkage''?

Once past the tricky Watergate turns on the wire, however, Kissinger regains his
high spirits. Give the Executive back its ''authority'' - and Kissinger's
''concepts'' - and America will not only survive but prevail.

Paradoxically, without Watergate there would be no Kissinger legend or slogans
to kick around. ''To leave a legacy, rather than a tour de force,'' he had
planned to resign, after the four years recounted in Volume One, to permit
construction of a more prosaic policy machine.  That would have cut short the
literature of a remarkable diplomatic career. Strip Volume Two of its tedious
rehash of bureaucratic controversy and its self-indulgent cuttings from speeches
and afterdinner toasts, and you still hold hundreds of pages of chilling,
thrilling international intrigue: The Russians begging the United States for
license to humble China once and for all with a preemptive attack. The Chinese
conspiring with Kissinger to exploit the American bombing of Cambodia - until
Congress calls a halt - to try to restore Prince Sihanouk and thus perhaps save
South Vietnam. A desperate Israel denied arms and ammunition in mid-war because
the Pentagon deemed it invincible. Washington and Moscow threatening to join in
that war through a night of rival military alerts while Nixon lay ''too
distraught'' from Watergate affairs to be awakened.

To all this, Kissinger brings a good ear, cunning insight and bold intuition. He
records how the powerful talk, what they think as they talk and what they
believe as they think, with abundant demonstrations that the three are rarely
synonymous.

THE reader is left only to wonder at the ulterior purposes these memoirs must
also serve. Much of the time, to be sure, they just tell what happened. But one
suspects that considerations beyond the scope of this book explain the meager
portrait of Alexander Haig, the Kissinger deputy elevated to manage a collapsing
White House, or the scornful references to former C.I.A. Director William Colby.
Understandably, Kissinger devotes extraordinary space (and the book's only
appendix) to a rebuttal of charges that he is to blame for the later ravages in
Cambodia. But Kissinger is less forthright in identifying other criticisms that
he seems to anticipate. Else, why the diffuse assurances that no blackmail was
paid to have the Arabs lift the oil embargo? Or that others are responsible for
the neglect of strategic military forces after Salt I? And what trepidations
about the Nixon tapes explain the book's puzzling detours to rationalize things
said or unsaid? ''Do you agree ... that we should draw the wagons around the
White House?'' Nixon suddenly asked one night. Lacking the ''fortitude'' to
confess bafflement, Kissinger says, ''I mumbled something noncommittal that
Nixon, not unreasonably, construed as assent.''

I feel sure, nonetheless, that Kissinger is seeking truth, a bearable but
essential truth in all important respects, even concerning the encouragement he
sometimes gave to Nixon's baser instincts, his own grasping for power and, above
all, his enthusiasm for the costly but futile effort to avert defeat in
Indochina. And he manages to present some ugly truths without burning too many
bridges. That has been his craft, in life and in office, and so it is in print.
Nixon and Kissinger will dine together again, despite the former Secretary's
unmistakable charges of anti-Semitism. Though he recoils from Nixon's crudities
and constant manipulations, Kissinger struggles to find a humane eulogy for his
fallen leader: ''Few men so needed to be loved and were so shy about the grammar
of love.''

That Kissinger is able to encompass so much complexity and so many layers of
purpose in clear and often epigrammatic English is a further measure of his
agility. As in Volume One, there are subtle portraits, notably of his dealings,
''not untinged with affection,'' with Zhou Enlai; of Brezhnev, whose
''boisterousness never quite managed to obscure his insecurity''; of Sadat, ''a
great man. ... who understood so well the virtue of solitude and used it so
rigorously''; and of Haldeman and Ehrlichman, the former ''convinced that image
defined reality,'' the latter combining ''comradely goodwill and testy
jealousy.''

There are, as well, dozens more of the memorable Kissinger characterizations.
Of the gutter language on the Oval Office tapes: ''The Nixon who talked with me
on foreign policy did so rather with the prissy pedantry of his public
personality.''

ON techniques of combat: ''For (John) Connally a victory was meaningless unless
his opponent knew he had been defeated; for Nixon (and surely Kissinger) the
most exquisite triumphs were those in which the victim did not know who had done
him in, or maybe even immediately that he had been done in.''

On Sadat's journey to Jerusalem: ''At one and the same time an act of nobility
and a method of disarming Israel psychologically: a unique gesture of
reconciliation and a device to isolate the Jewish state.''

On the dilemma of Communism: ''It seems impossible to run a modern economy by a
system of total planning, yet it may not be possible to run a Communist state
without a system of total planning.''

On Israel's conduct toward America: ''Israel sees in intransigence the sole hope
for preserving its dignity in a one-sided relationship. It feels instinctively
that one admission of weakness, one concession granted without a struggle, will
lead to an endless catalogue of demands. ... It takes a special brand of heroism
to turn total dependence into defiance.''

STILL, it takes a special brand of forbearance to mine these gems from 1,283
pages, or to distill from them the main lines of doctrine, without knowing what
else resides in documents so selectively declassified and cited. How can a
contemporary reader cope with this verbal assault?

For the simply curious student of the daily news, I recommend a 480-page
book-within-a-book about the Middle East war, cease-fires and disengagements.
This gripping tale appears in eight scattered chapters (6, 11, 12, 13, 17, 18,
21 and 23), but it is a coherent story, a tapestry of large and small diplomatic
designs, woven by a huge cast of statesmen, generals, bureaucrats and
politicians who had only one thing in common: their collaboration or competition
with Henry Kissinger.

Uniquely endowed and positioned, he recounts the events as he played them, in
ways that illuminate almost every major international issue - detente and
confrontation, the uses of adversaries as friends and friends as adversaries,
the politics of oil, the capacities of the United Nations, the diplomatic value
of intelligence, sentiment, pride. Those were rare months for statecraft, a time
when men shed blood for clear and limited political purposes and when the
rivalry of the Superpowers that had created the strife also facilitated its
resolution. It was a time when psychological stalemate, deviously arranged but
eloquently invoked, could be used to move enemies toward a vision of peace. No
wonder Kissinger wishes that this prelude to Camp David, rather than the Vietnam
negotiations, had brought him his Nobel Prize.

For a grasp of what diplomacy can be and for an indelible lesson in the
predicaments of nations, these eight chapters will do. For instructive history,
I recommend Chapter 19 on the murky origins of the energy crisis. And for what
are now the most relevant polemics, I urge a look at Chapters 7 and 22, which
define and defend Kissinger's detente - and set a new standard for tact by
failing even once to mention detente's principal assailant, Ronald Reagan.

THE foil instead is Senator Henry Jackson, held up as the personification of the
twin scourges of Kissinger's Soviet policy: ''Liberal idealism unrelated to a
concept of power and conservative dogmatism unleavened by a sense of proportion
or strategy.'' The ''liberals'' prize empty gestures of good will or pose
impossible demands for human rights; the ''conservatives'' refuse any dealings
with the devil, unless perhaps it's good for business. Kissinger's response is
rooted in an admirable realism, from which, however, he derives an unrational,
democratically unworkable corollary.

His realism reckons rivalries of power to be more fundamental than those of
ideology; even Mao confided to him that ''ideological slogans were a facade for
considerations of balance of power.'' The Soviet-American rivalry, Kissinger
believes, has produced such a delicate balance that even trivial upsets need to
be forcibly resisted. But it's a nuclear world, so the adversaries are also
partners in the avoidance of nuclear war. To contain and yet to coexist, the
Superpowers are doomed to negotiation and confrontation. Kissinger's detente was
in no sense a ''one-way street,'' as he proves in great detail.

But what's a balance of power in a kaleidoscopic world? When does upheaval, in
Angola or Nicaragua, threaten the balance and require response? Kissinger
postulates two competing orbits, with China potentially the leader of a third,
and hardly any no-man's land among them. It seems to him simply a fact of nature
that weaker nations - Chile, or Iran - have no right to challenge the
''geopolitical'' balance of the strong. The strongest nations are obliged ''to
defend global security even against ambiguous and seemingly marginal assaults''
- lest the shift of a few pebbles produce a menacing landslide.

That much, at least, is more or less consistent with the containment policies
pursued by eight Presidents. In Kissinger's hands, deterrents and inducements
were indeed shrewdly used to encourage Soviet restraint and respect for balance.
In this regard, Kissinger has every right to grieve for the lost opportunities
of Nixon's second term.

His special theory of balance depends, however, on that sweeping corollary:
radical challenge anywhere has to be resisted in the earliest stages, long
before the need for that resistence can be demonstrated to democratic societies.
By the time a challenge to the global equilibrium is really clear, Kissinger
observes, the cost of resisting will usually be great; in the nuclear age, it
may be prohibitive. America must therefore be ready ''to act on unprovable
assumptions.'' Enlightened diplomacy must command sacrifices whose necessity
''can never be proved.'' And ''the qualities that distinguish a great statesman
are prescience and courage, not analytical intelligence.''

Not even the American reaction to Vietnam and the failures he attributes to it
can persuade Kissinger that here may lie the theory's fatal flaw. To him, the
ultimate tragedy of Watergate (nee Vietnam) is that he lost the chance to
educate Americans to accept his remarkable thesis. The ultimate riddle of these
memoirs, however, is how Kissinger could emerge from the traumas of 1973-74
still believing that a free society would repeatedly commit itself to policies
that spring from even a great statesman's unprovable hunches.

Justly admired for his analytical intelligence and tactical skill, Kissinger, it
seems, aspired instead to the position of trusted prophet - presumably an
appointive office.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Henry Kissinger (Page 24) photo of 5 drawings
of Henry Kissinger

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Paperbacks:New & Noteworthy

BYLINE: Houghton Mifflin, $10.95.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 35, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE IN HIS TIMES, by James R. Mellow.


century America.

NAM, by Mark Baker. (Morrow/Quill, $6.) This skillfully arranged compilation of
tape-recorded recollections by dozens of veterans of the Vietnam War begins with
experiences with draft boards and in boot camps, continues with brutally vivid
stories of what went on in Indochina and ends with a series of disquieting
homecoming incidents. One of the best descriptive accounts of the war yet
published.

HAUNTED, by Judith St. George. (Bantam, $1.95.) Alex Phillips, 16 years old and
a confirmed goof-off, takes a summer job house-sitting Red Roof Farm, unmindful
of the weird rumors circulating locally about the recent deaths of its owners.
Before fall comes, he has been exposed to a series of eerie experiences that
leave him much wiser and more mature. An enjoyable chiller for readers 12 to 15
for whom haunted houses have a special appeal.

SULA and TAR BABY, by Toni Morrison. (NAL/ Plume, $5.95 and $6.95,
respectively.) The publication of these two novels in paperback provides readers
an opportunity to observe the artistic development of a leading American black
woman novelist. In ''Sula'' (1973), Toni Morrison turns the relationship of two
women in the poor black section of an Ohio town into a stylized, somewhat icy
myth. In ''Tar Baby'' (1981), she tells how a black fugitive upsets the
household of wealthy white Americans on a Caribbean isle. According to our
reviewer John Irving, in the latter Miss Morrison has risen above the social
realism that traps too many black and women's novels and made a symbolic fable
of race and eroticism.

THE JOURNEYS OF DAVID TOBACK, retold by Carole Malkin. (Schocken, $6.95.) From
notebooks written 49 years ago by David Toback, a butcher on New York's Lower
East Side, his granddaughter presents his memories of wanderings and of
self-discovery in the Ukraine during the late 19th century. A fascinating record
of a period when Jewish society was still bound by the traditions of community
and piety that had long sustained it, yet at the same time was being pulled in
many directions.

GOD EMPEROR OF DUNE, by Frank Herbert. (Berkley, $6.95.) In this fourth volume
of Frank Herbert's hugely popular series about the planet Dune, the populace has
succeeded in transforming almost all its desert surface into a conventional
watery world. Its leader, Leto, now a 3,500-year-old god emperor, orders a
change of course - an evolutionary cycle involving individual enlightenment,
revelation and even rebellion. Mr. Herbert's energy is beginning to flag, yet he
continues to keep readers concerned about Leto and the race he's determined to
save.

THE CHINESE OF AMERICA, by Jack Chen. (Harper, $8.95.) Before World War I, when
Chinese contributed importantly to the building of America by constructing the
transcontinental railroads and by digging gold and coal, three-fifths of them
came from one small district of their homeland; until 1943, immigration laws
fostered their concentrations in ''Chinatowns''; only after World War II did
they start integrating into American life. This is the best general account of
their culture, contributions and problems.

THE VICEROY OF OUIDAH, by Bruce Chatwin. (Summit, $5.15.) A fictionalized
account of the life of an early 19th-century slave trader, a poor white
Brazilian who used his friendship with the King of Dahomey to become the richest
man in West Africa and the Viceroy of Ouidah, only to die a ruined man. This
latest work by the author of that highly acclaimed travel book ''In Patagonia''
was said by John Leonard to ''dazzle and mystify, with its lush anger, its
impacted memory, its gorgeous desolation.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A TOWN GATHERS IN CONCERN

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 6; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1508 words


WOODSTOCK LAST year voters here used the town meeting to set the tax rate,
decide which roads to repair and impose an ordinance limiting public drinking.
This year they discussed how to carry out negotiations with the Soviet Union to
reduce the risk of war.

The jump from frost heaves to thermonuclear holocaust was made in this
northeastern Connecticut town, as at other town meetings around New England,
with hardly a blink, in a movement that has spread from meeting to meeting
unlike any other proposition. This is despite the fact that, according to
veteran meeting-goers, such municipal involvement in international affairs is
unprecedented.

Arms control has become a local issue. Woodstock is the first of 44 town
meetings in the state this year in which supporters of a nuclear-arms freeze
will bring their campaign, in addition to the 14 city councils and
representative town meetings. Last year, three town meetings in Connecticut -
Hampton, Old Lyme and Lyme - approved a call for a freeze in nuclear-arms
buildup.

The arms-freeze resolution is set to come before the Middletown City Council
tomorrow, the Danbury City Council on Tuesday and the Salisbury Town Meeting on
Friday. Westport, West Hartford, New London, Farmington and other towns are to
consider the question in coming weeks, according to freeze proponents.

The reasoning among freeze advocates is that all of Connecticut, a small state,
would be wiped out by bombs aimed at nearby targets.  ''It can happen here,''
read a leaflet mailed to Woodstock's 5,100 residents. The leaflet, by a local
freeze group, added, ''Although Woodstock seems rural and remote from urban
centers, we are part of the Northeast industrial corridor targeted for nuclear
attack.''

That line of reasoning has also been used with civic and church groups, the
General Assembly in Hartford, individuals around the state and in petition
drives.

In Woodstock, as at most other town meetings, the decision last Tuesday was to
call on the state's delegation to Congress to sponsor a nuclear-arms freeze by
the United States and the Soviet Union. The vote here was 166-9. But typical of
a New England town meeting, one of the more independent-minded voters demanded
that the Town Clerk also make note of the votes of those who wished to be
recorded as abstaining. There were two.

''You could argue that this sort of thing is not within the normal purview of a
town meeting,'' said Wesley Reed, who was chosen by consensus to be the
impartial moderator of the Woodstock meeting.  ''But the town meeting can
consider anything not prohibited by the Connecticut statutes, and this isn't
prohibited,'' he said.

Woodstock is not averse to taking up a complicated question with little
deference to outside authorities; the town, after all, predates almost all the
higher forms of government.

Settled as New Roxbury in 1686 by a party from the Massachusetts Bay Colony,
Woodstock decided in 1749 to secede from Massachusetts.  Even today, the town is
not restrained in speaking its mind.

''We are a free people, free to tell those who govern us and are in charge of
our defense that we must negotiate with the Soviet Union for a halt before it is
too late,'' said Margaret McClellan Tourtellotte, a supporter of the freeze, at
the meeting.

''If we're not informed about the issue, because government isn't telling us
everything, then nobody is informed,'' said the Rev.James S. Harrison, of the
First Congregational Church, another supporter.

The question of nuclear arms may be intractable to world leaders, but the
confidence of Woodstock in its town meeting is impressive. A saying in politics,
now framed prominently above the desk of Governor O'Neill's chief political
aide, is that ''No man's life or property is safe when the Legislature is in
session.'' But no such cynicism pervades the local legislative bodies, the town
meetings.

''You always go into them a wreck, and you always come out of them sort of
inspired,'' said Isham Martin, the First Selectman of Woodstock. ''You look out
on the crowd at the beginning of the meeting, and you see the faces of so many
rational, well-intentioned individuals that you know that nothing awful can
happen.''

The discussion in Woodstock's 90-minute meeting was sometimes heated and
sometimes emotional, although frequent meeting-goers said it was neither as
heated nor as emotional as the annual budget meetings. Still, in between the
analyses of throw weights and megatonnage, the 200 people of Woodstock who
attended the debate - out of an adult population of about 3,500 - said often in
their comments that the fear of nuclear war was pressing on them.

Sara Parker, for example, has a daughter who lives in Iowa, a son who works in
Danielson, a husband who works in Windsor and two children in school in
Woodstock. She told the meeting, ''I want to be with my children when it's time
for the end.'' But she doesn't think that there would be enough warning of a
nuclear attack for them to gather in time.

Dr. David Bates said he wants to quiet the fear he has had since he returned
from action in World War II that the United States and the Soviet Union will go
to war. When his children were small, he was convinced that nuclear war would
come before they were grown; his fears have been stimulated again recently by
the talk of war, he told his neighbors.

Mr. Martin told the meeting that he wonders about his four small children, the
insurance that he and his wife buy, and all the other species that would be
destroyed if mankind immolates itself.

''I don't know if you've pictured your cows lying over in the field, the deer in
the woods that will share in the suffering,'' he said.

''We spend a lot of time hassling over whether a new road should be built or how
much we should spend on schools,'' said Roger Kasperson after listening to a
long speech on the relative strengths of the United States and the Soviet Union.

''It's remarkable that we can get together the resources we've seen tonight,''
he said. ''There ought to be some times when we can get together as a community
and talk about the important things in life.''

In the life of Woodstock - a town of farms and light industry and a home base
for workers in companies from Southbridge, Mass., to Groton and East Hartford -
arms control was not an important issue until recently, when a fear that had
lain dormant for decades was stirred up. The fear is strong both among those who
have rarely involved themselves in the community's affairs, and those who have
always been at the heart of local politics.

Francis C. Stevens, for example, is getting active in the issue that first
troubled him 20 years ago, during the Cuban missile crisis, when he was the
principal of an elementary school in nearby Brooklyn. At that time, he told his
pupils that in case of nuclear attack, they would have to find their own way
home, because the buses would not run.

He was troubled, he said, by ''the obscenity of trying to explain that to
first-graders.'' Mr. Stevens, now the Superintendent of Schools in Eastford and
a member of the Woodstock Board of Selectmen, told the meeting that on his scale
of political values, ''Attila the Hun is a liberal.'' He also said that he is
once again worried over nuclear war.

Mrs. Tourtellotte, a resident of Woodstock for 44 years and a local leader of
the freeze campaign, calls this her first venture into politics. Mrs.
Tourtellotte said that she had become more concerned recently about nuclear war.

''I asked my doctor if there was anything I could keep on hand, and he mentioned
cyanide,'' she said.The anti-war activism involved in the freeze campaign lacks
the anti-establishment tinge of the Vietnam protests. ''This is a thing that
cuts across the political spectrum,'' said Marta Daniels of Voluntown, a member
of the American Friends Service Committee, which is leading the freeze campaign.
''There's not the connection with the emotion of having a son or a brother or a
friend come back in a body bag; this is something that's affecting everyone,''
she said.

It affects them in different ways, however. Cyrille Syriac, for example, spoke
against a freeze in nuclear arms.  ''The problem is not weapons,'' he said.
''When the first guy came out with the bow and arrow, I'm sure there were people
who thought it would destroy the world,'' he said. ''The problem is people.''

Mr. Syriac's response to the threat of Soviet nuclear missiles was that ''we
shouldn't be in too much of a hurry to give away what little advantage we
have.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of residents voting on nuclear arms freeze at
meeting photo of F. Veronica Hibbard, town clerk and Isham Martin

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TELEVISION WEEK

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 3, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 836 words


Capstone for Capra
Frank Capra, now 84, is a Hollywood pioneer who has won three Oscars for having
directed ''It Happened One Night,'' ''Mr. Deeds Goes to Town'' and ''You Can't
Take It With You.'' His career spans 42 films in 43 years.

On March 4 in Beverly Hills, the American Film Institute held a testimonial to
present Mr. Capra with the organization's Life Achievement Award. On hand were
James Stewart, Bette Davis, Barbara Stanwyck, Charlton Heston, Claudette Colbert
and some 1,200 others.  The industry tribute will be broadcast, with clips from
Capra movies, Sunday on CBS from 9:30 to 11 P.M. Incidentally, a retrospective
of Capra films is running this month at the Regency Theater.

A sizeable quota of Capra movies are now home-screen staples, though he has no
use for films made specifically for television.  ''They're made to sell things
to a free audience,'' Mr. Capra declared in an interview from California.
''Selling things is the main drive behind television - the clock is the
director,'' he added.

The benchmarks of Capra movies were sentiment, patriotism and idealism. Would he
make the same kind of film today? ''I sure as hell would,'' Mr. Capra said.
''Right now there's so much machinery going on in movies that we hardly see the
people.''

A Matter of Honor
A television adaptation of Tom Cole's 1976 play ''Medal of Honor Rag'' will be
shown as part of the ''American Playhouse'' series on Channel 13 on Tuesday at 9
P.M. His drama, the playwright said recently, ''sees the Vietnam War as a
tragedy for a lot of people. It focuses on how the war picked one man off the
street in Detroit, a really quiet man, and exposed him to incredible adventures
and trouble for something he didn't understand. It then rewarded him with our
highest award for courage - you might say the highest macho award - and he was
totally confused.''

Directed by Lloyd Richards, ''Medal of Honor Rag'' stars Hector Elizondo,
Clarence Felder and Damien Leake.  Despite its antiwar theme, the 1976 drama
originally drew praise in a Pentagon journal, The Pentagram News, and also won
acclaim from a mainly military audience at Fort Bragg. Mr. Cole said his play
was ''not in the mood of the 60's - it doesn't attack the army. But it does try
to engage the sympathy of the audience for what this man went through.''

Allyson's Orbit
Is the mature June Allyson still the sweet girl-next-door type? Speaking from
Houston, where she is currently acting in a play, she said: ''No, not exactly.''
Her roles for television and on stage now ''are a little more true to life -
what fits one era sometimes doesn't fit another.''

Monday at 8 P.M. on NBC, Miss Allyson will portray a fading, reclusive film star
in ''The Kid With the Broken Halo'' - a fantasy about a 12-year-old ''wayward
angel'' sent to aid three troubled homes. Gary Coleman plays the angel, with
Robert Guillaume, Mason Adams, Ray Walston and Georg Stanford Brown also in the
cast.

In 1943, Miss Allyson, then 16 years old, went to Hollywood with the cast of the
Broadway musical ''Best Foot Forward.'' M-G-M sustained her well-scrubbed image
in such films as ''Two Girls and a Sailor'' ''Little Women'' and ''Too Young To
Kiss.''

Miss Allyson's role in this television film does not reflect her life now. ''I'm
happy living up on my hilltop and I'm happily married,'' the actress said. ''I
have no emotional need to work, but I enjoy doing it when I find a script I
like. The industry thinks I want to work, so I do get a lot of offers, which is
very nice.''

Holiday Fare
The confluence of major Christian and Jewish holidays - Passover on Thursday,
followed by Good Friday and Easter next Sunday - gives rise to two pertinent
programs a day apart.

''Raanahah: A World of Our Own,'' a 30-minute documentary, will be telecast on
Channel 13 on Tuesday at 10:30 P.M. The film recounts how, in 1937, 39 Jewish
immigrant families from Eastern Europe, members of the Labor Zionist Movement,
acquired 64 acres of land in Orange County in New York State as a kibbutz-like
summer colony. They named it Raanahah Park. Raanahah is a Hebrew word: Its
English translation might be young, fresh or tender.

Marlene Booth, a Boston filmmaker, spent three months at Raanahah Park: ''I
wanted to preserve on film a world that was going to disappear. I made this film
realizing that when this Eastern European generation went, there wouldn't be
another like them to replace them.''

On Monday at 8 P.M., Channel 13's ''Great Performances'' will present Shubert's
Mass No. 6 in E Flat. From the Imperial Chapel in Vienna, Karl Bohm will conduct
the Men's Choir and the Hofmusikkapelle Orchestra and the Vienna Choir Boys,
with soloists Peter Schreier and Werner Krenn, tenors, and Walter Berry, bass.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 4, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER IN REVIEW;
BLEAK PLAY REAFFIRMS A TALENT

BYLINE: By ALVIN KLEIN

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 19, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 554 words


EAST FARMINGDALE THE Arena Players Repertory Theater is producing Joseph
Lizardi's plays, it seems, at the rate of two a year. The last, ''December in
New York,'' was a dud. With ''Three on the Run,'' which is on until April 18,
Mr. Lizardi is really cooking, full steam.

This is a scorching play and a reaffirmation of his talent and energy, even
though, thematically, the play is anything but affirmative. It couldn't be
bleaker, more despairing or more unsparingly honest.

Dee and Johnny live in an abandoned, rat-ridden building in the South Bronx. Dee
is eight months pregnant. Johnny, a memory-scarred Vietnam veteran, works at a
''decent job'' selling shoes. He steals for necessity and for kicks, and he
dreams futile pipe dreams where ''pimps and pushers live like kings.''

Johnny and a prostitute, ''Bitch Girl,'' with whom he grew up in the ghetto,
arrange the sordid murder of a drug dealer and abscond with $1 million worth of
uncut heroin. Johnny learned how to cut it in Vietnam. They have ''customers
lined up - on up to them pretty houses on Long Island.''

This heist will put them on Easy Street. Johnny will supply what people demand -
''hopes and dreams in little bags.'' He says: ''I didn't make the world out
there. I was just placed in it and told to survive.''

The delicate Dee, a rebel in her own right, is the tragic product of upwardly
mobile parents who have renounced their own heritage, leaving her with a
terminal case of ''social schizophrenia.'' Ever the reformer, Dee saved Johnny
when he was an addict, and she persists, vainly, in trying to do it again.

With his command of street slang and ghetto humor and his ability to flesh out
characters without being accusatory or righteous, Mr.  Lizardi has created his
own modern-day ''No Exit'': a trio of the damned and their continued descent -
the world outside, in his view, ''is sinking fast, too'' - and the actors blaze
forth with fiery performances.

Dee (Marie Wood) delivers an astonishing monologue about growing up in
Manhasset, where she was forced to bury her Puerto Rican roots.  Bitch Girl
(Adelaide Daddio) swishes about with a finger-snapping, tough veneer. Her
emotional numbness is the buildup of a life where surrounding horrors are taken
in stride.

As Johnny, Vito Pipitone is a network of nerve endings, haunted by recurring
visions of the Vietcong -with rockets and land mines going off in his head -
grabbing the guns he keeps in his trunk, boasting that he no longer needs ''the
dope to cope'' and clinging to the impossible scheme that will take care of Dee
and the baby.

The play is harrowing; even childhood good-time memories are graphically and
grimly detailed. ''Three on the Run'' is a confrontation with an objective
reality from which audiences must not turn away.

The Arena Theater's head, Frederic DeFeis, has allowed redundant sound effects,
but otherwise his direction has cumulative tension, suspense and involvement -
so much so that the actors take no bows at the end, which unsettles the audience
that much more. His investment in Mr. Lizardi is paying off.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vito Pipitone and Adelaide Daddio

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A CRITICAL COTERIE ON FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By STEVEN V. ROBERTS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


In the early 1960's, Senator Paul E. Tsongas worked in an Ethiopian village as a
Peace Corps volunteer, and the world has not looked the same to him since.

''You can't live in a village for two years and think that the people see
themselves in an East-West context,'' the Massachusetts Democrat recalled. ''It
never came up. So when Ronald Reagan tells me that the Ethiopians are Marxists,
it's like my telling Ted Williams the fine points of batting.''

Senator Tsongas represents a new generation of lawmakers who are starting to
make their voices heard on foreign policy issues.  Recently they spearheaded the
opposition to the Reagan Administration's Latin American policy on Capitol Hill
and proposed a number of amendments and resolutions that could significantly
affect Washington's relationship with the nations to the south.

As Senator Tsongas indicated, this generation is tied together by the belief
that the world cannot be divided into two warring camps: East vs. West, Marxists
vs. non-Marxists, Us vs. Them. To these lawmakers, the world is more confusing
and fragmented than some other legislators might think, a place where people are
motivated more by local and nationalistic impulses than by abstract ideology or
bigpower rivalries.

Kennedy and Vietnam Influences

''Reagan said during the campaign that all troubles in the world could be
attributed to the intervention of Moscow,'' Mr. Tsongas said. ''If he really
believes that, we have an unsalvageable situation on our hands. They look at
Nicaragua and see Castro clones. We look at Nicaragua and see years of
repression and inequity.''

For decades, foreign policy in Congress has been dominated by legislators who
were nurtured by the crusading spirit of World War II and the cold war. The new
generation has been shaped by the idealism of the Kennedy years and the
disillusionment of Vietnam. To their critics, they are terminally soft-headed,
unwilling or unable to recognize the dangers of imperialistic Communism.

''Not only is their attitude naive and immature,'' said Senator Orrin G. Hatch,
Republican of Utah, ''it disregards 50 years of aggressive Soviet behavior.''

But the younger lawmakers feel that their experiences are more relevant to
current problems. As Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, put
it: ''We won no clear victories, and we were far more sensitized to the
parochial nature of a lot of conflict. We had no nice enemies like Hitler, who
could coalesce everbody against a clear, pure evil.''

The Peace Corps Training

Joining Senators Dodd and Tsongas as highly visible and outspoken members of the
new generation are two House members, Representatives Michael D. Barnes,
Democrat of Maryland, and Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts. Here is
some background information on the four:

* Senator Tsongas, 41 years old, worked as a Peace Corps training instructor
after his tour as a volunteer. Elected to the Senate in 1978, he is a member of
the Foreign Relations Committee and coauthor, with Senator Dodd, of a proposal
that would require prior Congressional approval of virtually any Administration
moves in Latin America.

* Senator Dodd, 37, served as a Peace Corps volunteer in the Dominican Republic.
Also a member of the Foreign Relations Committee, he is promoting a resolution
advocating negotiations between the El Salvador Government and the leftist
guerrillas.

* Representative Barnes, 38, studied international relations in Geneva and,
while in the Marine Corps, marched in antiwar protests.  He is chairman of the
Latin American subcommittee of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and author of
a resolution urging the Administration to stay out of Nicaragua.

* Representative Studds, 44, is a former Foreign Service officer and civil
rights activist who won one of the first antiwar campaigns for Congress in 1970.
A member of Mr. Barnes's subcommittee, he is leading an effort to cancel
American aid to El Salvador on the basis of that country's human rights record.

Not all youthful members of Congress share the views of this group, and not all
older legislators disagree with them. Moreover, they sometimes differ among
themselves on specific issues.

But they all bear one distinguishing mark: a reluctance to play the ''good
soldier,'' as Mr. Studds put it, to simply accept the wisdom of the White House
or the Congressional leadership on foreign policy matters. Their reason, they
say, is experience.

''For us, it is conventional wisdom that the President of the United States
lies,'' said Mr. Studds. ''That was unthinkable before the 60's.''

They do not agree with the popular thesis that the United States should just
''stay out'' of Latin America, a view expressed by 60 percent of those surveyed
in a recent New York Times/CBS News poll.  But they insist this does not mean
they are isolationists or ''America Firsters.''

Carter's 'Positive Start'

They favor economic aid over military aid and generally support President
Reagan's recent proposal to increase aid and trade relations with Latin America.
But economic aid, they add, must be combined with a concern for human rights.

Mr. Barnes expresses a shared belief when he says, ''Jimmy Carter made a very
positive start in having the United States stand for something. The people in
Latin American were beginning, just beginning, to perceive an alternative to the
Cuban model. I'm afraid we've been set back badly in the last year.''

Although the new generation has been frustrated so far in pushing any of its
Latin American proposals through Congress, the last word has not yet been heard.
''I've vowed to myself,'' said Representative Studds, ''that Congress will not
go home this fall without voting on this issue.''

''We've fired a warning shot,'' Senator Tsongas added. ''The Administration
knows we're here. They have to take us into account.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senators Paul Tsongas and Christopher Dodd

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPUS POLITICAL ACTIVITY SHOWS SIGNS OF A SURGE

BYLINE: By WILLIAM E. SCHMIDT

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1775 words


For the first time since nearly a decade ago, when extensive protests against
the Vietnam War were convulsing the nation, there are signs this spring of a
renewed political activism on college and university campuses.

From Columbia University in New York City to the University of California at
Berkeley, a variety of issues, ranging from the role of the United States
Government in Central America to concern over the proliferation of nuclear
weapons, are increasingly the focus of attention and discussion, including
protest rallies, letter-writing campaigns, pamphlets and petitions.

Thousands of students recently joined a series of nationwide marches and rallies
to protest the United States' policy on Central America. And last week in
Philadelphia 200 student government leaders representing the nation's 42 largest
universities met to plan continuing opposition to the Reagan Administration's
threatened cutbacks in student financial aid.

The number of students involved is still relatively small. And, some educators
say, unlike the 60's, when students were in the vanguard of the antiwar and
civil rights movements, the emerging political sensibility among students today
seems more diffuse and less well defined.

Reflection of Uncertainty

But in the view of some educators, in that sense, perhaps, the mood on campuses
is a reflection of the larger debate and uncertainty in the nation as a whole
over such disparate issues as the economy, events in El Salvador and the
proliferation of nuclear weapons.

''Unlike the antiwar and civil rights protests of the 1960's, which were more
related to moral issues, the increased level of political awareness and activism
we are seeing among students today seems more tied to the economy,'' said Henry
Johnson, the vice president for student affairs at the University of Michigan in
Ann Arbor. ''A lot of students are anxious and angry because they feel
threatened. They see the support systems for their own economic opportunities
slipping away.''

As a result, Mr. Johnson and others suggest, it is not altruism that is moving
some students to speak out today but, rather, selfinterest.

''It's a logical outgrowth of the kind of energy we've seen concentrated on jobs
and careers in recent years,'' Mr. Johnson said. ''Now, as some of those
possibilities recede because of the economy, as the horn of plenty looms less
plentiful, there is stress. And stress, in turn, generates concern.''

Parallels to Vietnam Era

To some, even sharper parallels between the mood now and in the Vietnam era are
suggested.  ''The proposed cutbacks in financial aid are affecting students
today the same way the threat of the draft affected them during the Vietnam
period,'' said Kaye Howe, the assistant chancellor for academic services at the
University of Colorado. ''As a result, there is today a level of concern about
the nature of politics and the political system that we haven't seen in a long
time.''

Cuts in the Federal student loan program are expected to remain an active issue
on many campuses, although a group of key members of Congress has expressed
opposition to any such cuts, at least over the next year.

Yesterday about 1,500 people, including about 800 students, most of them from
Yale University, rallied in New Haven to protest proposed cuts in student aid.
In early March, about 5,000 students from around the country went to Washington
to rally and lobby against the proposed aid cuts.

''Nothing is final yet,'' said Steve Villano, a senior at the University of
Colorado, where a statewide student rally to protest the threatened cuts in aid
is planned for Wednesday. ''We've got to keep on pressing and stay on top of
this issue right through the budget hearings.''

New Mood Not Seen Everywhere

That there is growing student unhappiness over the proposed financial aid
cutbacks was recognized last week by Democratic Party officials, who said they
were organizing a nationwide voter registration campaign aimed at attracting a
million college students by November.

If there is a new mood on campuses, however, it is not apparent to everyone. At
Harvard, students and faculty members say that the campus is as quiet as it has
ever been, with students focusing on their studies because of the tightened job
market and fewer openings in graduate schools.

At Columbia University, Wallace Gray, a professor of English and comparative
literature, said that many students there continued to live, for the most part,
''in a private domain and rarely take an active role in political activities.''

However, Mr. Gray said he also foresees the potential for increasing student
activism because ''the domestic economy and political situation is directly
affecting them, so they are going to have to get involved.''

Mass Protests Not Predicted

Administrators, students and faculty members are not suggesting that campuses
are on the verge of the kind of mass protests or violence that characterized the
movement against the Vietnam War.  But, at the same time, some argue that
increased attention being paid to political issues seems to indicate a change.

For example, at the University of California at Berkeley, which was at the
forefront of the student protest movement in the early 1960's, tables in Sproul
Plaza carry literature, petitions and pamphlets on El Salvador, the nuclear arms
issue and student aid. Three thousand students attended an anti-Reagan rally
there Jan. 20, the first anniversary of President Reagan's inauguration.

At the University of Michigan, there have been a series of teachins on El
Salvador, while other students have attempted to revive the issue of
military-related research on campus.

''It's nothing compared to the late 1960's around here,'' said David Meyer, a
junior who is editor of the campus newspaper, The Michigan Daily. ''But Reagan
and the budget cuts are a growing theme here, because I think a lot of people
are scared, scared for the future of their education.''

Cuts in student aid, as well as draft registration and El Salvador, have
generated more activism at Wesleyan University in Middleton, Conn., than existed
in the recent past, according to students there. Last month 600 students, about
a fourth of the student body, went to Washington to participate in National
Student Lobbying Day.

More Groups Are Forming

At Columbia, the number of political and community organizing groups applying
for membership at Earl Hall, the campus religious center and a traditional focus
of political activity, has increased this year, according to Donald P. Kent, the
center's assistant director.

At the University of Colorado in Boulder, eight new student groups, advocating a
variety of causes ranging from nonintervention in El Salvador to the protection
of endangered species, applied for space this spring in the University Memorial
Center, the student union complex.

''There is more political interest and more political debate,'' said Stephen
Edelen, a senior who is chairman of Students for a Better America, a
conservative political organization that formed last fall and has more than 150
members. ''And the reason we decided to organize,'' he went on, ''was to be sure
that both sides of every issue receive a fair and rigorous analysis.''

Officials at the university said that the increased activism reversed a trend of
recent years, when the number of political groups on campus was declining.

''Though the mainstream of the campus remains very conservative, you can sense a
growing undercurrent here,'' said Jim Schaefer, the director of the Memorial
Center, who has been an observer of campus political behavior since he came to
the school as a student in 1963.  ''It's a combination of things -the financial
aid cutbacks, draft registration, the softer job market, worry about the
environment, the El Salvador thing.''

Vietnam and El Salvador

In Washington, D.C., a crowd estimated by the police at about 23,000 marched and
rallied just over a week ago in protest of the United States' policy in El
Salvador. Some students said they had been drawn to the event as an opportunity
for meeting friends and for sightseeing. Others said it reflected a growing
political awareness among their generation.

About 200 students from Princeton University attended the Washington protest,
but student activism there remains muted. For example, just recently the newly
formed Committee Against Intervention in El Salvador managed to draw 250
students to a campus rally, out of 4,400 students.

And last month, except at Dartmouth, all the student newspapers at the eight Ivy
League colleges published a joint declaration calling for the end of United
States military aid to El Salvador. It was the first time since 1969, during the
Vietnam War, that student editors of Ivy League newspapers had joined in a
statement opposing United States involvement in another country.

Conference in North Dakota

Even at the University of North Dakota in Grand Forks, a campus that has never
been synonymous with activism, the student government is helping to organize an
upcoming conference on world peace and the danger of nuclear proliferation.

On some issues, like El Salvador and nuclear weapons proliferation, much of the
organizaing and concern has been generated among groups outside the campus. The
Roman Catholic Church, for example, has been especially outspoken on nuclear
weapons.

''The antinuclear movement is very, very big in this area,'' said Brad
Blackwell, a co-president of the student government at the University of
Colorado. ''But the leadership is not with the students.''

What that suggests to Mr. Blackwell is that the issues moving students today are
those that affect them directly.  ''The threat of financial aid cutbacks, of a
softer job market - these are the things are that are causing students to become
restive,'' he said. ''Then, when they see a lot of Federal money and energy
going into El Salvador, into something they don't believe in, their anger spills
over into that issue.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of student demonstrators

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 6, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

GROMYKO, IN 2 DAYS OF TALKS WITH YUGOSLAVS, FINDS RELATIONS GOOD

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 703 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Yugoslavia, April 5


The Soviet Union and Yugoslavia ended two days of talks here today. Yugoslav
officials said the two sides had agreed that relations were good but that
constant efforts were needed to keep them that way.

The Soviet delegation was headed by Foreign Minister Andrei A.  Gromyko, the
first member of the Soviet leadership to visit here since President Tito's death
two years ago. Yugoslav leaders apparently stressed in their meetings that there
had been no change in the independent policy Yugoslavia had followed during the
Tito era.

Mr. Gromyko met Sunday and today with Foreign Minister Josip Vrhovec, and
Yugoslav officials said the two had agreed that continued contacts on all levels
helped to clarify differences between the two countries on ''certain unresolved
world issues.'' They did not elaborate, but they were believed to be alluding to
Soviet intervention in Afghanistan and Soviet-backed Vietnam's dominant role in
Cambodia, both of which have been criticied here.

Respect for Independence Affirmed

Tanyug, the Yugoslav press agency, said Mr. Gromyko had affirmed Soviet respect
for Yugoslavia's independent policies.  Mr. Gromyko discussed economic and other
relations with Prime Minister Veselin Djuranovic. HHe also met with President
Sergej Kraigher and with Dusan Dragosavac, the party leader, before his
scheduled departure on Tuesday.

Yugoslav informants said that, in today's discussions, Mr. Gromyko promised that
the Soviet Union would support Yugoslavia and other third world countries in
their bid for economic talks between industrialized and developing nations.

They said Yugoslav-Soviet economic cooperation was discussed only in general
terms, with details left to a joint economic committee due to meet later this
month.

Expanding commerce between the two countries, expected to total $7 billion this
year, has helped Yugoslavia overcome economic problems.  But officials here have
expressed concern about apparent shifts in Soviet demand for Yugoslav goods,
reported shortfalls in Soviet oil supplies and possible consequences of
overdependence on the Soviet Union as Yugoslavia's leading trading partner.

An official said the Soviet Union was seeking more deliveries of food and
consumer goods from Yugoslavia instead of ships, machinery and capital goods.

----

New Albanian Ethnic Unrest

Le Monde, Paris

BELGRADE, April 5 - New anti-Government demonstrations have flared in
Yugoslavia's Albanian ethnic province of Kosovo.  The Yugoslav Government is
said to believe that it faces an attempt at counterrevolution. It appears
determined to apply a policy of force to keep the demonstrations in check and at
the same time to speed economic and social assistance to the area in the hope of
obtaining a return to peaceful conditions.

The latest outbreak came on Saturday when several hundred youths gathered in a
park in Urosevac and, shouting anti-Yugoslav slogans, started a march. Security
forces dispersed them without injury and made some arrests.

The town is 25 miles south of Pristina, the seat of a university that is a
principal center of unrest. The student union there is reported to resound
nightly with demands for a separate Albanian ethnic republic of Kosovo and
unification with Albania. Kosovo now has the status of an ethnic province within
Yugoslavia's Serbian republic.

According to official sources, 401 Yugoslav Albanians were convicted in 1981 and
the first two months of 1982 of hostile activities, and 105 others are under
investigation. In the same period, the police are said to have dismantled 40
clandestine organizations, several of which were accused of being in contact
with security agencies in Albania.

Because of the continuing unrest, 4,000 to 5,000 people have reportedly left
Kosovo in the last few months. A recent census disclosed that 50,000 Serbs and
Montenegrins had left the province since 1971.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 6, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

A TIME FOR RELIGION

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS, April 2


Spring has always been a good time of year in the religious goods business.
Churches buy new altar linens to spruce up for Easter, parents and grandparents
purchase communion veils and confirmation gifts and families buy Haggadahs and
seder plates for Passover.

This year sales are better than ever. ''When times are tough,'' saidKay Hall,
owner of a store that sells religious gifts here on a suburban shopping strip,
''people want religion.'' They want Bibles, prayer books, records by singing
monks and plastic St. Christopher figures for their dashboards.

They want crucifix necklaces and patron saint medals, rosaries and Sacred Heart
of Jesus wall plaques, Infant of Prague figurines and Charisma magazine. They
want menorahs and mezuzas, taped Easter blessings cassettes and Frisbees that
say, ''It's Fun Being A Christian.''

Mrs. Hall's store, Hall's House of Gifts, has been in business for 25 years, and
she has seen ups and downs. These are times when customers come into the shop
and tell her their woes.

''A man gets laid off,'' said Mrs. Hall, ''and his family starts to pray. They
need things to pray with and in front of, so they come to us.'' The recession
has dramatically reduced sales of her secular items, such as Hummel figurines,
but sales of religious gifts continue to grow. ''Things are bad enough out
there,'' she said ''that people are shoplifting our Madonnas.''

Traveling around the New York area, one sees car dealerships, restaurants and
factories great and small that have closed, victims of the recession. But the
hard times are giving rise to more new religious goods stores with names like
the Lord's Library, Freda's Deliverance, Living Waters, the Country Parson, New
Horizons and His Place.

Not far from Mrs. Hall's store, a competitor has opened in the White Plains Mall
amid other stores catering to the modern suburbanite: Record World, Radio Shack,
Modern Bridal and the Complete Golfer. Dennis O'Connell, owner of the new Burns
& O'Connell religious gifts and church supplies store, said his customers were
worried about the economy and ''have a sense that life is degenerating all the
time.''

In a Yonkers plant, laminated Last Supper wall plaques roll off the assembly
line and workers put in overtime. Business here at the John Brandi Company on
St. Casimir Avenue has never been better. ''We bottomed out during the Vietnam
years,'' the owner, John Brandi, said, ''but now the whole industry is on the
upswing. The 'God Is Dead' thing just proved unsuccessful.

''Not that we trade on other people's miseries,'' he said, ''but with
unemployment and all the rest, people are turning to God.'' Pointing to cases of
No. 4500's (framed ''Head of Christ'' pictures) that were being shipped out to
Idaho and New Jersey, he added: ''We're not forcing it on anybody. People are
walking into stores in Boise and Paramus and asking for it.''

''In troubled times,'' he said, walking past stacks of hundreds of different
pictures of Christ - at Gethsemane, at the United Nations, talking to his
disciples, talking to forlorn-looking teen-agers - ''people need to pray to
somebody, to have someone to turn to, and it's not going to be Ronald Reagan.''

Some of the new stores carry a selection of ''pop faith'' items, such as
Frisbees, yo-yos, sunglasses, T-shirts, tote bags, mugs, cigarette lighters,
money clips, key chains and nail clippers imprinted with passages from the
Bible. There are ''Bowler's Prayer'' plaques, figurines of Santa Claus with the
Christ Child and ''Honk If You Love Jesus'' bumper stickers.

Those who carry these items maintain that they are more relevant to some of
their younger customers than, say, a bust of Jesus wearing a crown of thorns
with blood and tears running down his cheeks. Mrs.  Hall is sympathetic to this
argument - ''Much of religion is so frozen, cold, staid and predictable,'' she
said - but something keeps her from stocking most of these items.

Proprietors play down the role of such merchandise in their business resurgence.
''People are just more open about their religion,'' said Mr. O'Connell.

''Now,'' said Mr. O'Connell, ''even sales of religious statues are increasing.''
Arthur Brown, an owner of the Sikora and Sons religious goods store in Passaic,
N.J., has also noticed the trend. ''Customers are once again coming in and
asking for Last Supper prints for their dining rooms,'' he said.

The Christian Booksellers Association, which includes about 3,000 of the
estimated 5,500 religious goods stores nationwide, reports its membership
increasing by more than 500 a year, with about 90 percent of the new members
being new stores. The executive director, John Bass, said that some of the most
dramatic sales increases were occurring in the areas of New Jersey, Michigan,
Ohio and Indiana hardest hit by unemployment.

''There is a return to religious belief,'' he said, ''and the economic downturn
is a major reason.'' ''This is a scared business,'' said Mrs. Hall. ''Business
is good now because people are scared.'' A woman in the shop examined a
translucent Madonna and Child night light. She said it was not for a child's
room, but for hers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Sandra Ross in Burns & O'Connell store in White
Plains

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 6, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TV: 'MEDAL OF HONOR RAG' A VETERAN'S PROBLEMS

BYLINE: By JOHN J. O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 18, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 809 words


TOM COLE'S ''Medal of Honor Rag,'' tonight's ''American Playhouse'' presentation
on WNET-TV at 9 o'clock, was inspired by a true story.  Dwight Johnson grew up
in a Detroit slum. He was an altar boy. He was gentle, witty and easygoing.
Serving in Vietnam, he went berserk and killed several enemy soldiers after
discovering the deaths of his buddies in a tank from which he had just been
transferred. Back home, he became a hero, complete with a Medal of Honor, but
readjusting to normal life proved impossible. He was killed in what apparently
was his first attempt at a store holdup.

Mr. Cole's play takes place in 1971, at Valley Forge Army Hospital, and it is
largely confined to a single room. He has devised a fictitious encounter between
a New York psychiatrist who specializes in ''grief, impacted grief,'' and a
seriously troubled war hero named Dale (D.J.) Jackson. The two characters
perform a psychological ballet in which all their contacts are tenuous but
crucial.

D.J. is bright, suspicous and embittered. The psychiatrist is patient and
insistent, wanting to understand his patient so that he might understand
himself. It turns out that both men are suffering from ''survivor guilt.'' D.J.
is sarcastic, noting that ''I am what you call a hot property in this man's army
- an authentic hero, a credit to my race.'' The psychiatrist treads carefully,
sometimes belaboring the obvious. Considering the story of D.J. and his Vietnam
buddies, he solemnly explains, ''You don't know why you're alive and they are
dead.''

This is one of the explored themes, applicable to just about all survivors.
Others are especially pertinent to the Vietnam veteran.  Most notably, Mr. Cole
has pointed out:

''In this conflict, there were no parades or ceremonies to redeem the returned
warrior, to say, 'We forgive you; you are now once again a son, a husband, a
father, and not a killer.' That omission left the Vietnam War veteran with an
overwhelming psychological burden.''

''Medal of Honor Rag'' was first staged in 1975 in Boston. It has since been
produced in theaters around the country, including at Fort Bragg, N.C., where
last month it was presented as a tribute to the Vietnam veteran before an
approving audience of mostly military men and women. Although its
research-and-development seams are not entirely concealed, the personal
confrontation is always absorbing, sometimes powerful.

This television production by Joyce Chopra reflects unusual care and
thoughtfulness. Lloyd Richards, the director, has refused to indulge in a single
moment of emotional pyrotechnics. He uses enormous restraint to heighten the
intensity of the situation.

And the actors are superb. Damien Leake plays Dale Jackson, a role he has played
in stage productions. He is shrewd and confused, tortured and threatening,
vulnerable and stubborn - all at the same time. As the psychiatrist, Hector
Elizondo conveys a mixture of professional efficiency and human compassion with
unerring skill.

Also this evening, at 10 o'clock on NBC-TV, George Schlatter, creator of such
television entertainments as ''Laugh-In'' and ''Real People,'' has now decided
to deal with women of the 1980's in a series called ''Shape of Things.'' A cast
of comedy regulars whose names have yet to become household words will be joined
each week by a contingent of guest stars, who will join in the various sketches,
skits and musical numbers.

The four women heading tonight's festivities are all connected with past,
present or future television series -Betty White, Morgan Fairchild, Sarah
Purcell and Lynn Redgrave. Vic Tayback provides the lovable-tough-guy male
presence.

Most of the other male positions are monopolized by eight ''exotic'' dancers
called the Chippendales, discovered at a Los Angeles nightclub. Baring their
exceptionally well-developed pectoral muscles, they slither around in tights or
briefs, bringing new meanings to the television art of jiggly. At no time can
they be found wearing a shirt. The women spectators, on stage and in the studio
audience, squeal with undisguised delight.

Meanwhile, the premiere edition comes down solidly on the side of the proposed
equal-rights amendment. At one point, Miss White appears before a giant American
flag in a General Patton uniform, growling that there can be no more
pussyfooting in getting behind the campaign for the amendment.

Of course, later on, the audience -or soundtrack - explodes with cheers and
whistles when the shapely Misses Fairchild and Purcell briefly resort to some
bumps and grinds. Exotic males or no, some things will evidently remain the same
- even in the 1980's.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Damion Leake

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 7, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EX-JUSTICE ABE FORTAS DIES AT 71; SHAPED HISTORIC RULINGS ON RIGHTS

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 2097 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 6


Former Associate Justice Abe Fortas, who resigned from the Supreme Court in
1969, died of a ruptured aorta Monday night at his home here.

At 71 years of age, he maintained an active law practice. Just two weeks before
his death, Mr. Fortas returned to the Supreme Court to argue a case for the
first time since his resignation. He said in an interview that he planned to
keep on practicing law ''until my clients retire me or the Lord retires me.''

Clamor Over $20,000 Fee

Mr. Fortas resigned from the Court amid an uproar over disclosures that he had
accepted a $20,000 fee from a foundation controlled by Louis E. Wolfson, a
friend and former client who at the time of the payment was under Federal
investigation for violating securities laws.

His resignation ended a stormy three-and-a-half-year tenure on the Court, which
included an abortive effort by President Johnson to name him Chief Justice, and
made Mr. Fortas the only Justice in the history of the Supreme Court to resign
under the pressure of public criticism.

For the rest of his life, and conceivably in the history books as well, that
fact overshadowed the accomplishments of a long and brilliantly successful legal
career.

A Washington Insider

His service on the Court was in fact only a chapter, by many accounts a
reluctant one, in a career as a consummate Washington insider. Mr. Fortas, who
was a protege of Associate Justice William O. Douglas when he was teaching at
the Yale Law School, arrived in Washington with the generation of young lawyers
who helped shape and carry out the New Deal.

He went on to become a founding partner of one of the capital's most successful
law firms and to serve as a friend and confidant to one of Washington's most
successful political practitioners, Lyndon B. Johnson.

Their relationship began with legal assistance that Mr. Fortas rendered to
Johnson's Senate campaign in 1948. Mr. Fortas was one of the first people
Johnson called from Dallas on Nov. 22, 1963, and he was waiting at Andrews Air
Force Base to meet the new President on the night of President Kennedy's
assassination.

In 1965, shortly before Johnson named him to the Court, Mr. Fortas listed
himself in the new edition of ''Who's Who in the South and Southwest'' as
''Presidential adviser'' and gave his address as: ''Care of the White House,
1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, Washington, D.C.''

Mr. Fortas was reluctant to give up private practice and turned down Johnson's
initial offer of a seat on the Court. Finally, the President summoned his friend
to the White House and told him, ''I'm sending 50,000 boys to Vietnam and I'm
sending you to the Supreme Court.'' The vacancy was created by the resignation
of Arthur J.  Goldberg, whom Mr. Johnson had persuaded to leave the Court to
become the nation's chief delegate to the United Nations.

His new job meant a drop in income from an estimated $200,000 a year to $39,500.
His wife, Carolyn E. Agger, a highly successful tax lawyer, was earning a high
income herself, but the difference was still substantial, and Mr. Fortas made
pointed jokes about the low level of judicial compensation.

Chosen to Argue Major Case

The Supreme Court was familiar territory to the new Associate Justice. Three
years earlier, the Court had appointed him to argue on behalf of Clarence Earl
Gideon, an indigent Florida prisoner, who had been convicted in the absence of a
lawyer of breaking into a pool hall. The case promised to be a major
constitutional test of the right to counsel, and the assignment was an honor.

Mr. Fortas and younger lawyers at his firm, Arnold, Fortas & Porter, spent
months preparing Mr. Gideon's appeal. Their brief, and Mr. Fortas's oral
argument, came to be regarded as models of craftsmanship. The Court ruled
unanimously that the Constitution requires the states to assure free counsel for
the poor in every serious criminal case.

On the Court, Mr. Fortas established himself as a member of the then dominant
liberal bloc. Perhaps his most important opinion came in a juvenile rights case
in 1966 called In re Gault, which established for the first time that children
facing court proceedings are entitled to many of the constitutional protections
enjoyed by adults.

''Under our Constitution,'' Justice Fortas wrote, ''the condition of being a boy
does not justify a kangaroo court.''

Role in Rights Decisions

The Court in the late 1960's, under the leadership of Chief Justice Earl Warren,
was in the midst of a historic expansion of individual rights, and Justice
Fortas was a full participant in those decisions.

He also remained an active participant in the high councils of state. President
Johnson never stopped relying on him for advice, and he never stopped providing
it, whether the subject was judicial nominations or foreign policy.

Johnson consulted with Justice Fortas on such matters as steel price increases,
transportation strikes and, increasingly, the war in Vietnam.

He once called Albert L. Nickerson, chairman of the Mobil Oil Company, to
transmit the President's annoyance with the public prediction by a business
group that Mr. Nickerson also chaired that Government spending on the war in
Vietnam would be $5 billion more than the Administration had publicly predicted.

''I am a Justice of the Supreme Court, but I am still a citizen,'' Justice
Fortas said in defense of his action when that incident came to light.

Bid to Make Him Chief Justice

Criticism of Justice Fortas's continued closeness to President Johnson grew and
played a role in the failure of the President's effort to give his friend the
Chief Justiceship.

In 1968, when Chief Justice Warren told Johnson that he wanted to retire, the
President sent Justice Fortas's name to the Senate. The Senate Judiciary
Committee grappled with the nomination over the summer and it was late
September, with the Presidential election campaign in full swing, before debate
began on the Senate floor.

Mr. Fortas was criticized for his outside activities, his judicial philosophy,
and for what a number of senators viewed as excesses of the Warren Court.
Partisan politics played a role, too, with Republicans hoping to keep the seat
open in the event that Richard M. Nixon won the Presidency.

On Oct. 2, after his supporters failed to end a filibuster on the Senate floor,
Mr. Fortas asked Johnson to withdraw his name to end what he called the
''destructive and extreme assaults upon the Court.''

Johnson complied, calling the Senate's action ''historically and
constitutionally tragic.'' The post that was to have been Justice Fortas's went
to Warren E.  Burger a year later.

Resigns After Disclosure

A second crisis confronted Justice Fortas barely seven months after the Senate
debacle: the disclosure, in Life Magazine, of his financial relationship with
Louis E. Wolfson. The details emerged rapidly after the initial disclosure on
May 4, 1969. Justice Fortas submitted his resignation on May 14.

Mr. Fortas accepted the $20,000 fee from the Wolfson family foundation in early
1966, soon after he joined the Court, at a time when Mr. Wolfson was under
active Federal investigation. The fee was to be the first installment of an
annual $20,000 payment that was to continue for the rest of Mr. Fortas's life
and, after his death, for the rest of his wife's life.

However, he canceled the arrangement and returned the fee later that year after
Mr. Wolfson was indicted on stock fraud charges. Mr.  Fortas's obligations in
return for the money were not specified except that he was to help shape the
program and activities of the foundation.

When the arrangement came to light in 1969, Mr. Wolfson was in prison and there
were cries in Congress for Mr. Fortas's impeachment. Mr. Fortas continued to
insist that he had done nothing improper. In the letter of resignation he sent
to Chief Justice Warren, he said that although he and Mr. Wolfson had on
occasion discussed Mr. Wolfson's ''problems,'' he had never interceded on his
friend's behalf. However, he said, ''it seems clear to me that it is not my duty
to remain on the Court, but rather to resign in the hope that this will enable
the Court to proceed with its vital work free from extraneous stress.''

Blackmun Gets Seat

President Nixon nominated first Clement F. Haynsworth and then G.  Harrold
Carswell to the vacancy. When both nominations failed, he nominated Harry A.
Blackmun. Justice Blackmun today called his predecessor ''a person of great
legal ability and talent'' who was ''extraordinarily nice to me on every
occasion.''

Chief Justice Burger issued a statement praising Justice Fortas's ''illustrious
career as a member of the bar and in public office.'' Associate Justices William
J. Brennan Jr. and Thurgood Marshall, who both served with Justice Fortas, said
in a joint statement: ''He was not only an esteemed colleague but also a close
friend. We shall miss him.''

Abe Fortas was born June 19, 1910 in Memphis, the youngest of five children. His
father, William, was a cabinetmaker, an Orthodox Jew who had immigrated from
England.

Lifelong Interest in Music

His father encouraged him to take violin lessons, and the boy was soon playing
the violin at dances to earn money for college. He retained a serious interest
in music and musicians all his life. He played in an informal chamber music
group in Washington, and once remarked that music is ''one thing I can't live
without.''

He attended public schools in Memphis and received his undergraduate degree from
Southwestern College there in 1930. He graduated in 1933 from Yale Law School,
first in his class and editor in chief of the Yale Law Journal.

William O. Douglas, who was then teaching at Yale, arranged an assistant
professorship for Mr. Fortas, who spent the next four years commuting between
the law school and Washington, where Mr. Douglas had gone to become chairman of
the Securities and Exchange Commission. Mr. Fortas took on part-time assignments
with the commission and other New Deal agencies.

In 1935, he married Carolyn E. Agger, whom he persuaded to go to Yale Law
School. She graduated second in her class, and is now a partner at Mr. Fortas's
former law firm, which is known now as Arnold & Porter.

Represented Big Corporations

He started the firm in 1946 in partnership with Thurman Arnold, who had headed
the antitrust division in the Department of Justice. The firm flourished,
representing the Washington interests of a number of the country's biggest
corporations.

Before going into private practice, Mr. Fortas held a variety of jobs in the
Roosevelt Administration, including general counsel of the Public Works
Administration and Under Secretary of the Interior.  The Interior Secretary,
Harold L. Ickes, introduced Mr. Fortas to Lyndon Johnson, then a young
Congressman. ''I knew they were both comers and could help one another,'' Mr.
Ickes said years later.

In 1948, Johnson won the Democratic nomination for the United States Senate by a
margin of 87 votes, and his opponent persuaded a Federal judge to keep Johnson's
name off the ballot in the general election so an investigation could be
conducted.

Helped Johnson Stay on Ballot

Johnson asked Mr. Fortas to help him, and the young lawyer managed to persuade
Hugo L. Black, the Supreme Court Justice with supervisory authority over the
Federal courts in Texas, to restore Johnson's name to the ballot. Johnson won
the election.

In World War II, Mr. Fortas joined the Army but was discharged after a month
because of an eye ailment.  After his resignation from the Court, Mr. Fortas did
not return to his former firm. He practiced with a five-lawyer firm, Fortas &
Koven.

He and his wife had no children. They lived in Georgetown and had a summer house
in Connecticut.  The funeral service is expected to be private, with a public
memorial service planned for later this spring.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Abe Fortas Photo of Abe Fortas with President
Johnson

TYPE: obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 7, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REPAYMENT BY POLAND POSTPONED

BYLINE: By JOHN TAGLIABUE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: BONN, April 6


Poland and the Western banks to which it owes money signed an agreement in
Frankfurt today to delay repayment of $2.4 billion that Poland failed to pay the
banks last year. Thus ended a months-long financial tug of war.

The agreement promises to save Poland from default and afford it an economic
breathing space, but it is also thought likely to open a more difficult chapter
in the country's financial ties with the West.

The signing clears the way for talks on rescheduling the repayments that Poland
is due to make this year, but the declaration of martial law in Poland in
December has made it likely that the banks will await directions from their
governments before reaching an accord on this debt.

In a statement after the ceremony today, Dresdner Bank of West Germany, leader
of the bank group, said the agreement was signed by Poland's Deputy Finance
Minister, Witold Bien; by the president of the Handlowy Bank for Foreign Trade,
Marian Minkiewicz, and by representatives of the 20 banks in a multinational
group that negotiated the agreement.

Initial Agreement in October

Polish officials and the banks had reached a general debtrescheduling agreement
in October, after months of difficult negotiations. But the signing was delayed
when Poland's collapsing economy and the martial law made it increasingly
difficult for Warsaw to meet interest payments for last year, which the Western
banks had made a condition for the signing.

Earlier last year, in April, Poland and 16 Western governments had agreed to
delay repayment of $2.6 billion owed by Poland to the governments.

Dresdner said that, under the agreement with the banks, Poland must repay this
year 5 percent, or about $120 million, of the total due last year. Then,
beginning in December 1985, Poland would begin payment of the other 95 percent,
or about $2.28 billion, in seven semiannual payments, Dresdner said. The
agreement would take effect May 10, provided Poland can pay about $50 million in
interest due since the beginning of 1982.

Since December, Poland has met 1981 interest payments of about $500 million,
fulfilling the banks' main condition for the signing.  Under the agreement,
Dresdner's Compagnie Luxembourgeoise de la Dresdner Bank will act as agent for
the 501 Western banks to account for the payments.

Dresdner said that ''negotiations between Poland and the Western banks on
capital due in 1982 should begin as soon as possible.'' But no date for the
start of such talks was set. The agreement today was the last legal hurdle to
the start of these talks.

Talks Due on 1982 Debt

Poland is said to owe Western governments and banks $10.4 billion in interest
and principal in 1982, about three-fourths of which is due to the banks. But
Polish officials have said they would only be able to repay about $2.2 billion
because of the economic slowdown.

West German and American bank officials in several European countries have said
preliminary talks with Poland on 1982 payments will begin soon, and a delegation
of bankers is expected to go to Warsaw in May.

But the December crackdown in Poland has immensely complicated the process.  The
Reagan Administration has been putting pressure on its European allies to
tighten credit restrictions against the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. In
January, North Atlantic Treaty Organization ministers meeting in Brussels agreed
to delay talks on resche@duling Poland's 1982 debt to NATO governments until
martial law was lifted.  At talks in Paris in March attended by representatives
of the 16 governments, there was little change in attitude.

Seeking a Clarification

West German bank officials in Frankfurt said that the banks were seeking a
clarification of the export credit policy that might offer the banks some
guidelines. The next opportunity for such clarification could be a meeting in
Paris May 6 and 7 of members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development to discuss renewal of an agrement on export credits.

Support for credits to Poland is said to be gaining in neutral countries such as
Austria, Switzerland and Sweden, and in several NATO countries as well. Those
who favor such credits argue that Poland will need such aid, as well as a
postponement in debt repayments, if it is to purchase the raw materials and
spare parts it needs to revive its economy and meet future commitments to the
West.

The gap between Poland's commitments and its means is causing growing skepticism
both here and in Poland that the country will ever be able to repay fully what
it owes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 8, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

INTERNATIONAL LAWYERS STUDY THE MUDDIED WATERS

BYLINE: By STUART TAYLOR Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 7


As Britain and Argentina move closer to what may become open hostilities over
the Falkland Islands, and the machinery of international law creaks and groans
in an effort to avert it, a few things seem clear to most international law
experts.

First, a war might be fought over the islands without either side declaring it.
Formal declarations of war have become largely obsolete since World War II and
are used, if at all, primarily for political purposes.

Second, the Argentine invasion of the Falklands last week was a blatant
violation of the United Nations Charter, as the Security Council implicitly
indicated in its resolution Saturday condemning it. But this does not mean the
United Nations is likely to do much about it, beyond passing resolutions and
serving as a site for diplomatic exchanges.

Third, international law has at best a limited role to play in any emerging
conflict in a world that is still governed by military might and balance-of
power diplomacy.

Experts Differ

Several experts also agreed that the British fleet steaming toward the Falklands
could legally use a degree of military force to recapture the islands, under the
Charter and international law, if diplomatic efforts fail to budge Argentina.
Others questioned this.

Argentina has justified its invasion of the islands on the basis of a
150-year-old claim to sovereignty and arguments that the British occupation of
the islands since 1833 and current efforts to retake them represent
''colonialism'' of the sort that various international bodies have condemned.

But whatever the merits of the Argentine claim of sovereignty, which many Latin
American nations support, or the force of its appeal to the anticolonial
sentiments in many nations, the international lawyers and scholars who were
interviewed agreed they could not justify the invasion as a matter of
international law.

At the same time, Roger Fisher, a Harvard Law School professor of international
law, said that the important function for international law was not to determine
''who was right and who was wrong yesterday,'' but ''what is the best process to
go through to determine who should do what next.''

Declarations 'Really Obsolete'

Argentina sent several thousand troops to take over the Falklands in a surprise
attack Friday without declaring war. And while Britain today announced a
blockade within a 200-mile war zone around the Falklands, to begin at dawn
Monday, there is considerable talk in London of waging war but not of issuing
formal declarations.

This reflects the general disuse into which much of the traditional etiquette of
armed conflict has fallen since World War II and the fact that war is illegal
under the United Nations Charter except for purposes of self-defense.

''Declarations of war are really obsolete both historically and legally,''
Andreas F. Lowenfeld, an international law professor at New York University,
said today. ''I'm sure Britain could declare war, but I'm not sure it wants to.
Once it declares war restraints are also off the other side.''

The Times of London has pointed out that a declaration of war might require
internment of Argentine citizens in Britain and similar treatment of the 17,000
British subjects in Argentina.

Combatants in most conflicts generally see little to be gained from a
declaration of war, according to Mr. Fisher, ''The costs tend to be high, making
it difficult to disentangle, raising obligations toward neutrals,'' he said.

Vietnam War Undeclared

There was no formal declaration of war when the United States sent soldiers to
Vietnam or when it launched more than a dozen military expeditions in the
Caribbean in this century. Nor were there formal declarations of war when
Britain, France and Israel invaded Egypt in 1956, or during many of the other
big and small wars since 1945.

''Whether either side has formally declared war or not, it is a war,'' an aide
to President Abolhassan Bani-Sadr of Iran said in September 1980 after Iraq
invaded disputed territory. But a State Department official pointed out today
that while the war goes on, the two countries ''still maintain diplomatic
missions in each others' capitals.''

''What is a formal declaration of war except a shot across the bow?'' the
official remarked.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 8, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
GOOD GUYS, BAD GUYS

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 844 words

DATELINE: PARIS


The argument about how the United States should behave toward friends and foes,
and indeed which is which, has broken out of the Washington corridors and gone
very public.

Worried about Congressional and general opposition, the Reagan Administration
has mounted a series of what some would call opinionmolding and others
propaganda sessions. Apart from a few especially sour notes, such as the fiasco
with the young Nicaraguan guerrilla, there is growing stridency in the attempt
to draw up sides.

One side calls attention to evidence of massacres and atrocities by governments
that the U.S. officially supports. The other side charges Communist conspiracy.

On occasion, proof that the insurgents are the real villains is offered in
results of their victories in such countries as Iran, Vietnam and Cambodia. The
suggestion is that the aftermath of revolutionary war is so awful that rebels
should be repressed with whatever force it takes.

Some less responsible people go much further. A reader sent a copy of his letter
published last month in the New Orleans Times-Picayune and States-Item.

He signed the letter Steve Rhinehart. It began, ''I am ready to blow a fuse over
the way the secret enemies and traitors of our country are trying to speed up
the Communist takeover of Central America. ...''

There is comment on ''the heartless liars of our corrupt media,'' but the
sharpest attacks are reserved for President Carter, who the letter said ''ceded
Nicaragua to Russia,'' and for unnamed senators and Congressmen who the writer
calls ''the most infamous and ignorant traitors the U.S. has ever spawned.''

The conclusion is that ''in just a few months, perhaps, our rights to our
ancestral freedoms may be doomed in the jungles of middle America. ...''

The point isn't how the U.S. ever acquired Nicaragua to cede or established
ancestral rights in middle America. It is the conviction that since the
opponents look all evil to the writer, the other side must be all good.

The good guys aren't labeled by white hats, handsome faces or unflinching
virtue, but they are to be recognized without fail as whoever is against the bad
guys.

This is a universal human trait. It is a major reason why American cowboy films
are so popular everywhere. Good and evil must be unmistakable, so spectators can
cheer and hiss with certainty.  Chinese opera follows the same principle, but
the villains are made up with white faces and the heroes with red.

Of course, it is a dream world, but the temptation is strong to impose it on
reality. A recent book about Guatemala by Stephen Schlesinger and Stephen
Kinzer, called ''Bitter Fruit,'' is an example of how even careful researchers
fall victim. They offer remarkable revelations about how the U.S. Government and
the United Fruit Company organized the overthrow of the Jacobo Arbenz regime in
1954, clearly bad, so they can't resist casting Mr. Arbenz as a liberal
moderate, a good guy, which he wasn't.

The trap can be disastrous. Government decisions, based on the thesis that the
enemy of my enemy is my friend but with long historic consequences scarcely
foreseen, are then often justified with an attempt to prove that what seems the
lesser evil is actually good. The distortion provokes an equal reaction, so that
critics of a dubious or ill-conceived policy impute only noble motives to the
guerrillas.

These are recipes for disillusion, revulsion and the silly but dreadfully
debilitating charges of subversion and treason, which marked the Joe McCarthy
era and seem to be surfacing again.

It should be obvious that there aren't that many good guys among people who take
up arms to seize or cling to power around the world.  The basic U.S. interest is
to achieve settlements where possible since violence always favors the
extremists, and to contain conflicts where they can't be resolved. If
intervention appears unavoidable, then it isn't only a matter of choosing sides
but of a clear, objective assessment of the chances of success.

Another letter quoted the late Col. Nguyen Be, who said that instead of trying
to calculate ways ''to get the people on our side,'' the U.S. would do better to
find a way ''to get on the people's side.'' Colonel Be was one of the few South
Vietnamese officers who applied that principle in his own country with
remarkable success, though limited and ultimately doomed by the failure of
superiors.

The U.S. evacuated him when Saigon fell, promising also to bring out his family,
who were stuck in Vung Tau. The promise was not kept. He died, alone and
despairing, in Washington last year.

His advice remains pertinent, not only in terms of morality but sheer avoidance
of disaster. If we can't figure out how to apply it, we're bound to wind up with
bad guys on both sides.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A PRIEST'S OBSESSION: 'THESE ARE OUR CHILDREN'

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 8


The Rev. Alfred Keane still recalls that moment on Christmas Eve, 1970, as he
prepared for midnight services in a small parish in the Korean port city of
Inchon.

''Suddenly I saw some pushing and shoving from the back and I was amazed to see
a bunch of American kids, black and white, some of them blond and blue-eyed,''
said Father Keane. ''My first reaction was an unkind thought - 'Hey, what are
those Army brats doing here?' Then the Koreans brought them up to me and I was
shocked to see how dirty they were, how they were shivering because they had no
warm clothes.  I asked the Koreans, 'Who are these kids,' and I was told that
they were honyana, which means, 'mixed blood.' ''

Out of that experience grew what Father Keane terms his ''obsession'' to help
the tens of thousands of children born of Asian women and American fathers. It
is this obsession that has led him to trudge over the corridors of Capitol Hill
to plead with, cajole and harangue Congressmen to allow the beleaguered children
to enter the United States.

''These children are ridiculed, harrassed, exploited, beaten,'' said Father
Keane, a 50-year-old Maryknoll priest who has spent more than 20 years in Korea.
''These are our children. How can we ignore them? They are ashamed of their
American faces. My God, why can't we do something for them?''

Number May Reach 80,000

Estimates vary, but there may be as many as 80,000 half-American children in
Korea and Southeast Asia, including 25,000 in Vietnam.  Currently, the
Immigration and Naturalization Service classifies them as foreigners seeking
entry to the United States, and not as daughters and sons of Americans, a
category that would give them a much higher entry priority.

Officials have feared a flood of immigrants and say that it would be very
difficult to prove that children were fathered by Americans as opposed to other
Westerners.

At this point, Father Keane's efforts center largely on similar bills sponsored
by Representative Stewart B. McKinney, a liberal Republican from Connecticut,
and Senator Jeremiah A. Denton, a conservative Alabama Republican who was a Navy
pilot and spent seven years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam. Their
measures would allow substantial numbers of these children to receive priority
status in seeking immigrant visas. The bills require that sponsors of the
children be legally and financially responsible for them for a period of years
to make certain that they are not added to welfare rolls.

''This is the year we've got to do something,'' says Father Keane.  ''There's
interest this year, I sense it, and if we don't do anything the kids will be
forgotten.''

Senate Hearings Pending

Currently, there are 168 co-sponsors of the House measure, and 26 co-sponsors of
the Senate one.  But the issue is somewhat in flux because of a new bill on
overall immigration policy sponsored by Senator Alan K. Simpson, Republican of
Wyoming, and Representative Romano L. Mazzoli, Democrat of Kentucky. Father
Keane bluntly told the Senator that the bill was unfair to the Asian-American
children because it did not sufficiently loosen entry requirements. As a result,
the Senate Subcommittee on Immigration and Refugee Policy, which is chaired by
Senator Simpson, is scheduled to hold hearings soon on the status of these
children.

''I began coming to Washington from Korea in 1977, spent three months here, and
people kept saying, 'Oh those kids really have a tough time,' '' said Father
Keane. ''The same thing in '78. What struck me was how pompous people were,
especially on the Senate side. They were smooth talkers but they didn't care.''

'I Love These Kids'

Last year, a Congressional aide told Father Keane that he was wasting his time
and that the only way to assist the children was to make their plight known to
the American people. ''I went down South,'' he said, ''I went through the
midlands, I talked to anyone who had a local radio station, I talked to two
people, I talked to ten people.''

This year Father Keane decided to spend virtually all his time in Washington.
''I go to as many offices on the Hill as I can,'' he went on. ''I ask to speak
to the Congressman or senator and, of course, they put me together with an
assistant. I talk about the kids. I said it won't cost us a penny to have the
kids come in, and I ask them to help cosponsor the McKinney or Denton bills. By
the end of the day, if I have a couple of co-sponsors I'm on a high. If I don't,
I'm very, very low.''

''I love these kids, and I'll work for them until I die,'' said the priest,
smiling. ''At first, when I met the children, I was mad because I saw what was
happening to them and I was crying because children suffering this way just
disturbs me so much. Now I suppose I just get mad a lot.''

He lifted his briefcase and found a letter by one of the youths in Korea. Father
Keane read a line: ''I only desire to walk tall and straight like any other
man.''

He folded the letter and said in a voice that cracked. ''Dignity is what they
want.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Father Keane

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 9, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

A CENTURY OF SHAKESPEARE IN NEW YORK

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words


When John Barrymore climbed into a suit of armor before the battle scene in a
1920 production of ''Richard III,'' he faced a problem.  The fight scene called
for running and jumping, dipping and dodging, and the armor weighed more than 50
pounds. To make matters worse, he wore a large wad of cloth on his left shoulder
to simulate King Richard's humped back.

Fortunately, a New Jersey metalworker had foreseen the problems. He built
intricate overlaps and hinges into the armor, distributing the weight evenly and
allowing Barrymore a wide range of movement. And the craftsman pounded out a
space over the left shoulder to accommodate Richard's hump.

Today, Barrymore's custom-fit armor can be seen at the Museum of the City of New
York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street, in ''The Bard on Broadway: Shakespeare on the
New York Stage.'' It stands among 28 costumes and more than 1,000 props,
photographs, stage designs, playbills and posters documenting more than a
century of Shakespeare in New York.

Othello Tunic From 1860

''We want to show off our collection,'' Wendy Warnken, curator of the
exhibition, said. ''It's a well-kept secret that we have the finest American
theatrical Shakespeareana collection in the world.''

The costumes are especially diverse, from an 1860's tunic worn by E.L. Davenport
in ''Othello,'' decorated with gold-bullion trim, to the dress worn by Marti
Maraden in the BAM Theater Company's 1980 ''The Winter's Tale''; it has a
fiberglass-reinforced breastplate.

In an elegant costume by Mariano Fortuny, the early 20th-century designer, the
worlds of theater and fashion are interwoven.  ''It was designed for a rich
woman to wear at a cocktail party anywhere in the world,'' according to MaryAnn
D. Smith, costume curator of the exhibition. ''Ethel Barrymore picked it up and
wore it in a 1922 production of 'Romeo and Juliet.' ''

Modern Garb for Burton

Miss Smith explained that the costume, in being uncorseted, had broken tradition
when it was introduced in the early 20's. An example of Fortuny's trademark -
silk pleating - is seen in two long inserts running down each side of the dress.
The pleating technique Fortuny used has long since been lost.

Despite the Fortuny costume's historical interest, Miss Smith said that one of
her favorites was the plain costume worn by Richard Burton in a sparsely
designed 1964 production of ''Hamlet.'' It consists of straight-legged wool
trousers and a pullover top.

''It was a modern concept at the time,'' Miss Smith said. ''Very undecorated,
very simplified. It looked more dramatic in production, but that's because of
who filled it. A mannequin could never do that.''

For theater buffs, the exhibition offers layer on layer of Broadway history.
Props, costumes and scripts once held by Broadway's great stars are scattered
around the room like artifacts from an archeological dig. There are daggers and
goblets and scrolls, an antique chest from an old ''The Merchant of Venice'' and
an acrylic wand from a modern ''A Midsummer Night's Dream.''

Memorable Photographs

There are photographs, as well. An impish Helen Hayes, for example, is captured
with Alex Courtney in her portrayal of Viola in the 1940 production of ''Twelfth
Night.'' Katharine Hepburn is shown stretching out in a scene from a 1950
production of ''As You Like It.'' In another photograph, Paul Robeson and Jose
Ferrer square off in their historic ''Othello'' of 1943.

Alfred Lunt and Lynn Fontanne are remembered in pictures from ''The Taming of
the Shrew,'' the only Shakespeare they ever performed in New York. Katharine
Cornell; Cornelia Otis Skinner; the Barrymores, Ethel, John and Lionel; the
Booths, Junius Brutus, Edwin, Junius Jr.  and the infamous John Wilkes, and many
others are in the pictures.

In several cases, now-famous actors are shown in leaner days. Tony Randall is
caught kissing Katharine Cornell's hand in a 1950 production of ''Antony and
Cleopatra.'' Sydney Greenstreet is amply represented in a couple of minor stage
roles. And a fresh-faced Dudley Moore is pictured on a 1962 playbill for
''Beyond the Fringe,'' a comedy revue that contained a Shakespeare spoof titled
''So That's The Way You Like It.''

Faded stars are also remembered. The best example, perhaps, is the team of E.H.
Sothern and Julia Marlowe. Their fame at the turn of the century knew no bounds
among theatergoers. In the 40's, Miss Marlowe donated a large collection of
props, costumes, photographs and promptbooks to the museum, many of which are in
the exhibition.

Mirror of Society

The theater's supporting crafts, especially stage and costume design, are
represented. In stage design, the watercolors of Charles Witham upstage all
competitors. His vividly colored and intricately detailed designs for Edwin
Booth's productions are works of art.

Often, the Shakespearean artifacts mirror the themes and passions of the society
that produced them. War, especially, seems to have etched its mark on
Shakespeare productions. A photograph of Len Cariou's 1969 ''Henry V'' shows the
''victorious'' King surrounded by brutally bloodied, sad-faced soldiers - an
ironic comment on America's involvement at the time in Vietnam.

''You can do anything to Shakespeare, and he'll survive,'' Miss Warnken said.
''You can do kiddy productions. You can do 'Macbeth' with a chorus line of
witches or give 'King Lear' a happy ending.  Shakespeare will come back. He
can't be beaten.''

The exhibition runs through Sept. 6. It is open Tuesday through Saturday from 10
A.M. to 4:45 P.M. and Sundays 1 to 4:45. It is closed Mondays. Admission is
free, but there is a suggested donation of $1. To reach the museum by bus, take
the M1, M2, M3 or M4 to Madison Avenue and 104th Street, and walk one block
west.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Barrymore as Hamlet in 1922 photo of
Maurice Evans as Richard III in 1937 (pg.C1)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 10, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

FEDERAL OFFERS 'WORLD OF BEN CALDWELL

BYLINE: By MEL GUSSOW

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 542 words


''The World of Ben Caldwell'' is far short of its billing as ''a dramatized
examination of the absurdity of the American dream and subsequent reality.''
This revue at the Henry Street Settlement's New Federal Theater is a random
collage of comedy skits by Mr. Caldwell.  The humor is fragmentary, but there
is, of all things, a deft impersonation of Richard Pryor by Morgan Freeman.

Mr. Freeman, most often seen in dramatic roles, does not attempt to mimic the
comedian, but he adopts an appropriate talking-to-himself speech pattern to suit
Mr. Caldwell's cleverly imitative patter. In common with his role-model, Mr.
Freeman underplays the outrageous as the everyday, especially in a stint as a
quietly vengeful Vietnam veteran. He doesn't want to be shipped home, but
demands to be sent back to the front in his wheelchair so he can do ''searchin'
and destroyin'.''

Reginald Vel Johnson and Garrett Morris each appear in the guise of Bill Cosby,
and Steve Coats is introduced as John Belushi, but their acts have nothing
whatever to do with those originals. They are simply middling comedy turns - and
Mr. Johnson, who is amusing in his own right, looks more like Fat Albert than
like Bill Cosby. The only other real attempt at an impersonation is the
Laurel-and-Hardy teamwork of Mr. Coats and B. Jerome Smith. Without looking
their parts, they come close to an imposture.

Interlarded among these appearances are sketches dealing with sex, racism and
religion. In the funniest one, Mr. Morris and Dianne Kirksey exchange erotic
insults as a married couple trying to one-up each other. On the other hand, the
final scene, a feint at science fiction, ends the anthology on a pallid note.

The actors all have a cheerful comic instinct, although Mr. Morris, the most
experienced comedian on the stage, is more subdued than he was on ''Saturday
Night Live.'' As director, Richard Gant keeps the skits flowing as quickly as a
vaudeville bill and Sloan Robinson has contributed a bit of choreography for
Kirk Kirksey's flashy salute to Ben Vereen.

Although the entertainment is diffuse, Mr. Caldwell does reveal a talent for
sketch comedy. A prolific author of one-act plays, he might also have a future
as a writer of material for Richard Pryor.

The Cast
THE WORLD OF BEN CALDWELL, by Ben Cald- well; directed by Richard Gant;
costumes, Myrna Colley-Lee; set,Llewellyn Harrison; lighting, Lynne Reed; sound,
Regge Life; choreographer, Sloan Robinson; production stage manager, Debbie
Weiner. Presented by the Henry Street Settlement's New Federal Thea- ter, Woodie
King Jr. and Steven Tennen, producers. At 466 Grand Street.  WITH: Kirk Kirksey,
Reginald Vel Johnson, Di- anne Kirksey, Morgan Freeman, Garrett Mor- ris, Steve
Coats, B. Jerome Smith and Terria Joseph.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Morgan Freeman

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 10, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GOOD FRIDAY OBSERVED IN CHURCHES AND STREETS

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 531 words


The suffering of Jesus on the cross was brought home to Good Friday worshipers
in the city and across the country yesterday as traditional devotions often
focused on contemporary injustice.

In an ecumenical service at Christ Methodist Church on Park Avenue at 60th
Street, Bishop James Armstrong of Indiana said: ''The bias of our Lord is for
the neglected ones among us.'' Bishop Armstrong, president of the National
Council of Churches, said he feared public policy was ''turning away from human
needs.''

''We meet today linking the needs of our nation with the cross of our Christ,''
he said, echoing frequent references made during the service to Christian
concern for the poor, the nuclear arms race and economic injustice.

The somber theme recurred in the prayer led by Dr. Robert Polk, executive
director of the Council of Churches of the City of New York. ''We weave our
lives into Thy struggle to bring unity, justice and peace to the world,'' Dr.
Polk said.

Church services yesterday recalled the Crucifixion of Jesus.  Church altars are
stripped of their adornment until the more exalted liturgies of Easter. As
Bishop Armstrong spoke from the pulpit of the United Methodist Church, its
bronze cross was draped in black crepe.

Following the service, representatives of the Nuclear Freeze Campaign and East
Harlem social service agencies were on hand to distribute information about
nuclear armaments and needs among the city's poor.

Meanwhile, representatives of Pax Christi, a Roman Catholic peace organization,
and others took their Good Friday devotions to Manhattan's streets in a protest
against nuclear weapons.

''We must pay attention to the current crime and not just the one that is
past,'' said the Rev. Daniel Berrigan as about 50 marchers protesting nuclear
armaments carried an eight-foot wooden cross down Broadway. A worship service
was held at the doorway to the Riverside Research Institute on West 64th Street,
a private research organization that organizers of the march said has government
contracts to study nuclear weapons.

Outside the institute, the marchers read from the Bible and prayed the Stations
of the Cross, which focus on 14 incidents that, according to church teaching,
occurred along the route Jesus traveled to His Crucifixion and at the site
itself.

Blocked Institute's Doorway

Father Berrigan, a Jesuit who was one of the earliest critics of United States
involvement in Vietnam, and 15 others were arrested as they knelt blocking the
doorway to the institute and threw what they said was lamb's blood at the
building.

Those arrested were given desk-appearance tickets and charged with disorderly
conduct, criminal mischief, harassment and menacing.  Good Friday worship
services and processions in Boston and Bangor, Wash., also dealt with religious
concern over nuclear weaponry.  In Nevada, Daniel Ellsberg and 18 other
antinuclear demonstrators were arrested a mile from the Nevada Test Site on a
misdemeanor trespassing charge during a prayer vigil.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of pilgrims in Jerusalem (page 1) photo of Roman
Catholic march along Second Avenue photo of Pope John Paul II carrying cross in
Rome (page 28)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ROBIN SANSON ENGAGED TO HOWARD SHERMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 50, Column 6; Society Desk

LENGTH: 135 words


Mr. and Mrs. Edward J. Sanson of Princeton, N.J., and Edgartown, Mass., have
announced the engagement of his daughter, Robin Patrice Sanson, to Howard Slan
Sherman, son of Mr. and Mrs. Howard W. Sherman of Cranston, R.I.

Miss Sanson, daughter also of the late Elizabeth Sanson, is a product manager
with Avon fashions, a subsidiary of Avon Fashions in New York. She was graduated
from the Green Farms (Conn.) Academy and Skidmore College.

Mr. Sherman is a vice president of the First Boston Corporation, an investment
banking concern in New York. He was graduated from Wesleyan University and
received a master's degree from the Wharton School of the University of
Pennsylvania. He served as an Army captain in Vietnam and was awarded the Bronze
Star.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS ON THE MILITARY BALANCE IN EUROPE

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2091 words


WASHINGTON THE growth of the Soviet nuclear weapons arsenal to ''parity'' with
the United States is contributing to a basic re-evaluation of NATO military
strategy. Central to this strategy over the years was the presumption that the
United States would be prepared to use nuclear weapons first in the event of an
overwhelming Soviet conventional attack. As long as the United States was
generally believed to have nuclear superiority over the Soviet Union, the threat
of using nuclear weapons first was rarely challenged. But now all that is
changing. Arguments that were once academic - over whether Washington would
actually use these weapons and risk general nuclear war - are becoming of
immediate and real importance.

Last week, these issues, long debated by the experts, broke into general public
view. Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr., already busy fending off a
Congressional resolution for a nuclear weapons freeze, strongly upheld
traditional NATO doctrine against criticism by four former senior officials. The
four argued that it was time to move toward abandoning what they considered a
suicidal commitment by the United States to use nuclear weapons first, if
necessary. The threat, they said, was no longer credible and to maintain this
doctrine could only ''add to the risk of nuclear war'' and an all-out nuclear
exchange. The four were Robert S. McNamara, former Secretary of Defense, and
McGeorge Bundy, White House national security adviser in the Kennedy and Johnson
administrations; George F. Kennan, former Ambassador to Moscow, and Gerard C.
Smith, former director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency and President
Nixon's lead weapons negotiator.

The feasibility of this no-first-use doctrine depends directly on whether NATO
is in a position to defend itself against a non-nuclear attack with conventional
forces alone, that is, without resort to nuclear weapons. Mr. Haig said NATO was
not in such a position, which helps explain why Moscow can afford to take the
nuclear pledge not to fire first. Advocates in the West of a no-first-use
policy, he said, ''seldom go on to propose that the United States reintroduce
the draft, triple the size of its armed forces and put its economy on a wartime
footing.'' He argued that these steps would be necessary to counterbalance ''the
Soviet conventional advantages and geopolitical position in Europe.''

Reagan Administration and other military experts in Washington believe the
Russians know they would have to pay an extremely high price if they attacked
and that they could not be confident of the outcome. But the experts clearly do
not feel comfortable with the balance of conventional forces between NATO and
the Warsaw Pact.

Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger, in his budget presentation to Congress,
concluded that ''the quality of NATO's deterrent posture has weakened in recent
years, and an accelerated U.S. and allied force improvement effort is needed if
NATO is to retain a viable initial defense capability during the 1980's.''
Pentagon officials say this means that right now, NATO could withstand the first
Warsaw Pact thrust, but after a week or so the roof would cave in. Their
estimates about the future are far gloomier.

Harold Brown, Defense Secretary in the Carter Administration, said in a recent
interview, ''the Soviets have to have doubts about a successful attack, but not
as many as I would like them to have.'' But he added that NATO forces were in
better shape than at any time since the mid-1960's. Although the Warsaw Pact was
ahead, he said, the correlation of forces is ''either level or changing in our
direction.''

Continuing a longstanding budgetary pattern, more than half the $1.6 trillion
the Reagan Administration proposes to spend for defense in the next five years
would be for NATO. What is the preponderance of opinion on what all this money
has bought and what it will buy?

Doesn't the Soviet Union far outspend the United States?  The Central
Intelligence Agency estimates that in 1980, the Soviet Union spent $175 billion
on military forces, 50 percent more than the United States. Both sides spent the
bulk of these funds on the European theater. The C.I.A. comparison is measured
in dollars which, experts agree, overstates the Soviet figure because the
salaries of low-paid Soviet troops are computed in terms of much higher American
servicemen's pay. Nonetheless, almost all experts agree that Moscow has been
outspending Washington for conventional forces in Europe by $10 billion to $30
billion a year during the last decade.

But this comparison leaves out allied expenditures on both sides.  The
International Institute of Strategic Studies in London reports that Moscow's
Warsaw Pact allies collectively spend $20 billion to $30 billion per year, while
America's NATO allies spend $100 billion. Thus, NATO outspent the Warsaw Pact in
the 1970's by several hundred billion dollars. When allied or friendly nations
in the Far East are added, the West's margin of ''spending superiority'' is even
wider.

It is also true, however, that Moscow gets more for its money.  Manpower in
Eastern Europe is much cheaper than in the West, and all its allies use
Soviet-made major arms and equipment. NATO tolerates enormous duplication of
effort, with several countries producing their own aircraft, tanks and other
arms. NATO spends more, but for political and economic reasons having little to
do with security, the East gets more bang for the buck.

Does this translate into Warsaw Pact military superiority?  The experts say yes.
The Warsaw Pact leads NATO in numbers of virtually all kinds of weapons, often
by margins of two-to-one or greater. The gaps are particularly striking in
tactical aircraft, tanks, antitank missile launchers, artillery and air defense
guns.Taking quality into account mitigates the picture somewhat. NATO aircraft
generally stay in the air longer and carry more payload.  NATO tactical planes,
for example, carry three to five times the weapons load of Warsaw Pact aircraft.
But quality of tanks is about even and the pact is ahead in most ground forces
equipment and weaponry.

Surprisingly, manpower is about even on the central front. NATO, including
France, marshals 1.1 million troops against 1.2 million for the pact. The East
leads in the number of fighting divisions. Given this rough equality, the Pact
would have little to gain in a strike out of the blue. The real Soviet
advantages would develop from their ability to mobilize more quickly than NATO
democracies over a twoweek period.

Since the early 1970's, NATO and Warsaw Pact delegations have been meeting in
Vienna, seeking a formula for ''mutual and balanced'' reductions in conventional
forces in Central Europe. The talks have long been stuck on Soviet refusal to
accept Western proposals for asymmetrical reductions that would wipe out the
Pact's numerical advantages.

Is Warsaw Pact superiority new and if not, why all the worrying?  Pact
advantages in conventional forces are not new and, with the exception of one or
two moments of rhetorical resolution, it has been a NATO principle that parity
in conventional forces was not needed.  NATO leaders agreed they could make up
for the disparity in numbers by virtue of weaponry quality and United States
superiority in intercontinental nuclear forces. The prevailing view among NATO
experts was that Moscow would not risk an attack as long as the West maintained
an immense lead in these areas. (President Charles de Gaulle of France
disagreed. He did not think that Moscow believed Washington would risk the
destruction of the United States by nuclear weapons to defend Europe.)

What worries most NATO experts today is that Western technological advantages
are waning, while the Soviet Union has caught up with the United States in
strategic nuclear weapons. The experts also point to the modernization of
intermediate-range Soviet missiles such as the SS-20. All of this, they say, has
given additional weight to Soviet advantages in conventional forces.

Do these new Soviet advantages mean Moscow could now be confident of a
relatively quick victory?  Most Western experts would give a flat no. More than
half the 57 Warsaw Pact divisions on the central front are not Russian. Of
these, only the six East German divisions are considered reliable by Western
intelligence officers. If so, almost half of Warsaw Pact manpower and one-third
or more of its firepower must be assumed by Moscow to be of questionable value
or worse.

In the West, some Reagan Administration officials and NATO experts contend that
Washington also cannot count on some European allies.  But the weight of opinion
holds that West Europeans are much more likely to defend their freedoms than
East Europeans are likely to fight for their ruling bureaucracies.

Also, under present strategy, Soviet planners can never disregard the risk that
NATO might use tactical nuclear weapons against an attack. Moscow must consider
the 7,000 United States tactical (limited-range) nuclear weapons now in Europe.
NATO must also take into account a comparable Soviet capability.

What are the trends? Is the conventional balance getting better or worse for
NATO?  The experts are divided. At the Pentagon and at NATO headquarters in
Brussels, many experts believe the Russians are strengthening their relative
position, leveling off in numbers of men and arms, but steadily improving
weapons quality. They point to improvements in Soviet command and control and
logistical operations and they worry about the will in the West to match these
improvements.

Others, such as military experts at the State Department and some C.I.A. and
NATO analysts, agree with Harold Brown's assessment: ''Relative to the Soviets,
we are better off today than in 1960, but not as well off as we were in 1965;
back to no worse off today than in 1970, largely because of taking arms out of
Europe to meet the war in Vietnam; and better off today than in 1975.'' Mr.
Brown pointed to a substantial increase in antitank weapons, modernization of
aircraft and tanks, additional training and preparation for American forces,
considerable stockpiling of spare parts and ammunition by American forces (and
some by the European allies), better positioning of forces and increased
readiness, and increased size of West German reserve forces.

If, then, the balance is not so bleak, why the uproar?  An influential minority
including Secretary Weinberger and Gen.  Bernard W. Rogers, the NATO commander
in Europe, believe that unless most NATO countries make substantial increases in
military spending, deterrence will become doubtful and the West will soon face
disaster. The growth in Soviet military power, they fear, will lead to political
intimidation of the European allies. Many experts believe this has already
happened.

Another group, apparently including Secretary Haig, a former NATO commander
himself, believes the deterrent is still there, but fears erosion. These experts
find themselves in a dilemma. If they exaggerate the threat (and Soviet military
superiority) to get more money to narrow the gap, they risk making Europeans see
the situation as hopeless. But if they use more moderate and careful language,
Europeans and Americans might use this as an excuse to do little or nothing.
Basically, they have been emphasizing the negative in order to retain the
positive. As a former NATO senior commander recalled, ''It's like Harry Truman
used to say about public opinion, 'If you tell them nothing, they go fishing and
if you tell them something, they go crazy.' ''

Even those who would renounce the first-use of nuclear weapons in Europe
acknowledge that NATO would have to strengthen its conventional capability and
that this will take time. The four former senior officials made very clear that
this was the place to start.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of tanks tables of NATO and Warsaw Pact
conventional forces in Europe

TYPE: question

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RETURN OF THE BATTLESHIP

BYLINE: By William H. Honan; William H. Honan, editor of the Arts and Leisure
section of The Times, writes frequently on naval affairs.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 24, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4856 words


It is June 1983. The Government of Fidel Castro has been overthrown. A mob
gathers outside the northeast gate of the American naval base at Guantanamo Bay
- long a source of contention between Cuba and the United States. Insults are
shouted at the marines on guard and demonstrators fire shots in the air. At
first, there seems little danger of an actual attack.  ''Gitmo,'' as the
45-square-mile enclave is known to American sailors, is surrounded by the
largest mine field in the world, and air support is only minutes away in Key
West. But then aerial reconnaissance reveals disturbing signs. Emplacements for
antiaircraft guns and missiles, long abandoned by the Cubans, have been
reoccupied, and troop concentrations are forming near Guantanamo.

What should the American Presi-dent do? He can reinforce the 420-man Marine
Corps garrison, but even a sizable buildup of ground troops would not withstand
a determined attack, and the sudden arrival of troops might actually destabilize
the tense situation. He can threaten to bomb Cuban military installations, but
that might only serve to unite the populace against the United States. There are
other options, ranging from diplomatic initiatives at the United Nations to a
naval blockade, but the President decides on another course - one that Teddy
Roosevelt might have chosen. He sends the battleship New Jersey.  In 1981,
inspired by upheavals in the third world and the sense that America needed
stronger conventional forces to fight limited wars, Congress appropriated $237
million to return the 39-year-old New Jersey to the active fleet and another $88
million to start taking out of mothballs her sister ship the Iowa. The Reagan
Administration also plans to seek funds to reactivate the Missouri and the
Wisconsin, the other two Iowa-class battleships. The total cost for all four is
estimated to run between $1.5 billion and $3.5 billion.  The return of the
battleship has injected a significant new element into strategic planning. At
facilities such as the Center for War Gaming of the Naval War College in
Newport, R.I., data describing the military forces and capabilities of opposing
nations, along with facts about geographical and political realities, are fed
into computers. War games are played by as many as 275 participants - including
both adversaries and umpires -seated at video terminals on a floor the size of a
ballroom. An aircraft carrier is represented on the video screens by a square of
light with a slash through it; a battleship is a simple square. In recent
months, these unadorned squares have figured importantly in at least two major
games.

Although much of what goes on at the war games is highly classified, it is no
secret that the Navy is convinced that battleships can play a crucial role in
three basic limited-war situations. In the article that follows, these
situations are presented in the form of three scenarios that, according to naval
strategists, accurately reflect current thinking about the uses of the
battleship. Also included are the views of critics who dispute the value of
these World War II weapons in the age of the supersonic aircraft and the
''smart'' missile.

Show the Flag. In this first scenario, which poses the threat of an attack on
the naval base at Guantanamo, the battleship is valuable for its power to
inspire respect. ''You get a tremendous psychological effect from a battleship
wherever it goes,'' says Gen.  Robert H. Barrow, Commandant of the Marine Corps.
''People quickly realize this is something they can't deal with. North
Vietnamese foot soldiers stood their ground and fired their rifles at supersonic
jet airplanes, but nobody ever stood up to the New Jersey.''

Forcible Entry. Because of her remarkable ability to absorb punishment, and to
dish it out, the battleship is widely believed to be ideally suited for
supporting amphibious landings. The New Jersey showed what her nine 16-inch guns
could do in 1969 when she nosed up to a small, heavily fortified island off
North Vietnam. The enemy soldiers were allowed to escape unharmed. Then the
dreadnought opened fire. A newspaper headline later told the result: ''The New
Jersey Sinks an Island.''

Nonnuclear Global Conflict. Modified to serve as a launching platform for
long-range cruise missiles, the four Iowa-class battleships will increase by 40
percent the number of capital ships the Navy can deploy at any one time. The
battleships are seen as especially valuable offensive platforms in a nonnuclear
conflict with the Soviet Union because of their extraordinary 32-knot speed,
1,500-mile range and exceptional survivability.  The Presidential order to send
the New Jersey to Cuba finds her cruising in the Atlantic. The next day, she and
her four destroyer escorts appear 15 miles off Havana - clearly visible from
shore but not in violation of Cuba's territorial waters. Then she vanishes, and
24 hours later appears in all her threatening majesty at the other end of Cuba
off Santiago. These visitations create anxiety and uncertainty among Cuban
leaders as to American intentions.

Such an initial gambit is a specialty of the battleship. The New Jersey's
massive, 12-inch-thick armor belt enables her to go in harm's way. In contrast,
the Navy's most potent surface vessel, the aircraft carrier, would normally be
deployed 200 miles out at sea.  Laden with highly combustible aviation fuel and
protected only by lightweight armor, she would never dare venture so close to a
potentially hostile shore. In terms of a show-the-flag mission, submarines lack
the battleship's formidable presence, and aircraft lack staying power.

Three days after her arrival off Cuba, the New Jersey brazenly steams into
Guantanamo Bay. The sudden sight of the giant warship frightens away a good many
demonstrators. More flee when the New Jersey slews around her 65-foot-long
turret guns and points them toward shore.

The next morning, the battleship is gone. She has demonstrated the power of the
United States, but in a measured way, and without making a commitment from which
it might be awkward to withdraw.  It is March 1986. The Government of Indonesia
has been overthrown by a group of ultranationalist army officers. One of their
first acts is to announce that no vessel will be permitted to pass through the
Strait of Malacca, which lies between Indonesia and Malaysia, without the
express approval of the Indonesian Government. Furthermore, a levy will be
placed upon all ships granted passage. This plan - similar to one proposed in
1972 by Razaleigh Hamzah, a high-level Malaysian Government official - threatens
the vital movement of oil tankers from the Persian Gulf to Japan and the United
States. The shortest alternative route would add 900 miles to the tankers'
journey, but of greater consequence is the threat to the freedom of the seas.

The President of the United States decides to send American warships through the
strait to reaffirm what admiralty lawyers call ''the right of innocent
passage.'' A similar course was taken in August 1981 when the aircraft carrier
Nimitz was dispatched to the Gulf of Sidra to challenge a Libyan claim that the
entire gulf lay within her territorial waters. (It was during this mission that
aircraft from the Nimitz shot down two Libyan fighters.)

But the Strait of Malacca is so narrow that an aircraft carrier cannot maneuver
in order to launch and recover her aircraft.  Furthermore, there is evidence
that shore batteries are being set up along the Indonesian coast bordering the
strait, creating a gantlet no carrier would dare run. In Washington, the Chief
of Naval Operations recommends the use of battleships.

The New Jersey and the newly re-commissioned Missouri, on station in the South
Pacific, are to be accompanied by eight destroyers, to provide antisubmarine and
antiaircraft defense. A Japanese and a South Korean destroyer will also join the
armada. The aircraft carriers Kitty Hawk and Constellation, on station in the
Indian Ocean, are to move east to provide air cover.

The battleships and their escorts round Singapore without incident. But as they
move into the Strait of Malacca, two Indonesian fast-attack craft dash out from
an inlet on the coast of Sumatra, second largest of the Indonesian islands,
firing missiles and torpedoes. Several missiles strike the battleships, without
effect.  Torpedo wakes boil harmlessly past the New Jersey, but on the Missouri
the crew feel two violent jolts, and geysers of sea water spout up the port
side.

Such torpedo explosions sank three World-War-I-vintage American battleships at
Pearl Harbor. In the case of the World-War-II-era Missouri, however, they merely
breach the outer hull, in no way endangering the safety or function of the ship.

It is possible that so-called shaped-charge missiles might have a more lethal
effect. The shaped charge is an antiarmor weapon that penetrates a surface by
focusing upon it, at the instant of impact, a torch of hot plasma. Norman
Polmar, former United States editor of Jane's Fighting Ships and a prominent
writer on naval subjects, believes that battleships may be vulnerable to the
shaped-charge missile, and the issue was raised during the debate over
reactivation of the battleships. The Navy quickly admits that there is no such
thing as an unsinkable ship. Unquestionably, a direct hit by a small nuclear
weapon would do the job. And if an enemy were able to hit a battleship
simultaneously with a multitude of shapedcharge warheads - one of which might
penetrate the magazine, for example - the vessel could go down. The Navy points,
however, that the battleship remains by far the toughest capital ship afloat.A
case in point was the 73,000-ton Japanese battleship Musashi, which shrugged off
no fewer than 16 American bomb hits without suffering any appreciable damage,
and succumbed only after six waves of American torpedo planes drove 21 torpedoes
into her hull, one of which chanced to slide through the hole punched by a
predecessor and explode against the inner hull.  When word of the Indonesian
attack on the American vessels in the Strait of Malacca reaches the United
States, Congress quickly grants the President the power to make war. But the
President chooses to take only those steps that will assure free passage through
the strait for all nations. An amphibious brigade of 8,000 marines is to be
landed on Sumatra and the shore batteries there destroyed. A forcible entry, the
second scenario for the use of the battleship, is about to unfold.  The New
Jersey and Missouri, along with their escorts, have cleared the Strait of
Malacca and reached the Indian Ocean. There, an American assault force is
quickly assembled, built around the battleships. It steams east at 20 knots,
four antisubmarine destroyers leading the way. The New Jersey and Missouri
cruise abreast, two miles apart, followed by 11 amphibious assault ships ranging
in size from the 39,000-ton Belleau Wood, which carries 1,700 marines and 26
helicopters, to the 8,400-ton tank-landing ship Tuscaloosa.

The marines are drawn from amphibious ready-groups assigned to assault ships
already stationed in the Indian Ocean and the Mediterranean. Once they have
landed and established a beachhead, they will come under the command of the
Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force.

As the assault force bears down on Sumatra, the carriers Kitty Hawk and
Constellation, deployed 200 miles from shore in the Indian Ocean, launch their
aircraft. Swarms of A-6 Intruders, low-level attack planes, sweep the sea of any
Indonesian naval vessels and strike air bases throughout the country. F-14
Tomcat interceptors are sent along to destroy any hostile planes that manage to
become airborne, but several of the enemy escape and fire their missiles at the
American assault force. The battleships brush off these munitions as if they had
come from peashooters, but the Belleau Wood is badly hit, suffering casualties
and losing most of her troop-lift helicopters.

The Indonesians know that the Americans are coming, but they have no idea what
orders the American commander has received from Washington. Will the Americans
bombard Indonesian cities? Will carrier aircraft strike at Jakarta? Will the
Americans attempt a landing? There is little the Indonesians can do other than
to alert all forces, pack their armor on flatbed trucks - and wait.

The assault force is heading toward Banda Atjeh, a small port with its own
airstrip, located on the northern tip of Sumatra. When the American force is 25
miles from Banda Aceh, the troop-carrying ships and their destroyer escorts part
company with the battleships. They will remain just over the horizon from the
shore while the battleships forge ahead, their paths cleared by twin-rotor
helicopters trailing mine-sweeping gear.

When the New Jersey and the Missouri are within five miles of the port, salvo
after salvo from their 16-inch guns light up the sky.  Shore defenses are
demolished. The roads leading to Banda Atjeh become as pockmarked as a lunar
surface, preventing the arrival of reinforcements.

As soon as the fire ceases, troop-lift helicopters start landing marines on a
plateau a few hundred yards from the airstrip. The troops are barely in place
when the weather turns against them. A tropical deluge forces temporary
cancellation of planned air strikes in support of the marine position by A-6 and
A-7 attack planes from the American carriers.  The Indonesian garrison at Banda
Atjeh, which has survived the naval shelling until now, seizes the opportunity
to attack. But a naval gunfire spot team that landed with the marines radios
coordinates of the new targets to the New Jersey and the Missouri.

''Shot!'' calls the Iowa as she fires a spotting round.  ''Splash!'' reports the
spotter on seeing the impact.  When the smoke clears, the spotter determines
that the first shell has burst 50 yards behind the target. He calls to the Iowa:
''Beautiful! Drop five zero and fire for effect.''

Shells from the behemoths pound the shore relentlessly. It is this capacity of
the battleship to provide uninterrupted gunfire support at times when air
strikes are not possible, or when they cannot be continuous, that makes many
strategists regard the battleship as indispensable in amphibious operations of
this kind.

With local opposition suppressed, the marines quickly take possession of the the
port and its airstrip. Now that they have secured the means of receiving fresh
supplies and reinforcements, they can prepare for further operations. Soon the
marines will start leapfrogging down the coast of Sumatra, destroying one shore
battery after another, restoring free passage through the strait.  It is June
1986. Nine Soviet divisions, consisting of the armor and mechanized infantry
units based in the Transcaucasian military district, have suddenly and
unexpectedly driven into northwestern Iran. They must cover some 800 miles,
snaking their way through the rugged Zagros Mountains, before they can seize
their prize, the oil fields near Abadan. Success would place oil-hungry Japan
and much of Western Europe at the Russians' mercy.

On the first day, the Soviet troops gain 50 miles, the next day a little less.
In Washington, the Secretary of State issues a warning that the United States is
pledged to protect the integrity of Iran, and the President calls the Soviet
party chairman on the ''Moscow hot line.'' But all is to no avail. Meanwhile,
the Russian armor reaches the outskirts of Tabriz, almost half the distance to
Abadan.

Even as the diplomatic initiatives are under way, the United States Navy is on
the move, and it has options for dealing with the situation that were not
available only a few years before. As a result of having reactivated the four
Iowa-class battleships, the Navy has increased its forward-deployed strength by
a remarkable 40 percent.

Naval strength is measured in terms of the number of available offensive
platforms - ships that mount weapons capable of taking war to the enemy. In
1982, after launching the nuclear-powered aircraft carrier Vinson, the Navy had
13 such surface platforms - the 13 aircraft carriers. But the aircraft carrier
is a thoroughbred; for every carrier in deployment there are two others back
home being overhauled or resupplied or having their pilots and crew brought up
to peak performance levels.  Thus, in practical terms, at any one time only four
or five aircraft carriers were spread around the globe ready for action.  The
four Iowa-class battleships were transformed into major offensive platforms by
being fitted with Tomahawk cruise missiles.  The Tomahawks look like flying
torpedoes with stubby wings; they can hit ships from 300 miles away, or land
targets from 1,500 miles. The return of the battleships thus increased the
Navy's number of offensive platforms from 13 to 17, but the practical impact was
even greater. Battleships are workhorses and require fewer overhauls than
carriers. Since only two of the four battleships needed to be back home at any
one time, the Navy was able to increase the number of forward-deployed major
offensive platforms from four or five to six or seven. By 1986, each of the
battleships had become the nucleus for a so-called surface-action group whose
power was second only to that of a carrier group.

Naval strategists saw this increase in offensive platforms as particularly
important in the event of a major nonnuclear conflict between the superpowers.
In such a situation, the adversaries would each try to prevent the other from
concentrating military and naval forces at the battlefront. And that would lead
to confrontations around the world that would rapidly turn a local conflict into
a global war.

The wisdom of using battleships in this kind of conflict was hotly debated
before Congress approved the battleship reactivation plan.  Senator Ted Stevens,
Republican of Alaska, has argued that if the battleship was to be ''nothing but
a floating missile silo,'' submarines would serve the purpose better.
Submarines, he explains, are ''much harder for an enemy to find.'' John Lehman,
Secretary of the Navy, agrees about the utility of submarines and points out
that four nuclear-powered attack subs are already being fitted with cruise
missiles. However, he points out that refitting attack submarines is a slow and
costly business, and he opposes converting submarines that are part of the
nation's nuclear deterrent into platforms for conventional weapons. In sum, he
says, ''reactivating a battleship is quicker and cheaper than building a
submarine.'' The New Jersey is being recommissioned for about a million dollars
less than the cost of a new attack submarine.

Norman Polmar, the naval writer, prefers Spruance-class destroyers as bearers of
cruise missiles. It may take three destroyers to carry the number of missiles
that will ultimately be carried by a battleship, he says, but the battleship
gives the enemy a single large target. ''To a satellite,'' he says, ''that
battleship will stand out like a sore thumb. Also, if we've got our cruise
missiles on three destroyers and the enemy detects 50 destroyers he doesn't know
which ones have the cruise missiles. Thus we have forced the enemy to send a
plane out over each destroyer to find out.'' Secretary Lehman says the Navy does
intend to put cruise missiles on Spruance-class destroyers when they come in for
refitting.  Eventually, the Navy plans to have 100 submarines and surface ships
refitted with the missiles.

However, Lehman does not agree that battleships are such sitting ducks. ''With
satellites and other sensors,'' he says, ''a 10,000-ton ship is just as easy to
find as a 70,000-ton ship.'' That being so, he argues, the ship might as well be
as big and tough as possible, with all the armor, damage-control equipment and
other defenses that enable it to absorb hits and keep on fighting. The
Iowa-class battleships are particularly survivable today, he says. They were
built to withstand the kind of armor-pierc-ing shells used in World War II naval
warfare, and those shells had far greater penetrative power than today's weapon
of choice, the cruise missile, with its high-explosive warhead. Such a warhead
can wreak havoc with the superstructures of post-World-War-II-ships, which are
made of aluminum and fiberglass, but not with the heavily armored Iowas.

The debate over the ''survivability'' of the battleship is certain to continue,
but meanwhile naval strategists are considering just how these new-old additions
to the Navy can be used. One example is illustrated by the American response to
a hypothetical Soviet invasion of Iran.

As soon as the first Soviet tank crosses the Iranian border, new orders are
dispatched to the fleet. The battleship Iowa and her escorts in the North
Atlantic are to wheel northward between Greenland and Iceland. The battleship
New Jersey, on station in the North Pacific, is to lay a course for Kyushu, the
southernmost of the major Japanese islands. These are carefully calculated moves
on the chessboard of naval strategy, obscure only for the moment.

Meanwhile, the 80,000-ton aircraft carrier Kitty Hawk in the South Pacific
begins racing ahead of her escorts at 32 knots through the Strait of Malacca;
she will join the nuclear-powered carrier Nimitz, heading north in the Indian
Ocean toward Iran. The carrier Saratoga in the Mediterranean is also boiling
over the ocean - steaming eastward. The three carriers are like giant pincers
converging on Iran. Within two days, with the Nimitz and the Kitty Hawk in the
Gulf of Oman, and the Saratoga east of Cyprus, all three are within striking
distance of the long Soviet column grinding its way through the Zagros
Mountains. And by the third day of the Soviet advance, the United States Air
Force has ferried the 354th Tactical Fighter Wing out of Myrtle Beach, S.C., to
Saudi Arabia, the Saudis having granted the use of an airbase after some
high-level diplomacy.

The American President has tried every peaceful means to dissuade Moscow from
its course. He finally gives the order for United States forces to halt the
Soviet advance.

The American carriers point their shovellike prows into the wind and send their
jets shrieking aloft. Minutes later, the F-15's flying out of Saudi Arabia are
engaged in furious dogfights with Soviet MIG's, while low-flying American
land-based and carrier-based planes launch their television- and laser-guided
bombs and missiles. They are particularly intent on destroying bridges and
blocking passes and tunnels.

During the first three days, the Americans lose 18 planes, demonstrating again
the lesson of the Yom Kippur and Six Day wars - the ability of armor to resist
air attack. But the terrain has worked against the Russians. With bridges
collapsed and tunnels blocked, the highway through the Zagros Mountains has
become the biggest parking lot west of Teheran. The Soviet advance grinds to a
halt.

For the time being, American air power has triumphed, but the Soviet Union is
not about to accept defeat. The Russians have a number of formidable nonnuclear
weapons ready to hurl at the American carriers that have been the chief source
of Moscow's frustration.

The Soviet submarine squadron in the Indian Ocean, which includes a new Oscar -
a nuclear-powered submersible cruiser of 18,000 tons with 24 cruise missiles -
is unleashed against the Nimitz and the Kitty Hawk. Simultaneously, from the
Crimean Peninsula, comes a flight of Soviet Backfire fighter-bombers -swing-wing
supersonic aircraft equipped with long-range air-to-surface missiles.

The American forces dispatch a combination of attack submarines and
carrier-based Lockheed S-3B Viking sub hunters to parry the Soviet underwater
threat, and F-14 Tomcat interceptors are sent aloft to fend off the Backfires.
But the Kitty Hawk sustains two missile hits that put her out of commission for
12 hours.

A still greater danger faces the Americans. Moscow had withheld significant
outlying naval forces from the battle area so as not to tip its hand that an
invasion of Iran was imminent. But now naval headquarters in the Kremlin
contacts Rear Adm. V.N. Chernavin, commander of the Soviet Northern Fleet,
embarked on the 25,000-ton nuclear-powered battle cruiser Kirov in the North
Atlantic.  Chernavin is ordered to take his surface-action group south into the
Mediterranean; there he is to assist the Soviet squadron already on station in
the destruction of the carrier Saratoga.

The Kirov is the largest warship, apart from aircraft carriers, to be built
since World War II and the Soviet Union's first nuclearpowered surface vessel;
she mounts both guns and 20 cruise missiles. When she was commissioned in 1981
at the Baltic Yard in Leningrad - the first of four new Soviet battle cruisers -
the Kirov seemed a throwback to the 1930's, but she may well have been born of
the same perceptions that led to battleship reactivation in the United States.
Along with the Kirov, Chernavin's surface-action group includes the Kiev, a
42,000-ton VTOL aircraft carrier; two nuclear-powered missile cruisers; two
older Sverdlov missile cruisers, and several Krestaclass cruisers and fast
Kashin-class gas-turbine destroyers - all loaded with many dozens of
antishipping cruise missiles with ranges of up to 300 miles.

Chernavin sets his course for the the G.I.U.K. Gap - the strategic ''choke
point'' between Greenland, Iceland and the United Kingdom.  Suddenly his Rorsat
radar satellite reveals the presence of a hostile surface-action group in his
path.  Two reconnaissance aircraft are dispatched, and soon their report comes
back - it's the 43-year-old battleship Iowa, newly fitted out with advanced
cruise missiles, blocking his way.

Chernavin has no desire to tangle with the Iowa. His surface-action group, he
has been told, offers the Soviet Union its last chance to destroy or drive off
the American carrier in the Mediterranean that has helped stop his country's
invasion of Iran, and he feels he must save all of his cruise missiles for the
Saratoga. He signals his fleet to increase speed to 28 knots, trying an end run
around the Iowa, but the 32-knot battleship easily counters the move.

The frustrated Soviet admi-ral radios to naval headquarters for instructions. If
the American force consisted only of missile cruisers and Spruance destroyers,
Chernavin says, he would consider it an honor to trade cruise missiles with the
Americans and take his chances. He might still have enough offensive punch left
over to sink the Saratoga. However, in the case of the Iowa, the giant
battleship would certainly survive his missile barrage, and then the American
vessel would simply overhaul him with her extraordinary speed and blast him out
of the water with her 16-inch guns. ''Should I take that risk?'' the admiral
asks.

The Kremlin does not reply immediately. More bad news has just been received.
While Chernavin was heading for the Mediterranean, Adm. V.V.  Sidorov, the
com-mander of the Soviet Pacific Fleet, was proceeding under orders for the
Indian Ocean. His goal was to eliminate the American carriers Nimitz and Kitty
Hawk. But once again, an American battleship was in the way - this time, it was
the New Jersey, on station off Kyushu. And along with those bad tidings, Moscow
learned that the American 82d Airborne Division had just landed in Saudi Arabia.
The presence of American ground troops in the area threatens a major escalation
of the conflict, dramatically raising the stakes.

In the Kremlin, the Soviet leaders reassess the situation, and decide that the
time has come to sit down at the peace table.  Admirals Chernavin and Sidorov
are ordered to withdraw.

The most important lesson of this hypothetical conflict, in the view of many
naval strategists, is that the probable victor in any such struggle is the side
that can bring the greatest number of resources to bear quickly. In Iran, as in
all of the potential trouble spots around the Persian Gulf, the Soviet Union has
two enormous advantages. It is close by, and it has a huge and well-equipped
standing army ready to move. For the United States to win in this area, American
forces must be capable of reaching a trouble spot rapidly, before the situation
has become hopeless. And the American military must also be capable of
interdiction -of preventing the Soviet Union from bringing all its far-flung
resources to bear upon the local conflict. The interdiction mission is one that
the cruisemissile battleship can fulfill, not marginally, but with speed and
power to spare.

To be sure, a real war, outside the war-gaming rooms in the Soviet Union and the
United States, might not end so neatly as in the scenario above. Once the
flag-draped coffins started coming home, it is a serious question as to whether
or not both sides could refrain from resorting to nuclear arms. But short of
such an Armageddon, in that range of conflict where it remains possible to think
twice and where reason may yet prevail, the long-disparaged battleship can play
a useful role in the arsenal of democracy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Soviet Kirov (page 41) photo of battleship New
Jersey photo of gun on Iowa

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

'A SOUR LITTLE WAR'

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1428 words


The Origins of the Korean War Liberation and the Emergence of Separate Regimes,
1945-1947.  By Bruce Cumings.  606 pp. Princeton: Princeton University Press
Cloth, $40. Paper, $14.95
Korea The Untold Story of the War.  By Joseph C. Goulden.  Illustrated. 690 pp.
New York: Times Books. $22.50

By John Curtis Perry

Before June 25, 1950, and the outbreak of "our war" in Korea, most Americans had
scarcely heard of that nation. Yet the "Hermit Kingdom," as Westerners called it
in the 19th century, had already emerged as the cockpit of modern East Asia, a
focus for Great Power rivalries. Foreign nations had fought twice on Korean soil
within the preceding 60 years: Japan first defeated China (1894-95), then
Russia, 10 years later, with the Koreans as hapless bystanders. The fate of
their nation seemed to rest in the hands of outsiders.

After the Russo-Japanese War, Korea slipped into the orbit of Japan, that
nearby, newly imperialist power. When the Japanese formally annexed Korea in
1910, not one foreign nation protested.

The collapse of Japan in 1945 suddenly liberated the Korean people from a hated
foreign yoke. But Russian occupation of the North and American occupation of the
South irrationally severed a state that, for more than a millennium, had had one
people, one language and one culture. The split crippled the Korean economy.
Even more important, the freedom Koreans had ardently anticipated was denied
them.

Both Americans and Russians desired a friendly Korea. Koreans in North and South
alike wanted unity, but both sides wished it on their own terms. The Russians
and Americans, for different reasons, withdrew their troops before 1950. The
Americans had decided that South Korea was of marginal strategic value to them.
Dean Acheson was not the only official publicly to omit Korea from the American
defense perimeter. So did Douglas MacArthur.

Actually, it seemed we had little choice. Massive American disarmament in the
immediate postwar period left us with resources inadequate to protect areas of
considerably greater importance to us than the Korean peninsula. Yet when North
Korean troops streamed south of the 38th parallel, and South Korean resistance
disintegrated, the United States decided to intervene.

Using Korean as well as American sources, Bruce Cumings makes clear in his fine
book "The Origins of the Korean War" that the conflict that the United States
entered was simply an added complication of an already violent internal spasm, a
struggle in which, between August 1945 and June 1950, more than 100,000 people
had died. But Mr.  Cumings's detailed analysis of Korean politics, provocative
though it may be, will probably attract scholars more than casual readers. The
war we fought to combat Communism, rather than the politics of Korean
revolutionary nationalism, of which we understood little, is what interests most
Americans.

By contrast, "Korea: The Untold Story of the War" by Joseph Goulden is about
Americans; the Koreans in it are, for the most part, shadowy figures. Written in
a breezy style, it is aimed at a broad audience.  Contrary to Mr. Goulden's
assertion, we already have narrative histories of that war (notably the
excellent 1964 book by David Rees, "Korea: The Limited War), though none recent
enough to have exploited the rich lode of hitherto highly classified American
documents now available under the Freedom of Information Act. From these new
sources Mr. Goulden has much to relate. He has an eye for the vivid anecdoe and
persuades his reader to turn the page. But it may be Judgement Day before we
learn the whole story of the Korean War.  Other nations are less generous than
the United States in opening their archives; thus any conclusions must remain
tentative, and many questions unanswered, or even unasked.

Douglas MacArthur, America's senior military officer, looms large in the
American war in Korea, directing operations from his Tokyo headquarters.
Following his brilliantly conceived and superbly executed Inchon landing in
September 1950, which all the experts had said could not possible be carried
off, MacArthur had said could not possible be carried off, MacArthur split his
forces and lunged to the north. Although he later denied it, the General assured
Washington that the Chinese would not enter the war, yet of course they did.
MacArthur had had the bad judgment to promise, in a widely quoted remark, that
the war would be over, and the boys back home, before Christmas. Instead, two
Army divisions were virtually destroyed in the sub-zero December snows of the
bleak North Korean mountains, and Americans with their allies were obliged to
retreat ignominiously before the Chinese.

Mr. Goulden rehearses the pattern of insubordinate acts committed by Macarthur,
which would cause the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Omar Bradley,
later to say ruefully that he "treated us as if we were children." Yet Bradley
and his associates shilly-shallied, endeavoring to humor and cajole, instead of
simply issuing commands.

Macarthur wanted to win the war by expanding it. President Truman and the
European allies did not. By persisting in his refusal to accept Adminstration
policy, MacArthur made his dismissal inevitable, and Mr. Goulden has found new
information about the event. An already angry Truman leanred, via National
Security Agency interception of foreign diplomatic cables, that MacArthur had
told Spanish and Portuguese diplomats in Tokyo he could make the Korean War a
major conflict and crush Chinese Communism. If Russia entered such a war, it too
would be destroyed, MacArthur asserted. For Truman this was the last straw, but
he carefully took soundings before acting.  MacArthur's military peers
unanimously judged that the general must go. And no one else Truman consulted
disagreed with the verdict.

Secretary of the Army Frank Pace, then traveling in East Asia, was assigned the
unenviable task of delivering the orders personally to MacArthur. Pace was, of
course, MacArthur's nominal superior but, like others in Washington, was in awe
of the general. Despite the best intentions of the White House, the news leaked,
and MacArthur learned indirectly of his dismissal. As Mr. Goulden relates, Pace
later liked to tell friends that firing the great man would have been "no
problem.: "I'd commandeer the first plance and fly to Tokyo.  Being there after
hours, I would have gone directly to General MacArthur's headquarters. I would
ring the bell, shove the order under the door, and run like hell!"

If the Korean War has a hero for Americans, he is Matthew Ridgway.  Not a
flomboyant, save perhaps for his habit of wearing live grenades strapped to his
chest, Ridgway was an intelligent, tough and thoroughly professional commander.
He rebuilt the shattered Eighth army in body and in spirit and rallied the South
Korean forces, with the aims of establishing a defensible line across the waist
of the peninsula, killing as many Chinese as possible and persuading them and
their North Korean allies to negotiate.

Negotiating took a lot more time than the serious fighting, but an armistice
finally was agreed upon on July 27, 1953, and an end came to what Averell
Harriman called a "sour little war." More Americans died in in Korean than in
Vietnam. Considering the total casualties suffered by both sides, Koreans and
others, and the extent of devastation, Harriman's phrase is an understatement.

In the three decades since, the South, at least, has made an astonishing leap
forward and boasts one of the world's most rapidly growing economies. Yet today
probably more men per square mile stand under arms in the Korean peninsula than
in any other area in the world. The peace is uneasy, the politics remain
volatie, and the potential for violence is great.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DISNEY'S SPELL WORKS ON GROWN-UPS, TOO

SECTION: Section 10; Page 9, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1891 words


MARYLIN BENDER is the author, with Selig Altschul, of ''The Chosen Instrument:
Juan Trippe and Pan Am, the Rise and Fall of an American Entrepreneur'' to be
published this summer by Simon & Schuster.

By MARYLIN BENDER

T wo middle-aged couples, finding themselves in the vicinity of Orlando, Fla.,
on a business trip last February, ventured into Walt Disney World with nary a
child to lead the way.

Veteran trekkers to Disneyland in Anaheim, Calif., when our offspring were
small, we approached this side trip in the spirit of a lark. We were testing the
notion that the more life experience one brings to masterpieces of fantasy such
as Lewis Carroll's ''Through the Looking Glass,'' Antoine de Saint-Exupery's
''The Little Prince,'' and the entire oeuvre of Walt Disney, the richer the
reward.

The only source of misgivings was the multitude factor. One of our party is
phobic about crowds, which he defines as an assembly of more than three. He
refuses to stand in lines. Attendance at Disney World from Washington's Birthday
to spring college break averages 30,000 to 40,000 a day, up to 65,000 around
Easter and from June through August, 60,000 to 80,000 during the Christmas
holidays.

Charged with responsibility for research and planning, I consulted the new
official guide to Walt Disney World by Steve Birnbaum (Houghton Mifflin Company
and Diversion Communications, Inc., $4.95) available in large bookstores. One
must prepare for Disney World almost as diligently as for the People's Republic
of China to avoid frustration and wasted opportunity.

Disney World is 20 miles southwest of Orlando airport where the two other
members of the party were to arrive around noon on a Wednesday in February; my
husband and I were driving from Palm Beach. We agreed to meet for lunch at 1
P.M. at the Trophy Room of the Golf Resort, the quietest spot at midday and one
that accepts reservations.

We parked in the vast Disney World lot at 10 A.M. Noting our position - Dopey
104 - on the back of the $1 parking stub, we proceeded by tractor-drawn tram to
the transportation and ticket center. The two-day passport to the Magic Kingdom
appeared to be the best buy, $22.50, affording unlimited use of all the
attractions. The monorail was temporarily out of service, so we glided by
ferryboat across the Seven Seas Lagoon toward the blue and white spires of
Cinderella's castle, hub of the Magic Kingdom. Thus far, 20 minutes had been
spent queuing for transportation. It was less than I had expected.

The ferry docked at the foot of Town Square where we boarded the Walt Disney
World railroad for a 15-minute orientation through the six ''lands'' of the
kingdom. What was novelty for children, born to the airplane and the bus, was
for us fond remembrance of things past. The depot was spanking clean, the dapper
conductor bellowed ''All aboard'' and the 80-year-old locomotive fired by No. 2
diesel fuel huffed and puffed along the gleaming rails, whistles tooting. ''A
100-percent load factor,'' observed one of our group, formerly the chairman of a
real-world railroad.

Back at Main Street, we strolled along the turn-of-the-century thoroughfare with
its shops, penny arcade and air-conditioned silent movie house. It seemed
slightly less real than, say, Litchfield, Conn., except for the happy-faced
throng and the white-suited sanitation brigades following the horse-drawn
trolley car and sweeping the first flakes of litter from the streets.

One of the advantages of traveling childless in Disney World is the opportunity
to escape both the fast food and the hordes at lunchtime. We went by monorail
and bus to the Golf Resort. Over an all-you-can-eat buffet lunch for $6 a
person, reminiscent of a Harvard dining room on parents weekend, we plotted our
schedule for the afternoon. We would play it according to the length of the
queues and avoid Mickey Mouse at all costs.

We headed first for Tomorrowland and the Wedway Peoplemover, an innovative means
of pollution-free, energy-economical transportation. The engineer in our group
explained the mechanics of the linear induction motor and called attention to
the high quality of the components of track and monitors. At one stretch, the
five-car train wove along the edge of Space Mountain, the fearsome roller
coaster that operates entirely in the dark. The timbre of the shrieks forced us
to consensus: We would skip Space Mountain and try a less scary ride. But was it
really necessary for grown-ups to hazard a roller coaster?

We warmed up to the issue in stages. Three of the four vetoed the Grand Prix
Raceway, a bang-up treat for adolescents. We unanimously bypassed the Mad Tea
Party, a whirling, spinning ride in oversized cups.

Encouraged by a moving line of moppets and senior citizens, we climbed into two
flivvers for Mr. Toad's Wild Ride. It was fun holding hands and giggling, but
without a child's terror reaction to gauge, I would rate it C-minus for adults.
On the other hand, the Haunted Mansion, a show for kiddies, was sheer delight
from a grownup reference point, particularly in the authenticity of decorative
detail and the piling on of theatrical sound effects.

The 197-foot red stone peaks of Big Thunder Mountain confronted us at the border
of Frontierland. A discreet posting at the gate to this newest Disney roller
coaster, a railroad, warned those with cardiac conditions and weak backs to
reconsider. The moment of truth was at hand. ''Being adult means not feeling
compelled to do that which you know will make you uncomfortable,'' the engineer
declared.  He was staying on the ground.

''But there are times when you have to prove something to yourself,'' said his
wife. She confessed she was terrified.  Unfazed by a dim memory of almost
falling out of a roller coaster at Coney Island I was the most eager. Gallantry
- or was it force of conjugal habit - supplied me with a companion. They told me
later that it was a thrilling, three-minute catapult into the landscape of the
old Southwest. I missed most of it, instinctively closing my eyes and burying my
head in my husband's shoulder.

As we left the Magic Kingdom, the engineer mused: ''You play tennis and golf
because they're good for you, and go to the theater because it's intellectually
stimulating. This may be the only place an adult can go just to have a good
time.''

We returned to Disney World on a Friday, usually the quietest day of the week.
My husband and I had reserved a room at the Polynesian Village, the
honeymooner's favorite among Disney resorts, but because the 3 P.M. check-in
rule is rigidly enforced we parked our car in the hotel lot at 9 A.M. and
crossed by launch to the Magic Kingdom. Even at that hour, there was a 45-minute
wait for the Jungle Cruise, through simulated Southeast Asian jungle, African
veldt, Nile Valley and Amazon rain forest, much of which we had already glimpsed
in our real world travels.

It struck me during the 10-minute ride that, contrary to what our friend said,
the Disney World of fantasy provides a form of intellectual experience. If you
like Pirandello, you'll love the Magic Kingdom. What is real, what is illusion -
an adult strains to decipher. The tropical foliage was live (maintained by gas
heaters and fans); the animals and the headhunters were pretenders, fine
examples of the Disney Audio Animatronic process, or articulated Tussaud-like
figures.

Reality magnified and gussied up a bit, as in the Circle-Vision 360 ''Magic
Carpet 'Round the World,'' can evoke powerful emotions.  Revisiting familiar
sites from the make-believe vantage point of an airplane equipped with a zoom
lens, so that one almost grazes the Wailing Wall in Jerusalem, counts the
freckles of the Vienna Boys' Choir and bobs along the waters of Hong Kong harbor
(miraculously stripped of its neon billboards for Japanese products), brought a
tear to the eye and a catch in the throat when the journey ended at the Statue
of Liberty.

We had a tranquil lunch at the Liberty Tree Tavern. The freshest of fruit
salads, banana bread with apple butter, and tea cost $12 for two. Afterward, I
took a disappointing turn on Cinderella's Golden Carousel (too slow for this
merry-go-round buff and there was no brass ring to catch). We popped into
Mission to Mars, a reasonable simulation of space flight, and made our only test
of Disney World fast food, a 75-cent blob of chocolate-coated ice called a
frozen banana.

At that point, my husband had exceeded his crowd and queue quota for the next
decade; he fled to the Polynesian Village where it took him one hour and 15
minutes to check in.

Left to my own devices, I indulged a weakness for teddy bears and country and
Western music at the Country Bear Jamboree, and for American history at the Hall
of the Presidents. This presentation in film and Animatronics focuses on the
importance of the Constitution and places super-heroic emphasis on Abraham
Lincoln. Not a word was uttered about the New Deal or the Vietnam war, or about
Teddy Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson.

The patriotic appeal was unmistakable as was the hard sell for ''American free
enterprise'' in the Epcot Preview, an introduction to the 600-acre addition to
Disney World scheduled to open this fall.  Walt Disney was a master propagandist
and Disney World presents a wartless face of capitalism, a mind-boggling
affirmation of the American Dream. A simple man, endowed only with genius,
creates a mighty empire. Part of Disney's genius was his ability to build an
organization to carry on after his death in 1966. So I reflected as I sailed
away from the Magic Kingdom over the rippling lagoon as a crimson sun sank into
a mauve cloud bank.

Our $105-a-night room at the Polynesian Village measured 20 by 15 feet and
overlooked the lagoon. The bed was imperial size, the towels fluffy and
abundant, room service efficient. By every measure, including the facilities for
swimming and boating, Polynesian Village is a first-class resort.

Fearing crowds, we had breakfast in our room. The $5.50 Samoan special included
fresh orange juice and rolls, coffee, bacon and scrambled eggs that summoned
memories of an Air Force mess for my husband. It took 10 minutes to check out at
10:15 A.M. and we were off to the airport, drawing these conclusions about an
adult vacation at Disney World.

- Do not expect a great eating experience. On the other hand, prices seemed
fair.

- One cannot help but be impressed by the technical virtuosity and precision.

- For one inured to urban brutality, the orderliness, cleanliness and the
helpfulness of the polite Disney personnel, all of which undoubtedly foster the
good humor of the crowds, are both invigorating and relaxing.

- None of us missed having child guides to Disney World. But I would like to go
back with an escort three feet tall.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of visitors at Disneyworld Map of Disneyworld

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FIRE AND BRIMSTONE CAPATURED ON FILM

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 14, Column 5; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 968 words


MORRISTOWN THERE is something pleasing about the idea of a photographer born in
a country as flat as the Netherlands specializing in pictures of volcanoes. This
is the situation with Mathias Van Hesemans, whose second show at the Woodman
Gallery, 8 Dehart Place, will continue through next Sunday.

However, the paradox should not be dwelt on because Mr. Van Hesemans grew up in
California and because, as his black-and-whites indicate, he has been much
inspired by Ansel Adams. With his camera, Mr. Adams has done as much for the
monumental landscape of the West as Bierstadt and Moran did in their paintings.

A Vietnam veteran, Mr. Van Hesemans became interested in photography during the
war and later took degrees in it at, among other places, San Francisco State
University.

His first break came in 1977, when he filmed Kilauea, the Hawaiian volcano, as
it was erupting. The film was shown on nationwide television to the narration of
Walter Cronkite.

While in Hawaii, Mr. Van Hesemans directed the Brett Weston workshop there,
having already taught at the Ansel Adams Gallery in Yosemite and assisted at
several of the master's workshops, where he encountered other stars such as Wynn
Bullock, Paul Caponigro and Jerry Uelsmann.

Since then, Mr. Van Hesemans has published a book of photographs, ''Life
Cycle,'' in a limited edition, has been featured in various Hawaiian and
Californian journals, has had several shows in the West and has gained the
sponsorship of the Bell and Howell-Mamiya Company.

Still, you might say that his greatest patron has been Pele, the Hawaiian
goddess of volcanoes, who is said to take care of her friends but who
nevertheless has given her name to the most violent type of volcanic explosion.

Although Madam Pele's home is in the Halemaumau fire pit of Kalauea, her
influence apparently reaches North America, for some of Mr. Van Hesemans's best
works concern Mount St. Helens in Washington (before and after its performance
of two years ago).

Having had some close shaves, Mr. Van Hesemans takes care to add Pele's initial
to his signature on the prints. If he continues to placate the deity, she will
possibly come through for him again when he visits Alaska later on this year.

As an armchair vulcanophile, the reviewer naturally was predisposed to the
pictures. They feature marvelous sights, like lava columns in Hawaii silhouetted
against steam (or smoke) by the sun's rays and the dazzling stratification of
igneous rocks in Oregon.

In one aerial shot, a snow-covered Mount St. Helens appears dormant; in another,
the snow looks like skin that has aged into fine wrinkles, and ribbons of black
lava curl down to the foot of the mountain.

Yet, without the microscopic needles that are trees, stripped of their foliage,
at the bottom, there would be no gauging the scale of the peak or knowing really
what had happened. Not so with a third view, where something has taken a huge
bite of the slope and strewn trees around like matchsticks.

But in the end, it seems that Mr. Van Hesemans is not interested purely in acts
of God (or goddesses), and this is both a strength and a failing.

The strength is in the esthetics of the prints themselves - the shots of the
glistening, pahoehoe-type lava looking here like entrails, there like melted
bronze, with some shapes hinting at limbs and drapery and the study of one large
and several small white stones mimicking, on black earth, asteroids in space.

The failing, in this opinion, is the lack of substance that invariably goes with
such photographic metaphors, especially when the reality is more imposing than
the object it is thought to resemble.

Gifted and intrepid, Mr. Van Hesemans may have learned from Ansel Adams that a
photograph can be an art object, but he hasn't fully developed his master's
ability to express awe and respect for the object's subject.

It is possible that he is still a little too intent on making art - note the
diagonal abstraction created by black lava impinging on gray gravel - but his
pictures, which include studies of subtropical foliage, are nonetheless handsome
and memorable.

Another display at Woodman celebrates the first portfolio of Brian Lav, which is
obtainable at the gallery. A resident of Elizabeth and a photographer whose
reputation is growing steadily, Mr. Lav shares several mentors (Mr. Adams among
them) with Mr. Van Hesemans, having spent some time on the West Coast earlier in
his career.

But his friend, George Tice, has exerted the greatest influence on him, as on
several other up-and-coming photographers in the state.  Incidentally, Mr. Tice,
in an introduction to the portfolio, singles out the print that least resembles
his own work: a shot taken at night of two young girls sitting in the playground
of a school. He notes that its surrealistic qualities are of the real world, not
the dark room.

Most of the prints have been seen in previous Woodman shows. All are of vintage
quality, especially the landscape with a tree worthy of Atget that is balanced
by a lighted telephone booth. Both shapes are reflected in a smooth pond.

Still, it is Ticey and the reviewer, although devoted to the New Jersey master's
work, begins to hope for Oedipal restiveness among his disciples.

Mr. Lav has his own dry sense of humor and a very good design sense, so he could
afford to take more risks than he has so far - in subject matter, if not in
technique. The beautifully lit study of a male nude face down on a bed is an
auspicious start.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEMPSTEAD RE-CYCLING: 'GIVE IT A CHANCE'

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 15, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 378 words


In reference to the article on the recycling plant, I have attended the meetings
of the Town of Hempstead Committee on Solid Waste Disposal as one of the two
official observers representing the Salisbury Civic Association in South
Westbury.

No legitimate attempts were made to study alternatives to this plant.
Alternatives do exist and as a taxpaying resident of the Town of Hempstead, I
urge Mr. Gulotta to instruct the committee to continue its necessary
investigation of alternatives either as individual methods or in combination.

Underlying the principles of our democracy is that the government is the servant
of the people. As a wage-earning community, we do not have the resources of
Parsons & Whittemore or municipalities to finance independent studies for the
purpose of exploring alternatives to life-threatening conditions. Government has
the obligation to study and propose alternatives. As citizens, it is not our
function to prove that a condition is unsafe. Rather, it is the Government's
responsibility to prove that it is safe.

Despite all the problems that we have all become aware of, in view of the plight
of the Vietnam veterans in their battle with the Government and the manufacturer
of Agent Orange, must we also be involuntarily exposed to dioxin?

It cannot be denied that there is no standard for what amount of dioxin can
safely be inhaled. Must we learn our fate after it is too late, and then be
required to seek a special statue of limitations from the Legislature for the
Hempstead garbage plant victims?

The attorney for the plant owners, Kenneth Rubin, threatens that the Town of
Hempstead is subject to potential liability for the taking of property. We will
not be forced from our concerns by these threats since the taking of property
pales in the face of the taking of life.

The Government is our protector with its first responsibility the safety and
health of its citizens. Once this has been satisfied, then its attention can be
directed to property.  SHELLEY LOTENBERG Salisbury Civic Association South
Westbury

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 11, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WILL THEY CLASSIFY EVEN THE ALPHABET?

BYLINE: By James C. Goodale and Lawrence M. Martin

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 848 words


President Reagan has signed a new executive order that vastly increases the
power of Administration officials to stamp documents ''classified.'' Intended to
protect our country's secrets from falling into enemy hands, this order actually
will be used to keep almost everything secret.

Such overclassification will in turn breed contempt for the classification stamp
itself and encourage Government officials to leak any information that would
promote their political interests.

The Presidential order is thus a bad one, and should be rescinded.  An executive
order is a directive by the President to officials in the executive branch of
the Government. Since World War II, Presidents have issued such orders to guide
officials involved in military and foreign affairs in deciding what information
to keep secret. An executive order needs no vote or even debate by Congress to
gain the force of law.

Sadly, President Reagan's new order reverses two decades of painstaking efforts
by Richard M. Nixon and Jimmy Carter to strengthen America's security system.

The goal has always been to limit classification to what truly threatens
national security. Thus, a document was previously classified only if its
disclosure would pose an ''identifiable'' danger to national security.

Under the new order, any vague threat will do. Similarly, the categories of
classifiable information identified in the old rules were specific and clearly
set out. Under the Reagan order, all ''systems'' or ''plans'' or ''projects''
somehow ''relating to national security'' can be stamped classified.

(Would interstate-highway maps thereby become classifiable?  Representative
Glenn L. English, chairman of the Government Information Subcommittee of the
Government Operations Committee thinks so.)

Finally, when a document does not really pose a threat to national security, the
earlier rules allow the responsible official not to classify it. Under the new
order, classification would be mandatory whenever it is at all possible.

The effect of all this classification is no mystery. Before President Nixon
began the process of tightening up classification standards, similar policies
prevailed, and classification was almost automatic.

Among the thousands of documents that were classified was a history of the
Vietnam War. When that document was leaked, the famous Pentagon Papers case
resulted. Justice Potter Stewart of the United States Supreme Court, in his
opinion in that case, summed up the unfortunate effect of lax classification
policies: ''when everything is classified, then nothing is classified.''
Anything, that is, might be leaked.

This paradoxical result is actually quite understandable. Wide powers of
classification bring about the indiscriminate use of the classification stamp.

Vital national secrets are of course stamped, but so are politically
embarrassing documents (such as the Pentagon Papers) or any piece of paper that
seems vaguely sensitive. With so much technically secret, no one knows what is
truly secret. Officials come to see the stamp as a political tool that allows
them to keep secret what would hurt them and to leak what they want publicized.

Two recent events illustrate this phenomenon. In January, a White House official
told The Washington Post that a Defense Department study placed the cost of the
Administration's defense buildup at $2.25 billion, rather than the $1.5 billion
that had been reported.  Then, in March, a Pentagon official explained to a
group of reporters ''exactly how the Soviet Union could wipe out the U.S.
military system with 'two or three' well directed missiles.'' This was done, The
Daily News reported, to convince the public that a new defense program is
needed. The first of these disclosures should never have been kept from the
American people; the second is a vital military secret that should perhaps never
have been revealed to the public.  But both were officially ''secrets'' - and
both were leaked.

With all these leaks, how can we protect our nation's security?  Again, the
answer comes from Justice Stewart's opinion in the Pentagon Papers case, and
again is paradoxical: ''the hallmark of a truly effective system would be the
maximum possible disclosure.''

Only when strict standards limit classification to what truly bears on national
security will the classification stamp be honored.  President Reagan should
therefore summon the courage to rescind the order he has just signed, and
commission another that will tighten the present system still further.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
James C. Goodale, former vice chairman and general counsel of The New York
Times, is a member of Debevoise & Plimpton, a New York City law firm. Lawrence
M. Martin is associated with the firm.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Peking Reports Border Firing

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 11


China accused Vietnam today of firing on Chinese vehicles near the Yunnan
Province border, killing a militia officer. The New China News Agency said
Vietnamese troops opened fire Friday on a highway near the border, killing the
militiaman, wounding a worker and damaging a car and truck.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

MUNCIE FINDS FILM ON STUDENTS A DISTORTED MIRROR

BYLINE: By NATHANIEL SHEPPARD Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1316 words

DATELINE: MUNCIE, Ind., April 10


With one sociological study or another under way at almost any given time in
this ''typical'' Middle Western city, residents have nearly become inured to
being scrutinized like laboratory mice.

Or so it seemed until Peter Davis produced his study of Muncie, a six-part
documentary, ''Middletown,'' being broadcast by the Public Broadcasting Service.

Some controversy surrounds three of the six films, but the one that has touched
off by far the biggest furor here is ''Seventeen,'' which Mr. Davis describes as
''a film about the turmoil teen-agers go through'' and which some residents
describe as ''a tasteless put-down of Muncie.''

Question of Releases

Mr. Davis, who won Emmy and Peabody Awards for his CBS News documentary ''The
Selling of the Pentagon'' and an Academy Award for ''Hearts and Minds,'' a
documentary on the Vietnam War, has withdrawn ''Seventeen'' from the
''Middletown'' series. The withdrawal came after a dispute with PBS over editing
and amid network uncertainty about whether releases were properly obtained from
students, parents and others shown in the film.

''Seventeen'' focuses on a group of former students at Southside High School.
There are scenes in which they frequently use profanity, appear to use drugs and
alcohol and discuss racial tensions and interracial dating.

The controversy became public when the local PBS station, WIPB, decided to
screen the film for those shown in it and other interested local people because
of the contents. School officials, parents and some of the students shown were
shocked and dismayed at some of the scenes, and some said later in affidavits
collected by their attorneys that Mr. Davis and his associates had
misrepresented what would be shown.

Larry Dyer, program director for WIPB, said the issues were ''whether or not
actions of the film makers influenced behavior of the students involved and
whether proper permission was obtained from the students or their parents.''

Those who do not want the film shown say the issue of informed consent is the
main one, not the subject matter.  ''There wasn't a skirt above the knee or
anything like that, and it wasn't a witch hunt or censorship,'' said John Byron
Beasley, an attorney for the school system. ''The real issue is whether there
was informed consent on the part of participants.''

State Representative Hurley Goodall, a member of the board of WIPB, said of the
screening: ''It showed a part of the community I'm not proud of and not happy to
see. But Peter didn't put a magic lens on.  If the efforts to prevent the
showing of the film were because people wanted to suppress what was shown, it
was wrong. But if they were for legal reasons, then that is up to the courts to
decide.''

Mr. Davis denied that there was any impropriety in the preparation of
''Seventeen'' and said that ''not one inch is staged in any way or in which
people did not know and permit the filming to be done.'' He also said he hoped
the film could still be shown as part of the series.

Labeled by the Lynds

In place of ''Seventeen,'' many PBS affiliates plan to show ''Middletown
Revisited,'' a television adaptation of the sociological studies of Muncie
conducted in the 1920's and 30's by Helen and Robert Lynd.

It was their work that labeled Muncie a ''typical'' Middle Western city, opening
the floodgate to a multitude of studies that would follow. The projects,
examining everything from clothing to parking problems, have made Muncie perhaps
the most studied city in America.

Upset at the negative image they felt the new film gave Muncie, a group of
school officials and representatives of WIPB flew to Washington late last month
to voice their objections to PBS officials.

Southside students and parents involved in the film have been instructed by
their attorney, Franklyn Douglas Brinkman Jr., to withhold comment on the
controversy because of the possibility of lawsuits if the film is broadcast.

''There is more than the issues of releases and consents and
misrepresentations,'' Mr. Brinkman said. ''There are drugs and booze in the
movie and many of the scenes may have been set up.''

Muncie is a quiet town of about 80,000 people with at least 218 churches. It
sees itself as family-oriented and conservative, and critics of the film such as
Mr. Brinkman stress that the scenes are anything but typical.

Fears of Racial Tension

Harold Trulock, editor of The Muncie Press News, said, ''Much of the objection
to the film was that it might polarize the community racially and erode much of
the progress that has been made in this area.''

He was referring to the way interracial dating and friction between blacks and
whites were handled in the film. The Press News described one segment as showing
parents permitting their daughter and her friends to drink in their home. When
the daughter tells of receiving threats from black girls because of her
relations with black boys, the mother coaches her in the proper way to fight,
offering to give her a gun.

It is significant that Southside High is used in this segment because of its
neighborhood's image as an intolerant community.  Racial tensions flared into
violence there in the 1960's, but school officials and others say the community
has struggled to erase that image.

The south side of town is nicknamed Shedtown, a throwback to its days of
ramshackle housing. The lower-middle-class, blue-collar community has always
been a tough one. Men walk around with packs of cigarettes tucked into their
rolled-up shirt sleeves, and language is often simple and earthy.

It is also a proud community. Race relations have improved considerably,
according to some, although occasionally Ku Klux Klan slogans appear on bathroom
walls at Southside High and disputes sometimes arise over interracial dating.

''If the information in the affidavits we collected is correct, the film
presents a distorted view of race relations,'' said Sam Abram, assistant
superintendent for secondary schools.

He referred to a portion of the documentary that other critics said showed a
group of white youths in Thomas Park, apparently taunting an unseen group of
blacks whom they dare to come to the park. The problem with the scene, according
to critics, is that there were no blacks present and the white youths were
really talking to the camera.

''True, there were no blacks,'' Mr. Davis said. ''They were talking about
fighting another gang, and it was a gang of white kids. And the fight never
occurred. The scene has nothing to do with race relations and blacks.''

Davis Defends Film

''The film is about the turmoil teen-agers go through and some express this more
openly than others,'' he went on. ''The film contains both joy and despair and,
I believe, an accurate picture of the participants who are in it. There is no
narration, and no one says it is what every young person in America or in Muncie
does.''

Dr. Abram said that ''interracial dating goes on and has been accepted'' and
that no one believed that educators should be obliged to prevent it. However,
some parents do not condone it, and some were disturbed that the film was their
first indication that their children were involved in it.

''Southside High has gone through a growing process in which it has moved away
from being a school where it would be difficult to handle such situations,'' Dr.
Abram said. ''The staff has seen the movie and will use it as an opportunity to
move in a positive way to further improve the school.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Byron Beasley with Sam Abram map of
Indiana showing Muncie photo of Franklyn Douglas Brinkman Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

OTHER RELIGIOUS GROUPS JOIN MOON CHURCH IN ITS DISPUTE WITH CITY ON TAXES

BYLINE: By DAVID MARGOLICK

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1429 words


While the Rev. Sun Myung Moon defends himself against charges of tax fraud in
Federal District Court in Manhattan, the religious and political mission of the
church he heads is under examination in the New York State Court of Appeals.

And although the issues before New York's highest court ostensibly concern the
subtleties of tax policy, the case has sparked all of the emotion associated
with Mr. Moon's evangelical Christian movement.  It has also intensified debate
about the proper role of religious organizations in politics.

Concerned over whether their own political activities could affect their
tax-exempt status, an array of mainstream religious organizations have filed
''friends of the court'' briefs on behalf of Mr. Moon's Unification Church. They
include the National Council of Churches, the Catholic League for Civil and
Religious Rights, the National Association of Evangelicals and the American
Jewish Congress.

The Unification Church is seeking to overturn a 1977 decision by the New York
City Tax Commission to withhold tax exemptions for three properties the church
owns in Manhattan and Queens. The commission asserted that the church's mission
was too heavily imbued with politics and business for it to be considered a
sufficiently religious enterprise to qualify for tax breaks.

''The city is not comparing or criticizing religious beliefs,'' said Frederick
A.O. Schwarz Jr., the city's Corporation Counsel.  ''The important general
policy question involved here is whether or not an organization found to be a
business can be granted a tax exemption simply because it gives itself the label
of a church.''

In its court papers, the commission refers to the Unification Church as a
''primarily politico-messianic organization'' and a ''complicated and
interlocking corporate conglomerate'' that seeks ''to influence public policy,
engage in commerce and recruit cadres of 'believers.' ''

It charges further that the church is engaged in excessive commercial
activities, including seafood purveying and the importing of furs and ginseng
tea.

''Were this court to conclude that the views of the Unification Church, and its
use of its property, meet the criteria of 'primarily religious,' then it will be
impossible to explain why other ideologies - such as economic determinism,
Social Darwinism, or even vegetarianism - will not similarly qualify as
religious under the First Amendment,'' the Tax Commission contends.

Defense by Church Lawyers

Lawyers for the church counter that it is ''an undeniably genuine religion whose
only sins have been to meet with popular distrust and to speak openly on social
and political issues to which its theology attaches deep significance.'' They
maintain that the commission's ruling, later upheld by an appellate court and a
special referee, is not only unconstitutional but also threatens even
''establishment'' religions.

''Virtually all religions in America address political and economic matters
within their basic theology, and have leaders and members who engage in
political and economic life,'' the church's counsel, Prof.  Laurence H. Tribe of
the Harvard Law School, argued in papers filed for the case. ''The court below
both denied the Unification Church equal treatment under the law and so
radically redefined religion as to place the religious status of essentially
every church, synagogue and mosque in the gravest potential jeopardy.''

Henry Siegman, executive director of the American Jewish Congress, said, ''The
American Jewish Congress has no use for the Unification Church, an organization
we find dishonest and despicable.'' But he added, ''The court's determination
that a theology whose beliefs extend to political and economic issues is not
entitled to tax exemption poses a direct threat to all religions.''

Charges in Tax-Fraud Case

In the tax-fraud case, being heard before Judge Gerard L. Goettel, Mr. Moon is
charged with failing to report more than $100,000 in interest earned on $1.6
million deposited in his name in New York bank accounts. The defense contends
that the account belongs to the church, not to Mr. Moon.

At issue in the State Court of Appeals case is the tax status of three
properties purchased by the church in 1975 - its headquarters, at 4 West 43d
Street, formerly the Columbia University Club of New York; a ''missionary
residence'' at 305 West 107th Street, and a maintenance and storage facility at
38-38 Ninth Street in Queens, one-time site of the Loft candy factory. The
church first sought tax exemptions for the properties in 1976.

On April 13, 1977, the Tax Commission denied the request by a vote of 4 to 3. It
found the church ''inextricably interwoven with political motives and
activities,'' citing lobbying for Korean unification, support of former
President Richard M. Nixon during the Watergate scandal and its backing of the
American war effort in Vietnam.

First Amendment Cited

That decision was upheld in August 1980 by Donald Diamond, a special referee,
and in May 1981 by the Appellate Division, which concluded that even were the
mission of the church primarily religious, it had failed to prove the premises
in question were being put to religious use.

Last month before the Court of Appeals in Albany, Professor Tribe asserted that
the denial of tax-exempt status amounted to an impermissible penalty on the
Unification Church for employing its First Amendment rights to free speech and
the free exercise of religion. He asserted, moreover, that the penalty exacted
on the Unification Church for political activities he said were tolerated from
more acceptable religious groups represented a ''transparent tendency to
disadvantage the unknown, the unfamiliar, the unpopular,'' in violation of the
church's right to equal protection under the law.

''There can be no doubt whatever that a religion's adherence to the view that
its mission is to criticize and reform the secular order - a view held by the
church here - can serve neither as a badge of insincerity nor as a sign of
nonreligiosity,'' Professor Tribe said.  ''As far as the Constitution is
concerned, the contrary rule would, incredibly, condemn virtually all Western
religions, and many Eastern religions as well, to the dustbin of bogus belief.
That simply cannot be the law.''

The National Council of Churches, while noting its distaste for the Unification
Church, stressed that many critical figures in Christian history - from Jesus to
Martin Luther and Pope John XXIII - were interested in temporal affairs and that
religious leaders must continue to be.

Such issues as atomic weapons, genetic engineering and transnational
corporations, it said, ''have immense effects upon human well-being and the
future of the human race. What kind of religion would not be intensely concerned
about such things for profoundly religious reasons?''

Coercive Persuasion

Even though it bases its defense almost exclusively on the Unification Church's
purportedly excessive business and political entanglements, the Tax Commission
alluded in its court papers to those charges most frequently leveled against the
Korean evangelist and his church: that it resorted to coercive persuasion to
enlist members.

The commission quotes approvingly an opinion handed down by the zoning board in
New Castle, N.Y., that castigates the church for its ''indoctrinational thought
reform program.'' In denying a request for a variance, the zoning board asserted
that Unification Church practices deprived individuals of ''free will or freedom
of choice'' and led to ''psychological damage both temporary and permanent.''

Mr. Tribe, author of the leading treatise on American constitutional law,
conceded that the poor public image of the Unification Church had given him
pause before he accepted the case, -and has prompted a fair share of hate mail
to him since then.

He nonetheless dismissed charges that his client engaged in thought control any
more often or excessively than other organized religions.

''Those I've met in the church hardly seemed to be zombies,'' he said. ''They're
perfectly ordinary, clean-cut young people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Fredrick A.O. Schwartz (Page B3)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

THE REGION;
Dioxin Found In Hooker Landfill

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 212 words


Low concentrations of dioxin, a highly toxic component of the herbicide Agent
Orange, have been found at an industrial waste landfill on the site of a Hooker
Chemicals and Plastics Corporation plant in the Buffalo suburb of North
Tonawanda, N.Y., company and state officials reported yesterday.

Because the dioxin is buried under a parking lot and has not been found off
Hooker's 20-acre Durez Division site, it poses no immediate hazard to the
plant's 500 employees or to the nearest residential and industrial neighbors
several hundred yards away, said James Green, a Hooker spokesman.

John Spagnoli, the regional director of the state's Department of Environmental
Conservation, said, ''We don't envision this as a major environmental crisis,''
But he said studies at the site would be undertaken this week.

Mr. Green said the dioxin had apparently leaked from drums buried between the
1920's and the 1970's to dispose of waste in the production of phenol, which is
used in manufacturing molding compounds and industrial resins at the plant.
Dioxin is believed to cause cancer and has been blamed by Vietnam-era veterans
for a wide range of ailments. said .

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 13, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
Veteran Gets a Purple Heart, 16 Years After

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 260 words


Sometimes the spirit in which an award is given is as important as its
substance, says Armand A. Comire, of Danielson, Conn., who received a Purple
Heart yesterday, nearly 16 years after being wounded in Vietnam.

Mr. Comire received serious lung and stomach injuries in a Vietcong mortar
attack on Lak Tho on June 7, 1966. Shot while he lay wounded, he escaped death
by playing dead and lay unattended for eight hours.  He was hospitalized for 14
months and is severely disabled. Recently he had surgery to restore sight in one
eye.

Two months after he was wounded, he recalled, he asked a sergeant in a military
hospital about a medal.  ''He reached into a desk drawer and threw one in front
of me, and said, 'If you want a Purple Heart, there's one.' '' said Mr. Comire.
''I told him, 'That isn't my Purple Heart, or the manner in which I'm supposed
to receive it.' ''

Over the years, he said, the medal came to mean more and more to him, because
''as a Vietnam vet gets older, he realizes the sacrifice he did make.'' Last
December the 38-year-old Mr. Comire called Representative Sam Gejdenson of
Connecticut and asked for help.

And so yesterday, in the ornate chamber of the State Senate, Mr.  Comire,
wearing the insignia of the 101st Airborne Division, got his Purple Heart, with
his name engraved on the back. It was pinned on by Brig. Gen. John F. Gore,
acting adjutant general of the Connecticut National Guard.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 14, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

Phnom Penh Says U.S. Gives Asian Allies Chemical Arms

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 107 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 13


The Vietnamese-backed Government in Cambodia charges that the United States has
introduced chemical weapons into Thailand and Pakistan, the Hanoi radio reported
today.

It quoted a commentary in the official Phnom Penh newspaper Kampuchea that said,
''the U.S. slander campaign against the Soviet Union on the use of toxic
chemicals in Cambodia and Afghanistan is only aimed at misleading world public
opinion.''

''In fact the U.S. has supplied Thailand and Pakistan with chemical weapons.''
Thailand borders Cambodia and Pakistan borders Afghanistan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 14, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MITTERRAND IS OFF FOR VISIT TO JAPAN

BYLINE: By RICHARD EDER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 376 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 13


Until recently, France's sales of Perrier to Japan were drastically inhibited by
the Japanese requirement that it be boiled. True, French cognac did not have to
be boiled, but that, precisely, is the heart of one of the major complaints that
President Francois Mitterrand was carrying along as he left today for the first
visit ever made by a French head of state to Japan.

It is an elaborately prepared visit, the most elaborate of the many that Mr.
Mitterrand has undertaken. He is taking his most important Cabinet ministers
with him, as well as Jacques Ser@van-Schreiber, the leading purveyor of the view
that if France does not learn to work like Japan it will become a Versailles
staffed by 60 million caretakers.

Large-scale projects of scientific and cultural exchange will be announced, and
Mr. Mitterrand will talk to poets and historians as well as politicians. But
trade will be the aching tooth in the smile.

'They Buy Our History'

''They sell us their industry,'' a commentator here wrote. ''They buy our
history.'' In other words, it is felt here, while Japan offers cars, motorcycles
and electronic equipment to France, what the Japanese let in are mainly wines
and haute couture and expensive luggage.

History earns less than industry does, and the French trade deficit with Japan
has risen to $1.5 billion, nine times what it was in 1974.  There are no major
political issues to be settled or raised between the two countries, but Mr.
Mitterrand hopes to build up his contacts and to take a lead in drawing Japan
closer to political cooperation with the European Community.

In addition, the French President is expected to discuss with the Japanese
recent French efforts to improve relations with Vietnam.  France's condemnation
of the Vietnamese-imposed Government of Cambodia has kept Paris-Hanoi relations
frosty, but the Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, paid a visit here
last week, and Foreign Minister Claude Cheysson is to visit Hanoi later this
year.

Finally, Mr. Mitterrand will discuss the summit meeting of industrialized
countries that will be held here in June. The effect of Japan's trade policies
on Western Europe and the United States is expected to be one of the larger and
more heated issues.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 15, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK;
NO ICONOGRAPHY FOR CASTRO

BYLINE: By LESLIE H. GELB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 808 words

DATELINE: HAVANA


There is something missing in Cuba. It is first sensed at Havana airport and on
the long ride into town. It is the pictures of Fidel Castro that are not on the
walls; the statues of him that are not in the squares.

In Communist or authoritarian countries around the world, visages of the leader
stare down from everywhere. The cult of personality seems to fill the void of
internal legitimacy. But not in Cuba.

Jose Marti, the late 19th-century poet and revolutionary, gets top statuary
billing as the father of Cuban independence.  It is in conversations that one
feels Mr. Castro's presence.  Everyone seems to call him ''Fidel.''

The three eras of Cuban history -Spanish, American, and Soviet - blend in a
cacophonous kind of harmony. The old Spanish-style squares and buildings are
graceful and beautiful. The American period is represented by Miami-style
hotels, tall and marbled, and late 1940's and early 1950's models of Buicks,
Chevrolets and Fords.

The new cars cost 4,000 Cuban pesos ($4,800). The average monthly salary is 180
pesos. Even at rush hour, there are not many cars on the streets.

But the whole atmosphere is Cuban and the atmosphere is Latin and poor, not dull
and gray Communism.

Sugar is the staple of the economy and its future is not promising. So the
Cubans are experimenting with their economy, hoping to find ways to spur
productivity in other areas.

Workers in one factory did not like their housing. They made a deal with the
Government. Some of the workers would work full time on building a new housing
complex, with materials provided by the Government. The workers remaining in the
factory would put in more hours to meet the quotas. Somehow, it all got done.

There is a new law permitting joint ventures with other countries or private
businesses. Foreign partners are even allowed to own more than half the shares.

For farmers, once they meet their quotas, can sell the excess for a profit. As a
result, there is said to be more food and a lot of quarreling about quotas.

But United States-style free enterprise is still shunned. A few weeks ago, a
sale of television sets was announced at a Havana store. A few enterprising
people got in line the night before, bought up all the sets and sold them at
three to four times cost. They were arrested.

It is almost impossible for a foreign visitor to have a conversation without
getting a lecture on the history of the Castro revolution and of what are viewed
as American aggression and imperialism. The bitterness pours out, back to the
Spanish-American War and the sinking of the Maine.

Cubans see almost nothing wrong with their own actions. They even seem surprised
to hear Americans argue that indeed Cuba has the right to help foment
revolutions and send troops to Africa, but that the United States then has the
right to make Cuba pay certain penalties.

In their eyes and speech are all the pride and defiance of the David and Goliath
story.  Every year, they celebrate the anniversary of the Bay of Pigs invasion
of April 1961, when the Cubans foiled a landing by United States-supported
anti-Communist exiles. The billboard signs are all over the place. In private
conversations, the question is repeatedly asked, ''Is the United States going to
invade Cuba?''

'The Vietnam Syndrome'

It could all be planned, but the fears seem genuine, as is the Cubans' resolve
to resist.  Officials and scholars recite the argument: the United States wants
to overcome ''the Vietnam syndrome,'' build up the military budget, prove to the
world that it is prepared to use force, go to the source of trouble in Cuba. The
Cubans want reassurance, and when they get it, they do not believe it.

Curiously, the same people also argue, like officials of the Soviet Union a year
or so ago, that a conservative government in Washington like the Reagan
Administration is more likely than a liberal Democratic administration to bear
the political problems of trying to normalize relations with Cuba..

It is Saturday night and the eve of a Young Communist League meeting in Havana.
Mass is being celebrated in the cathedrals. There are block parties, with music
and dancing all over the city.

The six-day workweek is long. Not long ago, Mr. Castro told his people that they
had tightened their belts for 20 years and he was asking them to do it again for
another 20.

High on the balcony of the Havana Libre Hotel, reputedly built with Mafia money
just before the revolution in 1959, the music is rising from every corner. It
goes on until early in the morning.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of outdoor cafe in Havana

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 15, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

3 EDITORS AT THE TIMES GET NEW ASSIGNMENTS

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 462 words


A change of assignments for three editors of The New York Times was announced
yesterday by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the paper's publisher.  Charlotte Curtis,
editor of the Op-Ed page since 1974 and an associate editor of The Times, will
write a regular column in the news pages starting in June. She will be succeeded
by Robert B.  Semple Jr., who has been foreign news editor. Mr. Semple's deputy,
Craig R. Whitney, will become foreign news editor.

The Op-Ed page was established in September 1970. It is supervised by Max
Frankel, editor of the editorial page. Its function is to give readers a broad
range of opinion and analysis of current issues.

''Charlotte Curtis has fulfilled that mission with great distinction,'' Mr.
Sulzberger said. ''I welcome her decision to return to writing.''

Miss Curtis joined The Times in 1961 as a reporter. She became the newspaper's
family/style editor in 1965 and an associate editor in 1973, when she was named
editor of the Op-Ed page.

She is the author of ''First Lady'' (1963), a book about Jacqueline Kennedy's
first year in the White House, and ''The Rich and Other Atrocities'' (1976).

Miss Curtis, a native of Chicago, is a graduate of Vassar College.  She began
her newspaper career as a general assignment reporter with The Columbus (Ohio)
Citizen.

Mr. Semple, as foreign editor, has directed the work of the paper's 32 foreign
correspondents for five years.  He joined The Times's Washington bureau in 1963
and was a general assignment reporter, political reporter and White House
correspondent during Richard M. Nixon's first term. He was appointed deputy
national editor in 1973, London bureau chief in 1975 and foreign editor in
February 1977.

Mr. Semple was born in St. Louis in 1936. He graduated from Phillips Academy in
Andover, Mass., in 1954 and, after a year abroad, from Yale in 1959. He received
an M.A. in history from the University of California at Berkeley in 1961.

Mr. Whitney has been deputy foreign editor since October 1980. He was previously
the newspaper's bureau chief in Moscow (1979-1980), in Bonn (1973-1977) and in
Saigon (1971-1973).

Mr. Whitney joined The Times's Washington bureau in June 1965 as an assistant to
the columnist James Reston. He joined the Navy in May 1966 and spent three years
as a public affairs officer in the Pentagon and with the Seventh Fleet in
Saigon. He left the Navy in June 1969 as a lieutenant (J.G.) and rejoined The
Times.

He was born in October 1943 in Milford, Mass., graduated from Phillips Academy
in 1961 and earned a bachelor of arts degree, magna cum laude, from

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of Charlotte Curtis, Robert B. Semple Jr. and
Craig R. Whitney

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 16, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

STATES HEEDING PLEAS TO STRENGTHEN LAWS ON DRUNKEN DRIVING

BYLINE: By WILLIAM DICKE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1497 words


Amid rising public concern over the tens of thousands of deaths and injuries
caused each year by drunken drivers, states from Maine to California are
imposing tough new penalties, raising the legal drinking age or making it easier
to obtain convictions.

The flurry of legislative activity was prompted by citizen organizations in many
state capitals. Members of such groups as Mothers Against Drunk Driving and
Remove Intoxicated Drivers have moved politicians to action with testimony about
the loss of a child, grandchild or spouse at the hands of a driver who had been
drinking.  In a few states, politicians have pushed the issue more than the
voters have.

''I believe we as a nation have finally come to realize that more people are
being killed annually by people driving under the influence of alcohol and drugs
than soldiers were killed in Vietnam,'' said Judge Harvey Baxter of Dade County
Court in Florida.

Last year there were 49,125 traffic deaths in the United States, according to
preliminary figures compiled by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration. About half the deaths came in accidents involving drinking,
according to the National Safety Council. The American combat death toll in
Vietnam was 47,752 over 16 years.

In other signs of increasing concern, the Senate Commerce Committee has approved
a bill to encourage states to enact tougher laws on drunken driving, and
President Reagan established a 30-member commission Wednesday to work with state
and local governments on the problem.

A spot-check of more than a dozen states shows that governors and legislators
have grappled with the problem in a variety of ways.  Among recent actions taken
were these:

- Maryland increased the legal drinking age to 21 and Connecticut increased it
to 19, both from 18. At least 15 states have taken similar steps since the late
1970's, reversing a movement toward lower minimum drinking ages that began in
the 1960's.

- Maine eased the standard necessary to convict first offenders in less serious
cases and stiffened penalties in some cases.

- The Arizona Legislature moved toward a ban on plea agreements in drunken
driving cases.

- California set a mandatory penalty of two days in jail or a 90-day license
suspension for first offenders; Florida imposed a sixmonth license suspension
and Wisconsin a 90-day suspension.

- Dade County, which encompasses Miami, began to videotape the testing of
drivers arrested on suspicion of being intoxicated, for later use in court.
After watching the tapes, 90 percent of those arrested plead guilty.

Penalties Stiffened Locally

In New York, stiffer penalties for first offenders took effect last year,
providing for a fine of $350 to $500, an automatic sixmonth license suspension
and a possible one-year jail sentence. A bill raising the drinking age from 18
to 19 has been endorsed by Governor Carey, but prospects for passage are
uncertain.

The Connecticut Legislature, which passed a bill Wednesday to raise the minimum
drinking age, is now considering a bill unanimously approved by the Judiciary
Committee that would raise the penalty for vehicular homicide to 10 years in
prison and a $10,000 fine from five years and a $5,000 fine. The bill is
scheduled to come to a vote in the House of Representatives today.

New Jersey raised the minimum drinking age to 19 from 18 a year ago, and pending
legislation would increase it to 20 or 21. A law that took effect in January
stiffened penalties, providing, for example, that a first offender surrender his
license for six to 12 months as against two to six months under the previous
law.

However, some prosecutors, police officers and judges have suggested that some
of the steps being taken, particularly mandatory jail sentences and limits on
plea agreements, may not solve the problem and may create new ones.

''There's no easy answer to this problem,'' said Curtis A. Winston, manager of
the Office of Highway Safety in New Jersey. ''Otherwise it would have been
solved a long time ago.''

California Group Formed in 1980

One of the most active lobbying groups, Mothers Against Drunk Driving, was
founded by Candy Lightner of Fair Oaks, Calif., and some friends after her
13-year-old daughter, Cari, was struck and killed by an automobile in May 1980.

The driver, who had previously been arrested four times for drunken driving, was
intoxicated, Mrs. Lightner said. He was convicted of vehicular manslaughter and
served 10 months in jail but is eligible to have his driver's license
reinstated.

The group's lobbying led to passage of stiffer laws, which took effect in
January. Under these laws, a blood alcohol content of more than 0.10 percent is
considered absolute proof of intoxication. It was previously treated as
presumptive evidence and was often challenged successfully.

The laws also require that a first offender pay a fine of $375 and serve two
days in jail or lose his license for 90 days. If a drunken driving charge is
reduced to a lesser offense through plea bargaining, the driver's record is
required to show that alcohol was involved, a move to make it easier to keep
track of repeat offenders.

Death Toll Fell, Then Rose

The state's highway death toll fell 24 percent in January and February but crept
up in March. Kent Milton, a spokesman for the California Highway Patrol,
cautioned that it was too early to draw conclusions about the effect of the
changes.

The authorities in Maine also reported a decline of 44 percent in
alcohol-related traffic fatalities in the six months after a tougher law took
effect last September.

The law established civil and criminal categories of offenses. A first offender
who has a blood alcohol level from 0.10 to 0.19 percent and is not involved in
an accident is charged with a civil infraction that carries a possible penalty
of a $250 fine and a 45-day license suspension. A driver who tests above 0.10
percent and is involved in an accident or chase or who tests 0.20 percent or
above is charged with a criminal offense and faces a mandatory two-day jail
sentence.

A tough Wisconsin law that becomes fully effective May 1 was prompted by the
death of a 4-year-old girl, Kelly Schuett, who was crossing a quiet street in
Oconomowoc on April 5, 1980, when she was struck by a car. She died the next
day, Easter Sunday.

The 30-year-old driver was convicted of driving while intoxicated for the second
time. He was fined $284 and his license was suspended for three months. No proof
was offered that he could have avoided striking the girl even if sober.

The girl's parents, Mark and Bonnie Schuett, began a letterwriting campaign and
pressed for legislative action.  ''We aren't saying that Kelly wasn't partly to
blame,'' Mrs.  Schuett told a reporter. ''We're not saying she was - we just
don't know. But the fact is the man was driving drunk and his driving ability
was impaired. He shouldn't have been on the road.''

Rising Fines for Each Offense

Under the new law, first offenders will lose their licenses for at least 90 days
and face fines of $150 to $300. A second offense within five years would result
in five days to six months in jail, a fine of $300 to $1,000 and revocation of
the license for six to 12 months. Judges will no longer be able to substitute
treatment for part of the jail sentence.

In Arizona, a crackdown on drunken drivers became a top priority after State
Representative Clare Dunn of Tucson and an aide were killed in a head-on
collision last year. The driver of the other automobile was accused of being
intoxicated.

Slightly different versions of a measure that would mandate more jail time,
greater fines and longer license suspensions upon conviction were approved by
both houses of the Legislature and sent to a conference committee. Gov. Bruce
Babbitt has endorsed the measure.

One of the nation's toughest laws on drunken driving will take effect in Florida
in July. A first offender must pay $350 in fines and court costs and will lose
his license for six months. A third offense would mean forfeiture of the license
for 10 years, 30 days in jail and a $1,000 fine.

Judge Baxter said he feared that Florida's new law might clog the judicial
system because of its mandatory sentencing feature.  ''It's been shown that with
a mandatory jail sentence police are more reluctant to arrest first offenders,''
said Lieut. Richard Miller of the Michigan State Police, adding that judges and
juries might also be more reluctant to convict.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 16, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NICARAGUAN LEADER WHO QUIT LAST YEAR DENOUNCES EX-ALLIES

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 270 words

DATELINE: SAN JOSE, Costa Rica, April 15


Breaking nine months of silence, Eden Pastora, one of the most popular leaders
of the Nicaraguan revolution, criticized the Sandinists today for the direction
they have taken their revolution.

Mr. Pastora charged in a news conference here that the Sandinists have adopted a
policy that omits ''political pluralism, the practice of free elections and
respect for individual rights.''

He also accused his former allies of spreading a ''climate of terror that
extends over all of Nicaragua'' and of ''terrorizing'' the Miskito Indians.

In an apparent reference to the frequent closings of the antigovernment
newspaper, La Prensa, Mr. Pastora said, ''the revolution does not need to limit
freedom of the press, since if it does even the walls in the jails would be
converted into newspapers.''

At the news conference in a fashionable suburb, to which journalists were
escorted in specially chartered buses, Mr. Pastora also accused the Sandinists
of having strayed from the policy of nonalignment. He praised the Cuban and
Mexican revolutions, but said Nicaragua should follow its own course. ''I admire
the Mexican revolution because it was Mexican, that of Cuba because it was Cuban
and the revolution of Nicaragua should be Nicaraguan,'' he said.

Mr. Pastora's criticisms extended beyond Nicaragua. ''The invasion of Vietnam
was as imperialist as the invasion of Afghanistan,'' he said. ''Just as
imperialist are those who support a fascist junta in El Salvador as those who
support a totalitarian regime in Poland.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 16, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Political Unrest And Violence

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 828 words


IS there a common cause of the outbreak of political trouble and actual or
threatened violence in so many scattered theaters - between Argentina and
Britain over the Falkland Islands, between Israel and the Arab states over the
West Bank and the Palestine Liberation Organization bases in Lebanon, in El
Salvador and elsewhere in Central America, in Poland and elsewhere in Central
Europe, between China and the United States over Taiwan, and, most seriously, in
the resumed cold war and threatened nuclear arms race between the United States
and the Soviet Union? Is the common cause of the political troubles world
economic disorder, with military adventuring the common but dangerous solution?

Marxists and other economic determinists have always alleged a connection
between economic decay and war. But war in the nuclear age has become too
dangerous for the great powers actually to use it. Instead, goes the charge in
its present guise, the superpowers dare stir up only small wars where nuclear
weapons are unlikely to come into play; or they can engage in costly arms
buildups for the alleged purpose of deterring war.

Is this argument correct? While one cannot simply dismiss it - Reagan
Administration economists have encouraged it by emphasizing the stimulative
effect that the military buildup will have on the economy - it seems
fundamentally mistaken.

The political troubles around the world and the military buildups to which they
give rise are more likely to be bearish than bullish for national economies.
That is particularly true for the United States today. The overriding issue of
American economic policy has become how to reduce the enormous budget deficits
that have been overstraining the money and capital markets, forcing up interest
rates, dragging economic growth and breeding anxiety over unemployment and a
rekindling of inflation both at home and abroad.

The equity and bond markets have not reacted bullishly to the threats of war
kicked off in recent years by the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan, the war
between Iran and Iraq or any other. They remember that it was the Arab-Israeli
war of 1973 that led to the Arab oil embargo and the oil price explosion that
disrupted the world economy through the rest of the 1970's.

Earlier, it was the Vietnam War that unleashed inflation in the United States,
kicking off the outflow of dollars, causing the value of the dollar to sink and
spreading inflation internationally.

If highly conservative American politicians nowadays make strange bedfellows
with Marxists in pointing to the stimulative effects of military buildups,
America's allies in Western Europe and Japan have no such illusions. They have
demonstrated strong resistance to spending more money for arms - to the chagrin
of the Reagan Administration and the Carter Administration before it. The
Europeans and the Japanese have preferred to devote greater proportions of their
savings and investment to plant and equipment and research and development of
new industrial technology for the sake of advancing their productivity and
capturing larger shares of world markets. And they consider that the rapid
military buildup this country now means to mount is more likely to be a drag
than a spur to economic growth.

Obviously, if the military buildup were essential to prevent a collapse of the
democratic nations, one would have to accept it and be prepared to pay for it,
whether by further cuts in social programs, higher taxes or disguised taxation -
inflation.

But the issue raised by the Japanese and the Europeans, and implicitly by such
American critics of the nuclear buildup as former Defense Secretary Robert S.
McNamara and the former Ambassador to the Soviet Union, George F. Kennan, is
whether greater national security would result from lower, rather than higher,
levels of nuclear armament, as they argue in the current issue of the journal
Foreign Affairs.

Mr. Kennan, 35 years ago, wrote the original article in Foreign Affairs urging
''firm and vigilant containment'' of the Soviet Union - the doctrine that
dominated American foreign policy from the outbreak of the cold war through the
Vietnam War.

Ironically, in the light of his hard-line anti-Communism, it was President
Richard M. Nixon who changed that ''containment doctrine'' to one of detente
with the Soviet Union and initiated the ''opening'' to Communist China.

The critics of the Reagan Administration's return to a hard-line anti-Communism,
backed by a rapid military buildup, are arguing their case against rapid
military buildup on both political and economic grounds. Those critics include
such foreign leaders as West Germany's Chancellor, Helmut Schmidt; France's
President, Francois Mitterrand, and Japan's Prime Minister, Zenko Suzuki, so Mr.
Reagan is likely to encounter even tougher resistance to his military spending
plans at the summit conference in France this summer than in the Congressional
budget negotiations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 17, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

IN SINAI, A DEFIANT FEW AWAIT INEVITABLE BULLDOZERS

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: SADOT, Israeli


Occupied Sinai, April 15 - Amid pain and defiance, Israel is dismantling its
presence in the last area of the Sinai Peninsula still under its control, in
preparation for returning it to Egypt in 10 days.

Most settlers who over the last decade had wrought prosperity from the desert
have left, taking with them all that they could carry from their houses and
holdings. But Vito and Ella Weizman's house, the ivy-like creepers on its walls
gray with the dust of the destruction around it, stands incongruously intact in
this abandoned town where 72 families lived until recently.

While cranes and bulldozers were at work around the settlement, dismantling what
they could, demolishing what they could not, Mrs.  Weizman, who is 32 years old,
the mother of four children and pregnant, received a visitor in her living room.
The normality of the room made it look abnormal in this town. ''How exactly it
will be, I honestly don't know,'' Mrs. Weizman said, when asked what she and her
family would do when the army comes to remove them sometime before April 25.
''One thing is definite - that I will not leave this house of my own free
will.''

'David Against Goliath'

''I won't fight with Israeli soldiers,'' she continued. ''We are very good and
responsible Israelis. But when we came down here 10 years ago, I was definite
that I was developing my own country. Now, compared to everything that is
against us, we may be David against Goliath. The Israeli Army is strong, and I'm
proud of the way it is.  But from the morality point of view, in these things
we're stronger.''

Mrs. Weizman said her defiant words in a wan voice and apologized that the
destruction around her had made her ill. But she was far from wan about an hour
later.

A few hundred yards from her house, Mr. Weizman was sitting alone on a pile of
sand, facing the bulldozer that had churned it up. Its operator, just as pained
by the job he had to do, protested that he was only following orders in digging
up the pipeline that brings water from Israel to the storage tanks here.

Mrs. Weizman was soon joined by other woman and children, and the bulldozer was
temporarily stopped. Mrs. Weizman's companions were not settlers here but
Israelis from other areas who have trickled into town, bringing their children,
to resist its abandonment.

Children on the Roof

Haim, a bearded member of the Gush Emunim religious organization, who declined
to give his family name, said he and his wife had brought their six children to
help occupy shells of houses to prevent their being destroyed. Four children
were sitting on a nearby roof, Haim said, to prevent the destruction of the
house and to make the workers who dismantled others feel guilty.

''The Government says they must move, but God says this is the land of Israel,''
Haim said. ''When my boy says, 'But He is letting the houses be broken,' I say:
'But God knows what to do. That we don't know what he wants is our problem, not
God's.' ''

Children were also used this morning in the larger, nearby coastal town of Yamit
in an attempt to block a truck that was to remove lamp poles. Soldiers, mainly
women, removed the children, complaining about parents who misused their
children.

There are about 2,000 protesters in Yamit living in houses abandoned by their
inhabitants. A feast was celebrated today, Moroccan Jewish music was played
under a tent and a sheep was slaughtered to mark the eighth day of the Passover
holiday, a traditional rite among North African Jews.

'Still a Secret'

Among those who sat with the honored guests listening to vehement speeches
against the evacuation was Gen. Haim Erez, head of the Southern Command, who
happened to drive by. General Erez, when asked when he would evict the
squatters, who are defying an army order by being in what has been declared a
closed military zone, said, ''It is still a secret.'' He was also evasive when
asked how so many people were still able to enter the area despite the many
military checkpoints along the way.

After the General had left, members of the group that is led by Rabbi Meir
Kahane hurled homemade fire bombs at two successive army patrols. They caused no
injuries.

Two rabbis exhorted the crowd to keep every inch of ''the land of Israel,'' and
applause and occasional songs punctuated their speeches. Yuval Neeman, a member
of Israeli Parliament and former chief scientist of the Defense Ministry, said
in an interview that he was an atheist but shared the views of those who based
their position on religious zeal. ''Zionism,'' he replied in answer to a
question on what common denominator linked him to the protesters.

Asked for his view of the international obligation that Israel undertook in
agreeing to surrender Sinai, he said, ''Don't talk to me about international
obligations.'' He likened the campaign to resist the evacuation to what he
called the civil disobedience of American youth that helped end the American
involvement in the Vietnam War.

Bedouin children watched attentively as a bulldozer leveled the army camp at the
strategic Absalom Road junction on the way to Gaza.  But an older man just
squatted on the ground rolling a cigarette, out of the reach of the falling dust
and his back turned to one more withdrawal from Sinai, The road through the Gaza
Strip, strangely empty because much of the Palestinian population was put under
curfew today, smelled of the many tires that have been burned in protest over
last Sunday's attack by an Israeli soldier on the Dome of the Rock in Jerusalem,
a protest by those on the other side of the Middle East predicament.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of demolition opponents in Sadot

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 17, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
Teacher of the Year

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section 2; Page 48, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 244 words


A solid crystal apple for the Teacher of the Year was presented to Bruce
Brombacher, a 33-year-old Vietnam War veteran from Upper Arlington, Ohio, who
gave up a promising scientific career to go into teaching.

The apple was presented to Mr. Brombacher Thursday by President Reagan, in
ceremonies at the White House.  Mr. Brombacher, a mathematics teacher in Upper
Arlington, a Columbus suburb, was chosen from the nation's more than two million
elementary and secondary-school teachers in an annual awards program that
focuses attention on excellence in teaching. The competition, now in its 31st
year, is sponsored by Encyclopedia Britannica, the Council of State School
Officers and Good Housekeeping magazine.

''Teaching is a very personal thing,'' said Mr. Brombacher. ''It's like you are
a parent and you have 25 kids. I share their personal lives and they share
mine.''

A member of a teaching family - 10 of its members have taught in the Ohio public
school system for a combined total of more than 100 years -Mr. Brombacher has
been teaching for six years, all of them at Jones Junior High School.

Mr. Brombacher, who holds a master's degree in physics from Ohio State
University, had worked in atomic research before his Vietnam service. When he
returned he went to Otterbein College to qualify as a teacher.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              60 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADOR GETS RIGHTS LESSON FROM THE U.S.

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 15, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 879 words

DATELINE: FORT BENNING, Ga., April 15


Maj. Roger D. Slaughter, wearing his black beret with its red ranger flash,
tapped his pointer against the chart listing the do's and don'ts of gaining the
support of people in a fight against guerrillas.

He then turned to a circle of visitors and said: ''An army cannot violate the
individual rights of the people they are sworn to protect.''

With that admonition drawn from the doctrine of the United States Army, Major
Slaughter summed up the message that he and other American instructors have been
trying to impress on the army of El Salvador through officer candidates they
have been training here in the tactics and psychology of counterinsurgency.

Turning back to his chart, Major Slaughter said that winning the allegiance of
peasants in the villages of El Salvador meant respecting them, especially the
women and the elderly, and respecting their property. He said that it meant
avoiding what he called ''indiscriminate acts of violence.''

Humane Treatment for Prisoners

Another American instructor in a nearby training area, Capt. Mario Rosales,
finished a class in which he showed the Salvadorans how to treat guerrilla
prisoners humanely, both to persuade the people and to elicit information from
the prisoners, and then said: ''You have to use aggressive restraint.''

Major Slaughter, on temporary duty here from a special forces unit in Panama, is
among 160 Spanish-speaking officers and sergeants assembled from all over the
army to train 477 young Salvadoran cadets the rudiments of military operations,
with a heavy emphasis on human rights and antiguerrilla techniques. Captain
Rosales is here from the Eighth Division in West Germany.

The Salvadorans, here as part of United States assistance to the Salvadoran
Government in combating the leftist insurgency there, are scheduled to go home
early next month. Most will go immediately into the field to fight.

Because the Salvadoran military academy graduates only 25 to 30 lieutenants a
year, the influx of the 477 cadets into the army will increase the size of the
young officer corps by one third and thus may have wide influence.

Expected to Set Example

They were reminded of that by the Undersecretary of Defense for Policy, Fred C.
Ikle, who told them: ''You will be expected to set the example. It will be your
actions which your subordinates will emulate.'' Later, Mr. Ikle told reporters
that the United States would check to see how effective the training here had
been.

American officers said they were pleased with the attitude of the Salvadorans.
''They're intense,'' said Maj. Gen. Robert L. Wetzel, the commander of the
infantry center here.

An instructor in patrolling, Capt. Geoffrey Lambert, from the l93rd brigade in
Panama, said that ''you can't get rid of them after class.''

The Salvadorans, on orders from their Government, were not available for
interviews. But casual conversations with several suggested that they found the
field training useful. They also indicated they thought American leadership
techniques might have to be adapted to their ways of doing things.

Charges Taken Seriously

Beyond the military training, what has been happening here seemed to make two
more points:

- The United States Government takes seriously charges that army brutality has
alienated some Salvadorans from their Government. A briefing paper said: ''El
Salvador has no doctrine for establishing civil-military relations or gathering
intelligence information from prisoners. Nor does it have an appreciation for
the adverse impact of uncontrolled violence during operations. The current
political and military leadership are attempting to improve the discipline of
the armed forces. However, no known institutional changes have been made to
establish these policies as doctrine.''

- The program strongly suggests that the United States Army learned much from
its experience in Vietnam about counterinsurgency and the need to protect human
rights. The instruction for the Salvadorans is similar to that for young
American army officers in the basic and advanced courses at the infantry school
here. General Wetzel said that the American instructors, in particular, were
getting a ''refresher course in counterinsurgency'' by teaching the Salvadorans.

The training on the protection of human rights has taken place in classrooms,
during informal conversations between American instructors and the students, and
in field training.

At Fort Bragg, North Carolina, a Salvadoran infantry battalion of about 900
sergeants and soldiers, plus a few officers, has been in training for fast
reaction to guerrilla attacks. Human rights has also run through that
instruction, though not with the emphasis here.

When that battalion returns to El Salvador next month, it will be the second
trained by American instructors. The first was taught in El Salvador. Mr. Ikle
said the Salvadoran Government would like the United States to train two more
battalions and that funds for that had been requested from Congress.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              61 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEABODY AWARD WON BY CABLE TV PROGRAM

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 66, Column 2; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 594 words


For the first time in its 42-year history, the George Foster Peabody
Broadcasting Award has gone to a program made for cabletelevision distribution
rather than network.

The annual awards, for excellence in broadcasting, were announced yesterday by
Fred C. Davidson, the president of the University of Georgia, whose school of
journalism originated them in 1940. The 23 award winners will receive their
citations at a ceremony in New York on May 5.

One of the 23 winners is Home Box Office, which produced ''She's Nobody's Baby:
The History of American Women in the 20th Century,'' with Ms. magazine. It was
''the first time a producer for cable distribution has been honored,'' said
Prof. Worth McDougald, the director of the Peabody awards.

Besides official recognition of the growing importance of programming for cable,
the Peabody board also drew attention to the decline of children's shows.
''We're going to make an extra effort to stimulate high-quality children's
programs,'' Professor McDougald said.

Among the other winners is Danny Kaye, for ''An Evening with Danny Kaye and the
New York Philharmonic,'' produced by Lincoln Center for PBS, and ''Skokie,''
produced for CBS.

Other winners are: WJR Radio, Detroit, for a 23-program series on the
bankruptcy-court system.  National Radio Theater, Chicago, for ''The Odyssey of
Homer,'' a series of eight programs.Canadian Broadcasting Corporation,
Vancouver, British Columbia, for ''Carl Sandburg at Connemara.'' Timothy and
Susan Todd, Middlebury, Vt., for ''The Todds' Teddy Bears Picnic,'' a children's
radio series.  WQDR-FM, Raleigh, N. C., for a radio series on Vietnam veterans.
WLS-TV, Chicago, for investigative reporting on ''Eyewitness News.'' Bill
Leonard, CBS News, New York, for his role in developing the CBS news
organization.  John Goldsmith, WDVM-TV, Washington, for a year-end news roundup.
NBC and M.T.M. Enterprises, for ''Hill Street Blues.'' Nebraska Educational
Television Network, for an adaptation of Mark Twain's account of his brief
career in the Confederate militia.  CBS-TV and Alan Landsburg Productions, for a
''General Electric Theater'' special starring Mickey Rooney.  WNET-TV, New York,
and PBS, for a tribute to Nijinsky.  KJRH-TV, Tulsa, Okla., for a special on
China.  Societe Radio-Canada, Montreal, for a children's show.  ABC and T.A.T.
Communications, for ''The Wave,'' on the ''ABC Theater for Young Americans.''
WSMV, Nashville, for a series of television documentaries on crime.  KATU-TV,
Portland, Ore., for a series of documentaries.  WGBH, Boston, and Granada TV,
London, for a program on the Soviet army.  Eighth Decade Consortium, Seattle,
for a program on crime in five cities.ABC News for three programs, with special
mention to Ted Koppel.  KTEH, San Jose, Calif., for a retrospective of Dr. J.
Robert Oppenheimer's contribution to the atomic bomb.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

QUESTIONABLE COUNSELORS OF 'NO FIRST USE'

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 418 words


To the Editor:

Reports on the ''no first use'' proposal by former senior officials McGeorge
Bundy, George Kennan, Robert McNamara and Gerard Smith (news story April 8)
overlooked much of the political background.

Defense analysis, with its talk about the unknowns of nuclear deterrence and the
nature of a third European war, is essentially a clash of opinions. These
ex-officials have consistently offered views that tend to distract from the
urgent need to offset Moscow's military gains. Secretary McNamara's 1965
assurance that ''the Soviets have decided that they have lost the quantitative''
strategic arms competition is one unfortunate example.

Each of these four men bears considerable responsibility for the three primary
causes of the current U.S. military predicament: the loss of 250 billion defense
dollars during the tragic commitment in Vietnam, the imbalance of heavy missiles
in SALT I and the fashionable view of the past 15 years that the Soviets share
Western beliefs on strategic stability. The Reagan defense initiatives now have
to make up for these mistakes, and the belated deployment of intermediate-range
missiles is one step.

Enhancing conventional forces alone is an answer to clear-cut Soviet
preponderance in Europe. A Western buildup has proved unobtainable for 30 years.
Skewed academic comparisons of men and tanks in NATO and the Warsaw Pact are
nothing new (see ''The Other Balance,'' Tom Wicker's column of April 9).

NATO has always been less than the sum of its parts. Unlike the Warsaw Pact, it
is not offensively postured. NATO's political disarray also undercuts its
military potential, as Ambassador Smith knows from his work with the ill-fated
multilateral force.

Talking about ''no first use'' of U.S. nuclear weapons in Europe focuses
attention on a meaningless concept. Who can take Soviet pledges seriously along
with 300 SS-20's that are intended precisely to target NATO kasernen?

It is timely to recall that Germany wanted to propose a ''no first use'' of
submarines in the 1937 naval discussions with Britain. This would have been
worthless in war, and was only useful for further distracting British attention
from its own defenses.

The lesson, especially for former officials with questionable track records in
defense analysis, is to take a realistic look at the opponent, the allies and
our own preparations.
DEREK LEEBAERT, Cambridge, Mass., April 9, 1982.

The writer is associate editor of the Journal of Policy Analysis & Management.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Washington;
PROTEST OR DEBATE?;
by James Reston

SECTION: Section 4; Page 21, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 17


One of the many questions about the future of nuclear weapons is whether the
people of the United States and the other allied nations will get enough facts
on this immensely complicated military and moral issue for the searching inquiry
the subject requires. In short, will it be decided by government decision, by
public education or by political demonstrations.

Not since the debate between the isolationists and the interventionists in the
United States 50 years ago has there been such a momentous discussion in this
country about the order or chaos of the world.

How will this be approached by the U.S. Government, the political parties, the
press, the universities and the religious institutions?  This is the critical
threshold question. Will the contending forces be willing to listen to one
another or merely choose up sides between the militarists and the moralists? So
far, the demonstrators have outnumbered the educators, and the Reagan
Administration hasn't really helped very much.

For example, when former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Mac Bundy, George
Kennan and Gerard Smith proposed in Foreign Affairs that the United States
Government ''consider'' proclaiming that it would not be first to use nuclear
weapons even if faced with a conventional military attack on Western Europe,
Secretary of State Haig, in an otherwise thoughtful speech, didn't ''consider''
this proposal but merely dismissed it, and did so even before it was released
for publication.

Al Haig may be right. It is not at all clear that the Soviet Government, now
obviously confronted with its ancient problem of passing political power from
one generation to another, would believe President Reagan, even if Mr. Reagan
swore tomorrow that the United States wouldn't be the first to use nuclear
weapons. After all, both Washington and Moscow have to con-sider the possibility
that neither Mr. Brezhnev nor Mr. Reagan is immortal, and therefore have to
think about the longer range interests of their countries.

These questions are raised here, not to oppose the consideration of a
no-first-strike-nuclear policy by Mr. McNamara and the other former experienced
nuclear officials, or to oppose the suggestions of Senator Kennedy and others
for a ''freeze'' on the manufacture and implacement of intermediate nuclear
weapons in and around Europe. They are raised only to suggest that we should
have a rational and coherent debate on these issues, with more facts and manners
than the Reagan Administration has provided so far.

At the end of the last war, we had a good debate in the universities on the
issue of America's place in the world and the formation of the United Nations
Charter. Case studies were prepared for discussion, with definitions of the
questions to be decided - argument for and against. Students were encouraged not
to demonstrate but to study and debate the issues.

It was also the habit of governments in the past to produce white papers of
public documents on the historical background of serious issues that have
brought them into crisis. We need such a white paper from the Reagan
Administration and the allies now on the controversy over nuclear arms. At
Geneva, the Soviets, to the best of our information here, are proposing that the
U.S. should be restrained from emplacing new nuclear weapons in Europe, while
they are not restrained from maintaining nuclear weapons that could hit every
European capital from behind the Urals.

They are also apparently making all kinds of other proposals, which our
principal negotiator, Paul Nitze, regards as preposterous, but we don't know.
Mr. Nitze informs the allied governments about the facts of the Geneva
negotiations, and also informs some leaders of the Congress.

In fact, everybody has been filled in on the process of these talks at Geneva
except the American people, including the anti-nuclear protestors. Not right
now, but certainly by the autumn we will have teach-ins in the universities,
protest marches and all the rest of the anti-Vietnam energy directed toward
''peace.''

Richard W. Lyman, former president of Stanford University, and now president of
the Rockefeller Foundation, mused about this here the other day. He thought the
Government and the universities should be talking more together about the need
for a serious dialogue and that the universities should think about their
responsibilities.

''Mere protest is seldom really thoughtful,'' he said. ''It's a blunt instrument
and a crude one - often merely a primal scream of rejection.''

''Almost the worst thing the universities could do,'' he concluded, ''would be
to opt for a few easy and dramatic gestures, satisfying outlets for our
frustrations that might make us all feel a nice, warm glow of
self-righteousness, but would do nothing to advance our basic understanding of
the problem.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              64 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ON LANGUAGE;
SLUFF IT OFF

BYLINE: By William Safire

SECTION: Section 6; Page 12, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 1431 words


Estee Lauder, the cosmetics firm, advertises its ''Almond Clay Pack'' with this
copy: ''The clarifying facial that facilitates sluffing from within.'' Another
mask, it is claimed, ''sluffs, softens, smooths ... .''

A registered nurse, Frances Ewen of New York, wants to know what's with this
sluff stuff: ''The correct word is slough, pronounced 'sluf,' '' writes Mrs.
Ewen. She takes her definition - ''to separate from the living tissue'' - from
Stedman's Medical Dictionary, and adds masterfully: ''There is no such word as
'sluff.' ''

June Leaman, senior vice president of creative marketing at Estee Lauder - a
title presumably chosen to avoid confusion with the senior vice president of
uncreative marketing - responds by pointing to the two spellings, slough and
sluff, given in Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. ''Since 'slough' has two
meanings and pronunciations as well as two spellings, we chose 'sluff.' It
telegraphs phonetically the word we wanted as it relates to skin: to separate
dead tissue from living tissue, to become shed or cast off.''

Interesting word, slough. Spelled that way and rhyming with ''cow,'' it means a
swamp or bog; in ''Pilgrim's Progress,'' Christian fell into the Slough of
Despond, which undoubtedly caused little worry lines to form on his face.
Spelled that way and pronounced ''sluff,'' it is the skin a snake sheds each
year; by metaphoric extension, ''to sluff off'' means to shake off or shed any
unwanted covering or work.

For many years, the language has been trying to separate the snakeskin meaning
from the bog meaning by means of a spelling change: from ''slough'' to ''sluff''
when it is pronounced ''sluf'' and has to do with the shedding of dead skin.

Since I roughed up Mrs. Lauder's company for her unctuous treatment of ''cream''
- ritzily spelled ''creme'' - let me toss a smooth, soft salute to her
copywriters for their intelligent use of ''sluff.'' The word and its spelling
are correct; I just wish I could get rid of the word-picture of all those women
snaking out of their skins.

The same creamy kudos cannot be directed at Clinique, another cosmetics firm
owned by the Lauder family. ''To look healthy and trim over its bones,'' says a
recent ad, ''skin needs a step beyond cleansing. It needs exfoliation.'' Nothing
wrong with that word; to exfoliate means to strip, as leaves from a branch, and
is accurately applied to the stripping of dead skin cells from the skin. (Do not
confuse this with defoliate, the chemical stripping of leaves from foliage, a
process which caused some controversy when tried in Vietnam.)

The product promising to exfoliate your skin is called ''Scruffing Lotion.''
Scruff is an English dialect form of the noun scurf, which Webster's Third
Unabridged defines as ''material like bran that becomes detached from the
epi-dermis in thin dry scales ... .'' The verb to scurf means ''to remove (as
scurf) by scraping, rubbing or wiping.'' ''The doctors who formulated Clinique
Skin Care,'' says Carol Phillips, president of Clinique Laboratories, ''have
frequently used the term 'skin-scurfing' to describe the process of selective
exfoliation which removes dead flakes from the skin's surface. We fooled with
that word a bit, transposed the letters, and came up with 'Scruffing Lotion.' ''

No complaint there, either; there is a basis in dialect for switching scurf to
scruff.  My only problem is that I now look scruffy, which the same dictionary
defines as ''of a worthless or slovenly character: shabby, miserable.'' During
the 1960's, the word most often applied to hirsute protestors by self-righteous
citizens was ''scruffy,'' perhaps because dandruff is scruff. The adjective has
always been used to deride and demean; by adopting it as a verb, the marketing
people now have the task of scraping off the centuries-old connotation of
scruffiness and replacing it with ''that well-scruffed look.'' More power to
them, but it seems a little flaky to me.

Master Charge

Under the headline of ''The Luxury of Full Leather Bindings,'' a company
reprinting a hundred classics in snazzy editions warns: ''Do not confuse these
masterful editions with other volumes which feature partial leather bindings on
the spine only.''

More important, do not confuse masterful with masterly. The words started out
with the same meaning, and Language Slobs use them interchangeably today, but a
distinction has developed that good writers like to preserve.

Masterful means ''with the imperiousness of the master'' in a kind of
master-slave relationship; a masterful person is domineering, the sort of
take-charge type who is revered in books about how to become a success by
intimidating one's colleagues. The adjective verges on the insulting; it is used
in admiration mainly by masochists.

Masterly means ''with the skill of a master''; expertly. In ''Light Metres,''
Felicia Lamport, the punning poet, describes Richard Nixon during Watergate as
''grown skilled in arts of masterly escape; / I have measured out my life in
reels of tape.'' One reason he did not escape was that he was too masterful and
not masterly enough.

Since the words have distinct meanings, it makes sense to keep them apart, and
makes no sense to go with the permissivists who begin their argument with ''Ah,
hell ... .'' ''Everybody does it'' is no excuse. (What reminded me of that?)

The only thing clumsy and amateurish about this ukase is that there is no easy
way to turn the adjective masterly into an adverb. When you want to say, ''He
handled the Chinese with the skill of a master,'' you should not say, ''He
handled the Chinese masterly.'' It is awkward. You would more likely say, ''He
handled the Chinese masterfully,'' which means ''in a domineering way'' and not
what you mean at all. In that instance, use another word: skillfully, expertly,
adeptly. A masterly writer is masterful with his adverbs; get off my ukase.

World-Class

''First-class'' has had it. ''World-class'' is in. Richard Dudley of Guilford,
Conn., writes: ''All of a sudden, world-class runners, entertainers
(supersuperstars?), chefs, auto racers ad nauseam. Where do we go from here?''
And from Norman Hoffman of Yonkers: ''Even in today's 'Market Place' column in
The New York Times - 'Clorox is a world-class household products manufacturer.'
I say!''

Early on, it started as a Britishism (and have you noticed that ''trendy'' isn't
trendy anymore?). The earliest citation that Sol Steinmetz can dig out of the
Clarence L. Barnhart files is this soccer item from The (London) Sunday Times of
April 14, 1963, from a sports column by Brian Granville: ''But Charlton and
Greaves are world-class players and, for a match like this, both must stay.''

''Since soccer players participate in international competitions for the World
Cup,'' ruminates lexicographer Steinmetz, ''top-seeded players were viewed as
more than 'first-class'; they were 'worldclass.' The term proved to be very
useful for describing the topdrawer athletes or superstars of international
competitions.''

The key is ''competitor for an international prize,'' whether it be the Olympics
or chess tournaments. I would approve its extended use to international
competition where the prize is fame or fortune, but would frown on its extension
to a synonym for ''international,'' as in ''a world-class household products
manufacturer.'' (And who am I to approve or frown? I'm a world-class language
maven, that's who.)

This points up the ''honeymoon effect'' of superlatives. A honey, or full, moon,
begins to wane as soon as it appears; similarly (in what is known to first-class
writers as a ''labored simile'') ''world-class'' began to lose its
international-prize eminence as soon as it hit the top. Superlative hounds
quickly applied it to bleaches being shipped across town.

World-class has done to first-class what superstar has done to star. Who wants
to go to a lousy first-class match or see a mere star? The language always needs
a word one rank higher, and as soon as we get it, we start dragging it down. (So
he's a superstar - but is he a world-class superstar?)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 3 cartoons

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HOW THE CHINESE POLICE THEMSELVES

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD
Fox Butterfield, chief of The Times's Peking bureau from 1979 to 1981, now heads
the Boston bureau. This article is excerpted from his book, ''China: Alive in
the Bitter Sea,'' to be published next month by Times Books.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 21, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5890 words


Copyright c 1982 by Fox Butterfield. Reprinted by permission of Times Books, a
division of Quadrangle/The New York Times Book Company.

It was a cold, overcast day in January 1980 when I arrived at the cavernous
Shanghai railroad station for the overnight express train back to Peking. A
blue-uniformed woman conductor was waiting beside the door to my car. I had
purchased my ticket the day before in an office of the China Travel Service, the
state-run tourist agency. The clerk at the counter had not shown any particular
interest in me - I simply presented my green travel pass from the Public
Security Bureau, China's police, and paid for my passage. I had chosen to make
the trip by train, a 20-hour ride, rather than by plane, a mere twohour flight,
in hope of encountering some Chinese who, away from the prying eyes of neighbors
or office mates, might be willing to ignore the official regulations against
talking to a foreigner. It was a tactic other Westerners in China had sometimes
used with success.

But when I approached the train, the conductor's broad face broke into an
immense smile. ''Welcome to our train,'' she said, almost too eagerly. ''You are
the American reporter, are you not?''

It was more a statement than a question. As I stood with my suitcase in my hand,
I might as well have been naked. My hopes continued to fade as the conductor, a
stocky woman in her late 20's, began walking down the car corridor. Through a
crack in my compartment door, I could hear her stopping to announce to the other
passengers in her booming voice: ''We have a foreigner on board. He is an
American journalist. He speaks Chinese. He speaks very good Chinese.'' That was
the alert, I calculated.

Then she returned to minister to me. ''Please let me know if there is anything I
can do to serve you. My name is Ding.'' An appropriate appellation, for in
Chinese ding means solid, like nails, and she struck me as a rare cross between
a Marine drill sergeant and a cheerful, overweight waitress.

Mustering the remains of my courage, I asked Ding how she was so well informed
about me. ''The responsible comrades notify us who the passengers are, so we can
make preparations,'' she replied.

Ding's preparations included making sure that I had the compartment all to
myself. (I was traveling ''soft berth,'' in a private compartment for four
people with lace curtains and thick mattresses, the section reserved for cadres
and foreigners. The adjoining coach was ''hard berth,'' for the masses, jammed
with triple-decker hard wooden bunk beds lining an open, smoke-filled corridor.)
Still, I thought, I might meet someone in the dining car. What time was lunch, I
asked Ding.

''I will call you after the other passengers are finished,'' she answered. ''It
will be more convenient for you. It won't be so crowded.''

Indeed, when she finally did summon me, there were only two other Chinese left
in the dining car, and they were finishing their soup, the last course in a
Chinese meal. When they saw me, they hastily gulped down the rest of their soup
and left. I felt like the plague.  As the train crossed the rice fields of the
Yangtze River valley, the long trip appeared a mistake.

In its regimentation and singular lack of privacy, life in China is not much
different from life in an army barracks. In fact, it is not an exaggeration to
say that virtually every aspect of life is subject to constant public scrutiny.

Foreigners who have visited China, including some experienced in traveling
elsewhere in the Communist world, often say they were able to walk wherever they
wanted, poking down old lanes, looking into people's houses, without being
followed. China really isn't a police state after all, they conclude. But an
American who has lived in Peking since before 1949 (and who prefers anonymity)
scoffed at their naivete. The Government's control system operates the other way
around, he explained, from the inside out, through such overlapping and mutually
reinforcing components as the danwei (or workplace) and the street committee.

Every Chinese belongs to a danwei through his office, factory, school or
commune. The danwei is the basic building block of Chinese society, almost a
second citizenship for most Chinese. A Chinese is more likely to be asked his
danwei than his name when he goes someplace new. Although technically a person's
place of work, the danwei often provides the housing where a Chinese lives, the
school where his children get an education, the clinic where he receives medical
care, and ration cards for his rice, cooking oil and soap.  Before a Chinese can
get married, he must get permission from the party secretary of his danwei; if a
couple want to get divorced, the danwei must first approve.

In a sealed envelope in the personnel section of each danwei is a confidential
dossier for every employee. It contains not only the usual elements of biography
- a person's education and work record - but also any political charges made
against him by informers in the past and the party's evaluation of him. In
addition, the file lists the person's class background for three generations,
whether his grandfather and father were landlords and capitalists or poor
peasants and workers.

Before anyone can be transferred from one city to another, or from one job to
another, he must have a letter from his danwei confirming that his dossier has
already been forwarded to his new unit. His danwei also controls his right to
travel. Before a Chinese can make a trip from his city or village that will take
more than a day, he must get approval from the party secretary of his danwei. He
must come up with a concrete reason for needing leave (a sick parent, for
example), because the only regular vacation time in China is six national
holidays a year. If a traveler wants to get a hotel room, he must first present
a letter from his danwei. This is recorded and his name sent to the local police
station.  If the danwei exercises control over Chinese in their workplace, the
urban street committee provides the Government with a mechanism to watch them at
home.

On home leave one day in the early 1970's, my friend Weidong - the star on the
army's basketball team - and another soldier from his regiment first went out
drinking and then, at his friend's suggestion, visited a young female
acquaintance by the name of Hong (I have altered the names and minor details of
my Chinese friends' lives to protect them). When they arrived at her apartment,
red in the face and smelling of liquor, she pushed them out. Intrigued by the
attractive young woman, Weidong surreptitiously returned to her apartment later
that evening.

But an elderly woman neighbor, who was a member of the building's street
committee, had chanced to see Weidong sneaking in. She had immediately summoned
the police and they arrived within minutes. The next day, Hong was taken away by
the police. The daughter of intellectuals (both her parents were professors)
with suspect ''overseas relations,'' she was charged with trying to seduce a
soldier and the son of a general. Weidong tried to use his father's connections
to get her released. He even went to a Peking court and confessed he was to
blame, but to no avail. Hong ended up spending a year in jail.

After her release, Weidong and Hong, over the objections of their families,
dated each other and eventually married. Weidong had been warned by his parents
that he would become ''unreliable'' in the party's eyes if he had any
relationship with Hong, and when he continued to see her, his commanding officer
told him his military career was finished and he was demobilized. He is now a
low-level cadre in a foreign-trade corporation, while she is a translator.

In the five-story concrete building where they moved to after their marriage,
the representative to the local street committee was a rotund, graying,
illiterate woman in her 50's named Ma. Mrs. Ma was not a party member, but she
was energetic and shrewd. In action, Mrs. Ma was a building superintendent,
police informant, social worker and union-hall hiring boss. The powers of the
street committee are not codified in law - for members of such a committee are
considered representatives of the masses rather than the police - but that only
gives them more authority, Weidong said.

''Their most terrifying power is that they can search your house whenever they
want,'' Weidong related. ''The police are supposed to have a warrant, but the
street committee cadres can come in when they please.'' Usually three or four
members of the street committee, middle-aged women like Mrs. Ma, would just
barge in without knocking after midnight when Hong and Weidong were asleep.
''Their excuse is that they are here to inspect our hu-kou,'' the household
registration certificate. The street committee was checking to see if there were
any people from the countryside living illegally in Peking - relatives of the
family, perhaps.

''If we have friends over, even for dinner, Mrs. Ma may walk in and ask who they
are,'' Hong interjected. ''It's very humiliating. If you don't cooperate, she
can call the police and they will come over and ask the same questions.''

The street-committee cadres are not paid a regular salary, but they can count on
small gifts of meat, vegetables and rice from residents who want to keep on
their good side. More important, their posts put them in a position to help
their families and friends, for it is the street committee that passes on
recommendations about job assignments to the city labor department for
unemployed young people in the neighborhood. It is also the street committee
that advises the municipal housing office about which families need new
quarters.

In recent years, the street committee has gained a further and extraordinary
power - the right to decide which couples in the neighborhood may have children.
This prerogative is part of the Government's tough new birth-control campaign
that aims to reduce China's rate of population increase to zero by the year 2000
by encouraging families to limit themselves to one child. Under the drive, each
province and city has been awarded quotas for the number of babies allowed to be
born per year, and the street committee then determines which families may use
the quotas.

''We give first preference to couples without children,'' said Mrs. Tian,
another energetic, middle-aged street-committee member I got to know. ''If a
family already has one child, we ask them to wait at least four years before
having another, or better, not to have a second baby. If a couple already has
two children or more, we tell them not to have any more.''

Mrs. Tian was frank about how her street committee administered the program.
''We assign a person to keep track of each woman's menstrual cycle. If someone
misses her period and isn't scheduled to have a baby, we tell her to have an
abortion. There isn't room for liberalism on such an issue.''

The reason for this stringent program, the most ambitious familylimitation plan
in history, is the dismal arithmetic of China's population figures. In A.D. 2,
when China's first census was taken, there were 59.6 million people in the
country; in 1840, 412 million, and in 1949, 540 million. In other words, it took
about 4,000 years of recorded history for China to reach its first 500 million
people.  But in the past three decades, under Communist rule, the population has
almost doubled to one billion, all in a country only slightly larger than the
United States.  The control apparatus operates in less overt ways, too. Because
Peking's leaders firmly believe that information is power - especially the power
to shape people's minds - they are chary about disclosing anything, no matter
how trivial. I had my first taste of the national mania for security and secrecy
on my first day in residence.

Using the telephone in China, I found out, requires a special technique - not in
dialing the number, but in eliciting a response from the person you are trying
to reach. I had just arrived in Peking and was calling the personnel office of
the Diplomatic Services Bureau to inquire about hiring a Chinese assistant for
The New York Times. The conversation - in Chinese - went like this:

''Hello, is this the personnel office?'' ''I'm not too clear,'' said a diffident
voice.  ''Is there anyone there who knows if this is the personnel office?'' I
tried again.  ''They've just gone out,'' the voice answered. ''What do you
want?'' ''I'm the new correspondent of The New York Times and want to hire an
assistant. Whom do I contact?'' ''I'm not too clear,'' the voice said,
retreating once more.  ''Can I make an appointment to come over and talk to
someone in your office about an assistant?'' I said, trying a new tack.
''Please give me your phone number.'' ''Will someone call me back later?'' I
asked, my hopes by this time fading.  ''I'm not too clear.'' With that, the
person hung up.  Rule No. 1 in making a telephone call, I learned soon enough,
is never give out any information - it could be a state secret and get you in
trouble. But the lengths to which people go to avoid identifying themselves or
divulging facts on the phone often reach comical proportions. When one Chinese
calls another, the person answering the telephone always begins by saying,
''Wei,'' the Chinese equivalent of ''Hello.'' Even if you are calling an office,
like the Information Department of the Foreign Ministry, the official Government
spokesman, the clerk who picks up the phone never answers by saying, ''This is
the Information Department.'' It is up to the caller to guess whether he has
dialed correctly.

But to add to the confusion, most times the person who initiated the call is
also unwilling to identify himself. So neither party can be sure whom he is
talking to until one finally relents and takes the daring step of giving out his
organization or name.

The Government itself goes to extraordinary lengths to try to encase its
workings in secrecy. In 1980, disturbed by a number of foreign press reports on
developments inside the Politburo, Peking pointedly republished a Draconian set
of ''Regulations on Guarding State Secrets,'' first issued in 1951. The law is a
detailed document enumerating 15 categories of information that must not be
revealed: anything touching on the armed forces, national defense, foreign
affairs, the police, state economic planning, culture, public health, ethnic
minorities, warehouses -even weather forecasts. The 16th article of the law
covers ''all state affairs which have not yet been decided upon, or which have
been decided upon but have not yet been made public.'' For good measure, a 17th
article specifies the law also includes ''all other state affairs which should
be kept secret.''

This fetish for secrecy means that Chinese must do without some everyday
information that Westerners take for granted. Whenever I arrive in a new city,
one of the first things I do is purchase a map so I can learn my way around. In
Peking, I bought a copy of the standard bus-route map that the Government
publishes in Chinese. But my friends the Wangs -a middle-aged couple who
frequently invited me to dinner - laughed at me. It is not really accurate, they
confided.  The angles and dimensions of the streets and the locations of some
important buildings have been distorted to foil Western intelligence.

In keeping with the Chinese leaders' strict rule of discretion, the capital's
important buildings are devoid of identifying marks. There is no sign in front
of Zhongnanhai, the tall red-walled compound next to the Forbidden City where
the top party and Government leaders work. There is no plaque to identify the
drab yellow-brick building in the western suburbs of Peking that houses the
Central Party School.

In addition, most offices, factories, schools and even apartment buildings
throughout China have walls around them and guards at the gates. Outside the
new, whitewashed, walled compound of The People's Daily in Peking, two sentries
of the People's Liberation Army stand guard with rifles. Everyone going in and
out must show a special work pass from the paper. When I asked an editor of The
People's Daily why they needed so much protection, he replied, ''Because it is
one of the most secret places in China. Much of the information we handle is
secret.''

A professor at one of Peking's universities laughed when I complained to him
about the excessive precautions. He invited me for a walk down the Avenue of
Eternal Tranquillity to the western wall of the Forbidden City. There, running
for several hundred yards, was a three-story building that looked like part of
the palace, with the same madder-rose walls and mustard-yellow tiled roof. But
my companion urged me to look more closely. The windows on the west side of the
building, which faced the party and Government headquarters in the Zhongnanhai
compound across the street, were only painted to look like windows; the whole
edifice was a facade.

In 1973, the professor related, when the new 17-story wing of the Peking Hotel
was being completed, the Public Security Bureau discovered to its horror that a
guest, looking west, could peer down across the Forbidden City and into the
secret recesses of the Zhongnanhai - if he had very strong binoculars. Wang
Dongxing, then head of Mao Zedong's Praetorian Guard, a special army division
known only by its numerical designation - the 8341 unit -devised the idea of
putting up the facade as a security measure. ''It was outrageous,'' the
professor lamented, ''squandering millions of yuan on that hoax when satellites
can take photos from the sky.''

Even something as ordinary as a telephone directory presents a problem in China.
When I first arrived in China, there was a Chinese telephone book, but it was
supposed to be kept secret from foreigners. It was 190 pages long and was issued
to offices by special subscription through the post office. An individual could
not just walk in and buy one.

As a favor, a friend one day smuggled out her office's copy of the telephone
book to show me. It had been published in 1975, four years before, and not
updated since, I noticed. The telephone book contained odd lacunas. All the
listings were for offices; there were none for individuals. Only a few
privileged Chinese have phones in their homes, it is true, but the omission
helped me understand why Chinese are always nervous about losing the little
pocket-size personal phone-number booklets they carry with them.

In 1980, as part of its effort to become more open, the Government for the first
time issued a 30-or-so-page public phone book. The first number in the book is
that of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, followed by
the Supreme People's Procurate, relatively powerless organizations. The
Communist Party Central Committee, the nation's most puissant body, which
controls the entire structure of Government ministries, is included under the
heading ''Partisan Organizations.'' But the directory gave only two numbers for
it - one for the reception center for petitions from ''the masses''; the other,
the United Front Work Department.

Telephones are hard to get in Peking - there is an installation fee of 1,900
yuan (about $3,500, or almost three years' salary for an average worker) and a
year's waiting list. Only officials have telephones of their own, my friend Hong
said, and all public phones are in shops, offices or apartments of people who
work for the police. It is one of the most basic mechanisms of Government
control. ''They report to the police whenever there is a suspicious phone call,
especially from foreigners like you,'' said Hong. Phone service is erratic and
phones often emit strange buzzing and clicking noises, and it can take several
minutes to get a dial tone -signs, most foreigners assume, that someone else is
listening.

During the 1980 visit to China by the United States Secretary of Defense, Harold
Brown, when he was being feted at the Great Hall of the People, he ordered an
American diplomat to send an urgent message back to Washington for him. The
diplomat was uncertain as to how to proceed and asked a liaison officer from the
People's Liberation Army for help. He was immediately taken to a central
communications room inside the bowels of the Great Hall that had a bank of red
phones. When the American picked up the phone, he noticed the connection was
marvelously clear, unlike anything he had ever heard in China before.  The
special telephones are only one aspect of the Government's careful control of
access to information. Each party, Government and army unit distributes its own
classified documents. Like most things in China, information can be acquired not
with money but through one's connections. The higher an official's rank, the
better informed he can be. The principle is to keep the leaders wellinformed
without contaminating the minds of the masses.

Complementing the classified documents is a hierarchy of neibu, literally
''internal,'' or restricted, publications that go far beyond what is available
in the open media. There are four layers of these internal bulletins, my Chinese
friends told me -the narrower and more high-level the circulation, the more
complete, candid and interesting the contents.

At the bottom is a four-page tabloid-size paper called Reference News, which
reprints articles from the foreign press about international events and carries
some dispatches by Western journalists in Peking about domestic Chinese
developments. While foreigners in China may not legally buy or read Reference
News, any Chinese can subscribe to it, and the paper's circulation of more than
10 million is nearly double that of the official party newspaper, The People's
Daily.

At the next level above Reference News is Reference Material, a much richer and
more detailed digest of foreign news articles that is printed twice a day. It is
available only to party members and cadres through their danwei, not to
individuals, and is printed in large characters to help the fading eyesight of
elderly officials.

At a still more rarefied level is a group of publications known as nei-can,
''internal reference,'' which are distributed only to officials above grade 12
on the ladder of 24 ranks, equivalent to deputy cabinet ministers. Each ministry
puts out its own compendium of unvarnished reports about its area of
responsibility.

Finally, there is a special digest for members of the Central Committee and the
commanders of the large military regions. Called Cable News, it contains major
Chinese and international news flashes, and is similar to the daily briefing the
American President gets each morning from his national-security adviser.

Surprisingly, television has been allowed to drive a wedge into the Government's
system of controlled access to information. China established its first
television station only in 1958 and until 1979 there were fewer than five
million television sets in the whole country of a billion people. But now
suddenly the Chinese are becoming as addicted to television as Americans and
Japanese, at least in urban areas, where the ownership of sets is concentrated.

In 1980, the Government took the liberal step of adding 20 minutes of
international news - picked up by satellite from Visnews in Britain and
U.P.I.-T.N. and ABC in the United States - to its halfhour national news
broadcast each evening. Before, the evening news had been largely a turgid
rehash of stories from The People's Daily, plus some dreary homemade features on
the latest improvement in machine-tool production.  But now, in living color,
without censorship, the Chinese could watch the Pope touring Africa, Ronald
Reagan winning the American Presidential election, political terrorism in Italy,
even stock-car races in North Carolina and surfing in Hawaii.

After 30 years of almost total isolation from the outside world, the Chinese
were being fed a rich, confusing diet of exotic new images. Television, it
seemed to me, was likely to have a number of unintended side effects on China.
For the Communists, it could be a useful new propaganda tool, but it also tended
to break down the old stratified system of rationed information. It gave the
Chinese a much better appreciation of how wide a political and economic gap
separated them from the United States, Western Europe and Japan, and it bred a
desire for more consumer goods, particularly television sets.

If television threatens to break down the Government's control of access to
information, China's libraries have preserved it in its pristine form. The
library at Peking University, a modern concrete and glass structure, is one of
the newest and most impressive buildings on its tree-shaded campus. Although the
library houses three million volumes, the second largest collection of books in
China (after the Peking National Library near the Forbidden City), there is no
central card catalogue. Instead, I learned on a tour of the building, each
department has its own individual catalogue scattered among a labyrinth of
corridors and small rooms, most without identifying signs.

The division serves a purpose. A student may borrow books only in the field in
which he or she is majoring. A math student cannot take out books from the
English-language section, not even a volume of Shakespeare's plays or Mark
Twain's stories; a history major is barred from the philosophy department,
though he may need a book on Plato or Confucius.

After you have found the number of the book you want, you take it to the main
charge-out counter in a clamorous room crowded with knots of students shouting
to get the attention of the few clerks, who are dressed in long beige smocks to
protect them from dust. The library stacks themselves are closed except to a few
privileged professors and library-science majors, so students are totally
dependent on the clerks, like supplicants.

''At least half the time they take your slip, walk into the stacks, go only a
few steps, and without even leaving the main aisle check off 'We don't have it,'
'' a student studying library science related. One problem, she added, is that
most of the clerks are former peasants or factory workers with only a
primary-school education.  Censorship in China is both subtle and pervasive.  It
is designed to be so all-encompassing that it blots out facts of life that Deng
and the Politburo do not want to exist. I was reminded of this when the Chinese
press in 1980 suddenly discovered that the country's long-time model
agricultural unit, Dazhai, was a fraud. Since Mao glorified Dazhai in 1963,
proclaiming, ''In agriculture, learn from Dazhai,'' millions of Chinese pilgrims
had trouped to the small production brigade of 83 families on 250 acres of
stony, arid land in Shanxi province, in the northwest.

But that had been Mao's version of Dazhai. Now Deng saw it differently. Hua
Guofeng, his colorless but stubborn opponent for the party's leadership, had
continued to extol the virtues of Dazhai. Further, one of Hua's few remaining
supporters was the former party secretary of Dazhai, a peasant turned Politburo
member, Chen Yonggui. So for Deng, Dazhai became a symbol of all that had been
wrong with the Maoist way and a handy instrument with which to dishonor Hua.

The People's Daily confessed that Dazhai had not really relied on its own
efforts to terrace its rocky hills and dig its irrigation ditches; actually,
Dazhai had accepted millions of yuan in Government subsidies and help from
battalions of army laborers. Dazhai's everincreasing grain-production figures
were fake, too, a lie by the local authorities; its output had actually gone
down year by year.  Not only that but, during the Cultural Revolution, Chen's
persecution was responsible for the death of 141 people. Now all those millions
of signs, ''In agriculture, learn from Dazhai,'' would have to be painted over.

This kind of comprehensive censorsorship, of ''turning black into white and
white into black,'' to use a popular Communist slogan, is tireless work,
requiring endless attention to detail. At a photographic exhibition on the life
of Zhou Enlai in Peking's huge, Stalinesque, sandstone Museum of History, one of
the pictures showed the party leadership attending his funeral in January 1976.
In the solemn rank of mourners there were four blank spaces, gaps in the line.
Once, I guessed, these had been the Gang of Four.

Courtesy of the visit by Defense Secretary Harold Brown to Peking, I managed to
make it into the Military Museum, but only one of its two wings was open, that
commemorating the Red Army before 1949. The other, covering the history of the
People's Liberation Army after 1949 -its fighting in the Korean War and its
border skirmishes with India and Vietnam was off limits. Why the difference, I
asked my guide.

''We have not yet come to a conclusion about certain things,'' she replied with
a straight face. Translated, it meant that it was difficult to decide what to
say about Lin Biao, the former Defense Minister and military hero who had been
officially accused of trying to assassinate Mao in 1971.

What was striking about these incidents was that the party's monopoly of the
means of communications makes it very difficult for the Chinese to know what to
think about anything.

''We are a nation where the Government controls not only the present, but the
past,'' commented Bing, a friend of mine in her late 20's whose father had been
imprisoned during the Cultural Revolution for being a ''capitalist roader.'' She
had been given an essay of George Orwell's by one of her foreign teachers,
''Looking Back on the Spanish War,'' and she quoted a passage she thought
applied to China: '' 'If the Leader says of such and such an event, 'It never
happened' - well, it never happened. If he says that two and two are five -
well, two and two are five. This prospect frightens me much more than bombs.
...' '' Despite the fact that a vast apparatus is in place to control the
thoughts and behavior of the populace, every now and then quixotic acts break
through the humdrum surface of daily life.

Once, on a cold winter afternoon, driving back to the Peking Hotel, I noticed a
young policeman on his elevated traffic box hail a woman cyclist who was trying
to cross the intersection. He was shouting at her for some apparent violation,
but she wouldn't stop.  So the policeman dismounted from his stand, grabbed her
bike by the luggage rack on the back, and threw her off balance to the pavement.
The woman was incensed. She jumped up, whacked the policeman on the shoulder,
punched him in the chest, and then for good measure yanked off his stiff
blue-cotton cap and hurled it across the street. In turn, he took her by the arm
and marched her over to a white-painted police sentry stand on the corner.

She was a poor woman, in her late 30's, with tired eyes and rough skin. I
noticed she was wearing a worn corduroy jacket, baggy bluecotton pants and thin
cotton gloves, which had been crudely mended. Her cotton shoes were old and much
too thin for that time of year. Several more police soon arrived and confiscated
her bicycle, ordering her to report to a nearby police station to be questioned.
''But how can I get there if you lock up my bike?'' she protested.  By this
time, a crowd of several hundred bystanders had gathered.  There are few movies
and plays to go to in Peking, and tickets are hard to come by anyway, so a crowd
will gather to watch almost anything, especially a fight with a policeman. A
teenage boy stepped up to the woman, ignoring the police, and said, ''Here, ride
my bike to the station.''

Yet, despite such occasional acts of bravado, the ubiquity and intensity of the
control apparatus have generated tremendous psychological pressures on the
Chinese, creating mental strains that few Westerners can imagine. ''People live
under constant tension,'' remarked a dignified, taciturn engineer. ''You always
have to worry about someone you know betraying you,'' he explained, someone in
your danwei or your street committee.

This pressure has been compounded by the years of political campaigns, the
constant shifts in the official line, and the widespread political persecution,
the engineer added. To try to minimize the dangers, he said, he follows one
major precaution - he never talks about anything personal with people in his
danwei. ''For the next time a campaign comes up, the party will order criticism
meetings in your danwei and people will be compelled to say anything they know
about you, whether they like you or not. So I make my friends with people
outside my office.''

The engineer and his wife both complained about suffering from what they called
shen-jing shuai-ro, literally, ''weakness of the nerves,'' or medically,
neurasthenia, what Westerners identify as nervous tension, depression and
anxiety. Over time, I found, many of my Chinese friends talked about having
shen-jing shuai-ro.

David Eisenberg, a young American doctor from Harvard Medical School who was
doing research at the Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine in Peking, spent
a month observing how patients were treated in the acupuncture clinic of the
hospital. He was the first Ameri-can permitted actually to work in the hospital.
More than a quarter of the 100 patients he saw complained about nervous tension.

While the Chinese doctors prescribed a course of treatment with needles for the
headaches, insomnia and fatigue, Dr. Eisenberg, as an experiment, inquired
whether the patients had any emotional problems that might have triggered their
symptoms.

''One young man said no, he didn't have any personal problems, but a few days
ago his fiancee had been stabbed to death by two guys,'' Dr. Eisenberg recalled.
Among the other patients, some were depressed by conflicts with the cadres in
their danwei, from whom they couldn't escape. Another man was catatonic. He
couldn't speak or move and seemed numb. When Dr. Eisenberg asked a companion who
had brought him into the clinic about his history, it turned out he had just
been released after spending nine years in solitary confinement in prison.

Psychology as a field of study was branded a ''bogus bourgeois science'' by the
Government in 1957 and banned. Most of China's small number of Western-trained
psychologists were arrested and packed off to labor camps, a psychologist who
earned his Ph.D. at Columbia University before 1949 told me.

Shortly before I left China, I met a woman psychologist in her late 50's who had
been allowed to resume teaching her specialty again in 1978 after a 20-year
hiatus. Her books had all been burned years before, but her own spirit was still
youthful, almost feisty, and she was deeply interested in the implications of
psychology for China.

Had she noticed that many Chinese complained about nervous tension, I asked. Her
dark eyes stared at me intently for a moment and I wondered if I had trespassed
onto forbidden territory. But then she broke into a passionate discussion.

''After what we have gone through in the past 30 years, the whole country is
depressed,'' she said, her eyes flashing. ''Depression and anxiety are our
psychological scars. I worry about this every day.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a Chinese commune (Page 56) 3 photos of scenes
in China (Page 33)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 18, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PENETRATING THE PENTAGON

SECTION: Section 10; Page 39, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1567 words


RICHARD HALLORAN is a reporter in the Washington bureau of The Times.

BY RICHARD HALLORAN

Among the offbeat places in Washington that are at least partly open to visitors
but rarely included in sightseeing plans is the Pentagon. That's understandable.
The Pentagon is a low-lying block of concrete that could easily win a booby
prize for architecture and has a reputation, well-deserved at one time, for
being dreary. Memories of anti-war demonstrations that began during the days of
Vietnam and continue occasionally today surely don't make the Pentagon more
appealing. Moreover, the inside is a maze of five rings, each with five floors,
within the five-sided structure that is the world's largest office building.
Physically and politically, the Pentagon is the butt of endless jokes.

On the other hand, the Pentagon has always been in the news, more at one time
than another, but still a place that affects the lives of every American. The
politicians and bureaucrats, the generals and the admirals who work there plan
to spend $195 billion of the taxpayers' money this year and $215 billion next
year. That alone is worthy of notice.

Beyond that, and unknown even to many people who live in Washington, the
Pentagon has several attractive displays. The collection of oversize ship models
may be the best in the world.  Military art, some of it professional and some
amateur, lines many of the corridors to illuminate the heroism and the horror of
war.  Memorials to great military leaders can make history a little more real.
One alcove, the Hall of Heroes, honors with quiet dignity the 3,400 military
people who have won the Congressional Medal of Honor, the nation's highest
military decoration.

Visitors cannot wander freely around the Pentagon because much of the work done
there is secret. But hourlong public tours begin with a short film showing that
the Pentagon was built during the early days of World War II in 16 months at a
cost of $83 million, a figure that wouldn't buy two F-14 Navy jet fighters
today. The film also tells viewers that the Pentagon was to be turned into a
warehouse for records after the war.

The film is followed by a walking tour led by a well turned-out young soldier,
sailor, airman or marine. The guide takes a small group through the corridors
and alcoves dedicated to military leaders, such as Dwight D. Eisenhower, George
C. Marshall and Douglas MacArthur. Those memorials and the other displays are
the brainchild of Melvin Laird, the Secretary of Defense in the early 1970's,
who wanted the drab interior of the Pentagon dressed up and made attractive for
visitors, including taxpayers. There is even an alcove dedicated to news
correspondents and named, appropriately enough, for Ernie Pyle, the respected
correspondent killed during World War II.

The most appealing pictures in the places named for the military leaders are,
curiously, those stiff, posed portraits taken when they were young officers on
somebody's staff. There is memorabilia, such as an ''eyes only'' wartime message
from General Marshall, then chief of staff of the Army, to General Eisenhower,
the supreme commander in Britain preparing for the invasion of Normandy.
Marshall told Eisenhower he needed a fresh outlook for the battle and said:
''Now come on home and see your wife and trust somebody else for 20 minutes in
England.''

The MacArthur corridor, like its namesake, has been controversial.  Admirers of
the general, famed for his ''I shall return'' slogan that inspired hope in
Filipinos during the Japanese Occupation, had asked that a memorial be arranged
for him in the Pentagon. But Harold Brown, the Secretary of Defense in the
Carter Administration, disapproved because he considered General MacArthur to
have been insubordinate to President Truman, who recalled him from Korea in
1951.

However, Caspar W. Weinberger, the present Secretary of Defense, is among the
MacArthur admirers, having served on the general's staff in the South Pacific
during World War II. Thus, the memorial was dedicated last fall in the presence
of President Reagan and Mrs.  MacArthur, the general's widow. It includes no
mention of the general's dismissal by President Truman. But it does have General
MacArthur's uniform as first captain of cadets at West Point and other mementos,
including the handwritten final page of his memoirs, in which he noted that
''the shadows are lengthening for me'' and went on to say: ''In my dreams, I
hear again the crash of guns, the rattle of musketry, the strange mournful
mutter of the battlefield.'' That was from his peroration at West Point, where
the general, who had a Churchillian command of the English language, said that
his last thoughts would be of ''the Corps and the Corps and the Corps.''

The art in the Pentagon includes, without stretching the definition too far, a
collection of models of warships, several of them over six feet long. Enclosed
in glass cases, the models are detailed images of giant nuclear-powered aircraft
carriers, such as the Enterprise, sleek Spruance-class destroyers and agile
frigates of the Oliver Hazard Perry type, and sinister dark submarines that
patrol the seas endlessly and silently. One model is of the Boston-based
Constitution, or ''Old Ironsides,'' the oldest commissioned ship in the Navy and
still carried on the rolls as a ship of the line.

Elsewhere there are Navy and Marine Corps recruiting posters that date from the
Revolution. One, of later vintage, portrays John Paul Jones saying: ''Sign on,
young man, and sail with me.'' Another, of pre-World War I days, says: ''Men
wanted for the U.S. Marines, an opportunity to see the world.'' Life was simpler
then.

The best art is a group of 150 watercolors, oils and sketches that are part of a
collection of 1,050 pictures commissioned by the editors of Time and Life
magazines during World War II. The rest of the collection is in the Time-Life
headquarters in New York.

In the softly lit alcove named the Hall of Heroes are posted the names of the
3,400 men and one woman, Dr. Mary H. Walker, a Civil War surgeon, who have been
awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor. It is given to the soldier who, ''in
action involving actual conflict with an enemy, distinguished himself
conspicuously by gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of life, above and beyond
the call of duty.'' The names of the famous are there, of course. But the most
striking thing is the rollcall of privates and sergeants who came from ordinary
walks of life.

The walking tours of the Pentagon, which began as part of America's Bicentennial
celebration in 1976, have two shortcomings, both in the name of security. The
visitor must stay with the group, which moves along at a steady pace, with
little time to dawdle if something strikes the stroller's fancy. The only way to
see something a second time is to take another tour. No one has to wear a badge
but the guide knows exactly how many are in his group and he walks backward most
of the time, not only to deliver his narrative but also to make sure everyone
stays where he is supposed to be.

Then, some of the more interesting places are off limits. such as the National
Military Command Center where maps and data of military movements - United
States and Russian and others - all over the world are plotted, along with more
highly secret information. The command center also houses the Pentagon's
communication system, in which an officer can push a button and communicate with
a base halfway around the world. You can get some idea of what the center looks
like from the introductory film.

A guide for visitors
How to Get There The Pentagon, located in Arlington, Va., just across the
Potomac from the nation's capital, is easy to reach from downtown Washington. By
car, take the Memorial or 14th Street Bridge and follow the signs to the
visitors parking lot. On the subway marked National Airport, the Pentagon is
only 20 minutes from, say, the Capitol. A way station is Arlington Cemetery,
where visitors can see the Tomb of the Unknowns and the graves of President
Kennedy and his brother, Robert. Walking Tours Pentagon walking tours for the
public run every hour or so in winter, more frequently in summer, from 9 A.M.
Monday through Friday but not on national holidays. Special tours for visitors
with impaired hearing are held on the first and third Monday of the month at 1
P.M. For reservations, write Tour Group Director, Room 1E776, The Pentagon,
Washington, D.C. 20301 (202-695-1776.) Where to Dine Because visitors are not
permitted to roam freely in the Pentagon, the cafeterias and dining rooms are
not available to the public.  Snacks can be purchased in the Concourse, where
the tours start.R.H.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Seaman Wayne Post guiding visotors map

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GAYLORD HARNWELL PHYSICIST AND PRESIDENT OF PENN, DIES

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 820 words


Dr. Gaylord P. Harnwell, an atomic physicist and educator who led the University
of Pennsylvania in 17 years of postwar growth, died early yesterday at his home
in Haverford, Pa., after a lengthy illness. He was 78 years old.

Dr. Harnwell became the university's president in 1953, after teaching and
guiding researchers at the school since 1938. He helped change the Ivy League
institution with a major building program that knitted the university more
closely into Philadelphia's urban community.

In his tenure, about 90 projects valued at more than $125 million were
completed, with others planned and waiting for financing. The program enabled
Penn to expand its research and faculty resources and to build such facilities
as dormitories for women students.

''The University of Pennsylvania,'' the current president, Dr.  Sheldon Hackney,
said yesterday, ''abounds with the legacies left by Dr. Harnwell, and they will
forever stand as fitting tributes.''

Coped With Vietnam Protests

Dr. Harnwell also dealt with a rebellious campus mood of the late 1960's at the
time of America's entanglement in Vietnam.  A central issue, and the occasion of
a sit-in at his office in 1967, was secret research on chemical and biological
warfare undertaken for the Army and Air Force in the school's laboratories.  Dr.
Harnwell, who distinguished himself in anti-submarine developments in World War
II, nevertheless declared that his campus was no place for the research. He used
his influence with university trustees to stop the work.

He led efforts to bring the university in touch with the community surrounding
it. He also played a role in settling civic and labor disputes in Philadelphia.
In 1968, he successfully proposed that trustees sit down with students, faculty
members and administrators to work out differences.

Asked at the time what qualities a university president needed most, Dr.
Harnwell replied with one word: ''Patience.'' A few months earlier he had
threatened faculty members with disciplinary action after they used university
facilities to denounce the war in Vietnam.

Paper Sought His Retirement

At the opening of the 1967 fall term, The Daily Pennsylvanian, the campus
newspaper, demanded in an editorial that Dr. Harnwell retire. It said he was
''an old man'' who had allowed the campus to be divided by a generation gap. The
paper said that Dr. Harnwell was an able fund-raiser but said that what Penn
needed was ''an infusion of new blood at the top.''

In 1970, the year Dr. Harnwell retired, about 500 of the 3,784 Penn students
receiving degrees walked out of the award ceremonies at the urging of an antiwar
student leader.

Dr. Harnwell was a director of a number of corporations, including the
Pennsylvania Railroad. He had just become the university's president emeritus
when the board of directors of the Penn Central Company, the successor to the
railroad company, elected him chairman of the board, president and chief
operating officer of the holding company.  In March 1971, he and four other
directors had severed ties to the troubled company.

Research Role in War

Gaylord Probasco Harnwell, a native of Evanston, Ill., was educated at Haverford
College, Cambridge University and Princeton University.  He received his Ph.D.
at Princeton in 1927 and was appointed an assistant professor of physics there a
year later.

He engaged in nuclear research and was an associate professor by 1938 when the
University of Pennsylvania offered him a professorship and the chairmanship of
the physics department and the opportunity to direct the school's Randal Morgan
Laboratory of Physics. The university was then preparing to install one of the
country's largest atom smashers.

In World War II, Dr. Harnwell, while on a leave of absence, headed the United
States Navy Radio and Sound Laboratory at the University of California. His
contributions to sonar led to his receiving the Medal of Merit from the Navy.

In 1946, he returned to Penn as a professor, physics chairman and laboratory
director, again becoming involved in nuclear research.  Harold E. Stassen, then
the university president, left in 1953 to join the Eisenhower Administration.
Dr. Harnwell was chosen to succeed him.

Dr. Harnwell was the author of several texts, plus a ''Russian Diary'' written
after a study tour of Soviet universities in 1958. He also wrote ''Educational
Voyaging in Iran.''

Dr. Harnwell is survived by his wife, the former Mary Louise Rowland; a son,
Robert G., two daughters, Dr. Ann Harnwell Ashmead and Mary Jan Harnwell
Wallace, all from the Philadelphia area; and 10 grandchildren.

The date of a memorial service is to be announced.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

K. Switzer Is an Old Boy

BYLINE: George Vecsey

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 4; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 1083 words


IF it hadn't been cold and snowy in Boston 15 years ago, Kathy Switzer might not
be a television commentator at the Boston Marathon today. She would not have
become one of the historic figures in America's most famous road race - like the
two unrelated John Kelleys, or like Will Cloney and Jock Semple, the two
officials who tried to take away her numerals in 1967.

Much more importantly, if she hadn't needed a thick sweatsuit in the raw blasts
of a Boston spring, there might be no marathon for women in the 1984 Olympics.

Because of the weather, because of the sweatshirt, and because Miss Switzer was
accosted on the course by Jock Semple, the zealous protector of marathon
tradition, thousands of women around the world now realize they can run 26 miles
385 yards without - as Miss Switzer puts it -''growing a mustache.''

As the director of sports programs for Avon, Miss Switzer travels as far as
Brazil and the Philippines partly to demonstrate how feminine a 35-year-old can
look, seven years after running her personal dream race of 2 hours 51 minutes 37
seconds at Boston.

''You never heard the old line that if you worked out too hard, you'd have a
mustache?'' she asks. ''Women heard it all the time when I was growing up.''

She didn't look like a man in 1967, either, except when covered with her thick
sweatsuit as she joined friends from Syracuse University at the starting line of
the marathon.

She had enrolled in the race as K. Switzer, and taken a private physical,
knowing that women were not allowed in the marathon.  Roberta Gibb had attracted
considerable attention in 1966 by going the distance without an official number.

Miss Switzer was convinced that no official would try to interfere, but she
wasn't familiar with the tenacity of Jock Semple, the Scottish masseur and
proprietor of the Boston Athletic Association, the sponsor of the marathon.

''Looking back, if I had worn my T-shirt and shorts at the start, they would not
have let me run,'' she says.

She says she wasn't trying to run as part of the protest movement of the late
1960's.  ''I'm pretty conservative,'' Miss Switzer says. ''My father is a
retired Army colonel and my brother flew helicopters in Vietnam and I wasn't
part of those protests. I wouldn't call myself a feminist, either. I was a
runner, an athlete, an individual. I was running the Boston Marathon. I was
going to Mecca.''

After four miles toward Mecca on April 19, 1967, Miss Switzer removed her outer
layer as the press bus pulled alongside.  ''The officials felt I was making a
mockery of the race,'' Miss Switzer recalls. ''I can understand it now. Jock
Semple grabbed me and tried to push me off the course. But Big Tom, my
hammer-throwing boyfriend, came alongside and shoved Jock.''

Big Tom's block on Semple was captured on film, and could easily have been used
in the National Football League highlight films. In his entertaining book,
''Just Call Me Jock,'' Semple maintains he did not go sprawling because of Big
Tom's block but rather because, ''I think I tripped over my shoelace the instant
before he hit me.''

After Semple went flying, the officials judiciously shook fists at Miss Switzer
and stayed out of the way of Big Tom. (Miss Switzer later married Tom Miller,
but they are now divorced.)

''After Jock tried to stop me, I went through every emotion,'' Miss Switzer
recalls. ''I was scared, then it became comical, then I just wanted to get away,
then I was paranoid about what they would do to me.

''Then, finally, I was angry. I realized I couldn't just sign up and run with
the Syracuse Harriers. I wasn't special. I was being treated as just another
woman.''

After many officials and sports reporters harrumphed about Miss Switzer's
action, the publicity helped the barrier fall by 1972. In 1975, Miss Switzer
finished second in the women's division, knowing ''this was the race I had
always wanted to run. This was the perfect wave that surfers look for.

''George Sheehan always says there is no perfect race, you can always do better,
but I realized this was it for me. It was like a perfect love affair. It's over,
and you shouldn't try to repeat it.''

Miss Switzer stopped running competitively five years ago and put her massive
energy into lobbying for the inclusion of the women's marathon in the 1984
Olympics, a battle that was won a year ago.

''To me, the marathon was the ultimate - an event that was uniquely masculine.
Now it is recognized that women can run that distance, and I believe the studies
that show that women may eventually be superior to men at distances of 35 or 40
miles.

''The idea of women running in marathons has developed an incredible sense of
optimism. I believe that the revolution in women's sports may be the most
profound social revolution of the 20th century.''

Miss Switzer organizes marathons in countries such as Brazil, ''obviously a
market for Avon, a culture that places great emphasis on the body, and also
becoming more conscious of health and environment.

''In a lot of countries, the men are afraid women will become masculinized.
There are tremendous pressures on women to not take running seriously. It is
important for them to run without feeling intimidated, which is why we run
marathons for women, even though I believe in men and women running on the same
course.

''For now, we want to show women that it is healthy to run. We want to draw
women into the sense of accomplishment. We take the winner of each race to our
international race each year. This year it's in San Francisco on June 6. I
managed to get the Golden Gate Bridge closed off for 20 minutes at 7 A.M. on
Sunday. I just hope the fog isn't too bad.

''We want the 16-year-old in Brazil who just ran her first race to look up the
winner's stand and say: 'That could be me. I could get a trip to San Francisco
some day. I could be somebody.'

''We just had 2,500 women in our race in Brazil. It took us 10 years to get that
far in America, but we did it right away in Brazil. To me, that's as good as
running 2:51 in Boston. I'm passing it on.''

Today in Boston, Miss Switzer will ''pass it on'' as one of the television
commentators. The hard feelings with Semple faded at the starting line in 1973
when Semple sidled up to her and roared in his Scottish-Boston gargle: ''Come
on, lass. Let's get ourselves a wee bit of notoriety,'' and he kissed her. With
that kiss, the notorious K. Switzer knew she was becoming one of the grand old
boys of the Boston Marathon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Kathy Switzer

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RAYCHEM CARVES A PROSPEROUS NICHE

BYLINE: By BARNABY J. FEDER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 5; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1331 words

DATELINE: MENLO PARK, Calif.


Sometimes, a new technology can pleasantly surprise even those with high hopes
for it. Paul M. Cook was convinced by his work for the Atomic Energy Commission
almost 30 years ago that radiation chemistry -in particular, bombarding plastics
with radiation - could produce unusual and useful materials.

Nevertheless, he shakes his head in happy amazement as he recalls the quiet
niche-by-niche rise into the Fortune 500 of the Raychem Corporation, the company
he founded in 1957 to pursue that conviction.

''It's been a much more encompassing technology than I thought it was going to
be,'' Mr. Cook, who is Raychem's president, said in an interview.

The first valuable thing Raychem learned to do by radiating plastic was to make
it heat-shrinkable. Today, an almost incomprehensible variety of pipes, cables
and wires are sealed, spliced or insulated by plastic materials that are shrunk
to fit during installation using a blow torch or other heating devices.

Wide Variety of Applications

To capitalize on heat shrinkability, Raychem had to tailor products to a wide
variety of industrial, utility and military applications.  Some required the
addition of adhesives or sealants, while others needed materials that could
survive corrosive environments, strong or varied electrical fields, and various
temperature conditions.

''The company has never really had a breakthrough - that's not our style,'' said
Robert M. Halperin, Raychem's executive vice president. Instead, the company
looks for $1 million to $3 million markets where a special combination of skills
is needed to engineer a product that small competitors would find impossible to
duplicate and that larger ones would find uneconomic.

Thus, Raychem's growth over the last decade from sales of $67.2 million in the
1972 fiscal year to $525.4 million in the 1981 fiscal year, ending last June 30,
has been a case of one thing leading to another tens of thousands of times.

''I guess we've developed 200,000 or so products,'' Mr. Cook said.  ''But don't
ask me to make them all in the same week. We are only supplying 10,000 or so at
any given time.''

Dominant Patent Position

One reason Raychem is free to move in small steps is that radiation chemistry
is, technically speaking, a small world in which Raychem has cornered a dominant
patent position and a great deal of the available expertise. According to
company officials, there are no university programs focused on the technology.

In addition, potential competitors find that the price of entry is not cheap.
Mr. Cook became interested in the field while looking for ways to use atomic
waste, but the preferred radiation source today is an electron beam generator.
The one at the company's plant here is the largest such generator in the world,
according to company officials.

The machine works by accelerating electrons to 90 percent of the speed of light
in a vacuum, at which point they pass through a titanium foil window and crash
into the plastic, knocking loose some molecular bonds while creating others. The
voltages involved are low enough so that none of the products are radioactive.

While most of Raychem's products incorporate heat-shrinking plastics, a growing
number do not. Innovative tubing that heats up only when needed to keep pipes
and storage tanks from freezing is marketed by Raychem's Chemelex subsidiary,
based in nearby Redwood City.

Metals With 'Memory'

Another new and expanding line of products involves metals with ''memory.''
Certain metal alloys can be processed so that they will suddenly alter their
structure and shape - to one from which they were previously deformed - when
heated. This change, known as a phase transition, was harnessed by Raychem to
couple metal tubes together in the Grumman F-14 fighter plane by shrinking a
metal sleeve around the joint.

Wall Street has had so much trouble characterizing what all this adds up to that
few analysts follow the company. ''There's nobody like them,'' said Dennis
Sherva of Morgan Stanley. ''They are not electronics, not chemicals, not
mechanical - just a little bit of everything.''

Another reason Raychem is not well known is that almost two-thirds of its
business is transacted overseas. With 10 manufacturing plants, 45 service
centers and six research centers in foreign countries - and only one domestic
manufacturing facility outside the San Francisco Bay area - the company has an
understandably low profile at home.

Raychem's overseas exposure has been financially trying in the last year and a
half because a large proportion of the company's sales and earnings is in
European currencies that have plummeted in value in relation to the dollar.
Recently, the currency penalty has been exacerbated by recession at home and
abroad.

Sales Off, Net Up

Sales fell slightly during the first six months of the 1982 fiscal year, to $252
million from $255.9 million in the first half of the 1981 fiscal year. But
earnings rose to $24.5 million from $16.8 million in the period a year earlier,
albeit with help from a onetime $6.9 million profit related to changes in
British tax laws.

For the last full fiscal year, earnings per share were $4.01.  Recently, Fortune
magazine said that the per-share increase from one cent in the 1971 fiscal year,
when military business slumped, to the the 1981 fiscal year, an annual growth
rate of 82.1 percent, was the highest for the decade among the nation's 500
largest companies by sales.

While Mr. Halperin speaks of the currency rates ''killing us,'' Raychem's
financial pinch today is far less upsetting than two earlier predicaments that
worked lasting changes in the company. More than a decade ago, as the Vietnam
War wound down, Raychem's performance declined because sales were heavily
concentrated in military markets. Today, the company says it is not interested
in military business that does not involve products or technologies with
important nonmilitary markets.

In 1976, the company's earnings were wiped out by a $16 million write-off of its
investment in Stilan, an ill-fated high-performance plastic whose discoverers
died in a 1972 plane crash. It proved difficult to manufacture and, when new
environmental regulations presented the company with the need for a
multimillion-dollar plant renovation, Raychem threw in the towel.

''Never again will we put so high a fraction of our discretionary reserves in a
single project,'' Mr. Halperin said.  Both Mr. Cook, a 57-year-old chemical
engineer, and Mr. Halperin, a 51-year-old mechanical engineer, are closely
involved with Raychem's Group for Emerging Technologies and Markets, which they
refer to by the initials G.E.T.M., pronounced ''get'em.''

New Plastic Device

G.E.T.M.'s primary task is nursing new products to the point where they can be
moved into operating units. At the moment, its most intriguing challenge is a
plastic device that Raychem calls the Polyswitch. The device allows normal
electrical current flow but protects electric and electronic equipment from
surges in current by suddenly increasing its resistance.

It is seen as a possible replacement for the common fuse in many applications
because it quickly cools and allows current to flow again when the surge has
passed, in effect resetting itself.

''I could give you an astronomical number for the potential market for
Polyswitch,'' said Bert Levin, head of G.E.T.M. Typically, however, although
Raychem believes Polyswitch might be a mass market device, the company is
concentrating on finding ways to mate it with other products in high-value-added
systems for specific applications.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Raychem president Paul Cook Table of Raychem
financial data

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR ARMS CAN BE A VOLATILE TOPIC FOR CLERGY

BYLINE: By CHARLES AUSTIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1200 words


When the Rev. Jerry Carter steps into the pulpit of Asbury Methodist Church in
Livermore, Calif., he preaches to a congregation made up largely of employees of
a nearby laboratory that designs nuclear weapons.

Although some people have come to him with worries about their personal moral
responsibility for the arms race, Mr. Carter says, ''I do not believe that it is
appropriate for me to minister to a large number of people who work for the lab
and make that a major concern.''

Yet the 10 million-member United Methodist Church, to which Mr.  Carter's
550-member congregation belongs, has supported the campaign to freeze
development and stockpiling of nuclear weapons.

The California clergyman, like many ministers in areas where the nuclear
industry is a major part of the economy, faces a triplehorned predicament.
Opposing the arms race could mean attacking the livelihood of his parishioners.
Supporting increased production of nuclear weapons could put him at odds with
positions taken by his denomination. Saying nothing means ignoring a major
contemporary moral issue.

Many national church officials have taken the lead in calling for an end to
nuclear armaments. However, members of the clergy like Mr.  Carter and others
whose churches are in areas dependent on the nuclear industry must often tread
softly on the issue.

Special Responsibility Seen

Despite the difficulties, ministers whose churches are near nuclear weapons
centers say they have a special responsibility to address the issue. This is
evident in Los Alamos, N.M., where a huge nuclear research laboratory with an
annual budget of $480 million employs 7,000 people.

The Rev. John Conway, pastor of the Immaculate Heart of Mary Catholic Church in
Los Alamos, is typical of the large number of ministers who want to take a
middle road between activism and quiescence. He would not suggest that his
parishioners consider quitting their jobs in weapons research or production, an
idea suggested by Bishop Leroy T. Matthiesen of Amarillo, Tex., where a Pantex
plant makes parts for the neutron bomb.

''I know these people, and I would never confront them like that,'' Father
Conway said. ''They are not given enough credit. They are deep-feeling,
concerned people, and they are talking about what they are doing.

''In a sermon,'' he went on, ''we have a captive audience and there is no
dialogue. I feel with this thing I have a better chance by sitting down and
discussing it with people.''

Other Los Alamos clergymen, such as the Rev. George Easley of the United Church,
also think it is inappropriate to address the subject from the pulpit but want
to raise the topic in other ways.

Workers Termed More Aware

Mr. Easley says he believes that nuclear workers may be more conscious of the
moral and practical dangers of the nuclear age than the public at large. He said
many of them believed that working to keep the nation strong was as moral a
position as denouncing nuclear weaponry.

Another Los Alamos minister who endorsed the nuclear freeze campaign in a sermon
says his congregation's reaction was mixed. The Rev. David Shaw of the First
United Methodist Church admits that it is particularly difficult to raise the
issue when nearly everyone in town is supported in some way by the laboratory.

The economy of Connecticut is heavily dependent on military contracts, but a
growing number of churches there are joining the freeze campaign. The Rev. Merle
E. Spring of Old Mystic Baptist Church says that the freeze is ''less
threatening to people than a move for total disarmament.'' He said he expected
the statewide meeting of American Baptist churches in Connecticut this month to
pass a resolution supporting the campaign.

In Noank, Conn., about one-third of the parishioners at the Baptist Church work
for the Navy or for the Electric Boat Company in Groton, which builds nuclear
fast-attack and Trident submarines. Nonetheless, the Rev. James Pratt preaches
against stockpiling nuclear weapons.

Conflict With Parishioners

As in the early days of the civil rights movements and the anti-Vietnam War
demonstrations, religious leaders who speak out frequently find themselves in
conflict with their parishioners.

Prompted by the antinuclear statements of Bishop Matthiesen, Rabbi Martin Scharf
of Temple B'nai Israel in Amarillo expressed similar views. One parishioner
resigned and the president of the congregation, a Pantex employee, also
complained.

''But as clergyman I have a definite right to express what is right and wrong on
moral issues,'' Rabbi Scharf said.  Bishop Matthiesen's outspoken opposition to
the neutron bomb cost Catholic Charities in Amarillo the support of the local
United Way campaign.

The Rev. Scott Andress, 28 years old, said he was removed as pastor at an
Amarillo Methodist church at the request of his congregation after he took part
in a demonstration outside the Pantex plant.

The strong stand taken by Bishop Matthiesen and others has mobilized some local
clergymen on the other side of the issue, however. The Rev. Alan Ford, pastor of
Southwest Baptist Church, says his congregation will observe May 23 as ''Pantex
Appreciation Day.''

----

Antinuclear Drive Continues

By United Press International

Americans rallied across the country yesterday as part of a weeklong Ground Zero
demonstration to educate people about the dangers of nuclear war.

The Pittsburgh City Council unanimously adopted a resolution calling for a
''mutal and immediate freeze'' in the development of nuclear weapons by the
United States, the Soviet Union and other nations. Councilman Robert Rade Stone
said he thought it was the first such action by a major city.

The resolution originally called for a unilateral freeze by the United States
but was amended to include the concept of mutuality.  Copies of the measure will
be sent to President Reagan, Congressmen from the Pittsburgh area and possibly
Russian leaders.

About 200 people attended a rally in downtown Louisville, Ky., and placed a
stone tablet in a small park as a symbolic designation of the center of a
potential nuclear explosion.

In Boston, antinuclear forces arranged to pass out leaflets at the marathon.
Senator Paul Tsongas, Democrat of Massachusetts, said public support was ''the
only hope'' for achieving a nuclear weapons freeze.

Case Western Reserve University sponsored a Ground Zero walk in downtown
Cleveland. And at the University of Houston, a series of six workshops was being
held, including one on the economic effects of a nuclear war.

Ground Zero is a nonpartisan group trying to develop a public push to prevent
nuclear war. Its name comes from the term for the surface area directly below or
above the point of detonation of a nuclear blast.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 20, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
ANTITANK AND ANTI-NUKE

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 856 words


Is the tank, introduced in World War I and the dominant land weapon of World War
II, obsolete already? And if so, might that help in the prevention of nuclear
war?

The answer is ''yes'' to both questions, in the view of an impressive group of
prominent scientists, military officers and former senior government officials.

Unfortunately, their recent statement attracted little notice, owing primarily
to the great attention accorded at the same time to a proposal by four former
national security officials that the U.S.  move toward a policy of ''no first
use'' of nuclear weapons.

The group under the auspices of the Union of Concerned Scientists went further.
They recommended:

* A ''no-first-use'' policy and the withdrawal from Europe of U.S.  and Soviet
tactical nuclear weapons.

* Immediate Soviet-American negotiations for massive reductions in nuclear
arsenals.

* A U.S. announcement of its willingness to enter into an immediate bilateral
freeze on the buildup of strategic nuclear weapons, as well as renewed
negotiations for a Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.

The concerned scientists' group concluded, first, that the U.S. and the Soviet
Union share ''rough equality'' in nuclear weaponry - 9,500 strategic nuclear
weapons on the American side, 7,000 on the Soviet - with neither having the
capacity to disarm the other in a successful first strike.

The group further concluded that NATO has ''the manpower, economic wealth and
technological prowess to mount an adequate conventional defense against a
nonnuclear attack by the Soviet Union.'' That's where the tanks come in.

Virtually every argument by those who maintain that the Warsaw Pact powers could
overwhelm NATO in conventional warfare relies heavily on the assertion that the
Pact deploys about 20,000 tanks on the European front, against perhaps a third
that many for NATO. But the same spokesmen rarely point out that NATO has a
counteradvantage in antitank weapons.

In a letter to me, Dr. Hans Bethe -the Nobel Prize-winning physicist and a
member of the scientists' group -wrote that because of ''the rapid evolution of
antitank weapons, thanks largely to the very significant technological lead
enjoyed by the West ... many highly qualified persons believe that before long
tanks will be as obsolete as the cavalry.''

One such person is Richard Garwin, a physicist and defense specialist who also
was a member of the scien- tists' group. He agrees that tanks are becoming
obsolete because of technology and the inherent advantages of the defense over
the offense in war.  Hence, assuming that the Pact would be the aggressor in any
conventional war, the West would retain its advantage even if the Russians
developed equivalent antitank technology.

Specifically, Mr. Garwin said in a telephone interview, the U.S.  now has or can
quickly develop hand-held, air-delivered, missiledelivered and artillery
weapons, utilizing such devices as laser beams and infrared homing, that could
make tanks all but useless in attack. Either aircraft or artillery, for example,
can deliver fields of ''strike mines'' across the path of a tank assault
wherever it develops, making that path all but impassable.

Another antitank device requires an observer to focus a laser beam on an
oncoming tank; either an air- or missile-delivered bomb or artillery shell then
''homes'' on the laser and destroys the tank.  This method was used in Vietnam
as early as 1969 in bombing bridges.  Alternatively, infrared-guided weapons can
pick up the heat of a tank engine and follow it to the target.

NATO antitank aircraft, of course, could be vulnerable in battle; for that
reason, Mr. Garwin advocates a buildup of conventionally armed cruise missiles
to deliver - from whatever distance required and without the inflexibility of
fixed artillery positions - the antitank weapons.

Hand-held weapons can also fire guided missiles that will seek out a maneuvering
tank if the man firing it keeps his sights trained on the tank; the weakness is
that this can take perhaps 10 seconds during which the weapon's holder must
remain standing and is highly vulnerable. Mr. Garwin insists that periscopes and
detached firing equipment could quickly and cheaply be developed to perfect
these otherwise effective tank killers.

All these weapons would be more effective than neutron bombs or other nuclear
weapons against a spread-out tank force - and would carry with them no risk of
nuclear escalation.

Thus, conventional developments in antitank warfare, if they void the supposed
Pact advantage in tanks, also go far to void whatever necessity there might have
been for NATO to rely on nuclear weapons to repel a conventional attack. That,
in turn, would make clear the feasibility of a ''no-first-use'' policy, and even
the withdrawal of tactical nuclear weapons from Europe - a long and significant
step away from the probable escalation of conventional into nuclear war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

ELECTRONIC DATA GETS ARMY CONTRACT

SECTION: Section D; Page 5, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 309 words


The Army announced yesterday that it had awarded to the Electronic Data Systems
Corporation a 10-year contract to install and operate what will be one of the
Government's biggest data processing networks. The contract's value is estimated
at $656 million.

The contract, the largest ever awarded by the Army for data processing, will
connect 42 Army posts to a nationwide network of data processing centers.

Electronic Data won the contract over the International Business Machines
Corporation and the Computer Sciences Corporation.  Government contracts, a new
market for Electronic Data, account for 20 percent of the company's revenue,
which reached $454 million in the last fiscal year.

The new setup, called Viable, will enable Army posts to send financial, supply
and personnel information to five regional data processing centers that
Electronic Data will build in the next few years. Each Army post has been using
20-year-old, stand-alone computers, which do not connect posts with other
computers in the Army system.

The Army ''desperately needed'' the network, said Col. Clinton H.  Black,
project manager for Viable with the Army's Computer Systems Command, because the
current system, which was obsolete in the 1960's, is ''overloaded and
unreliable.''

The data centers will be situated in or near Atlanta; Killeen, Tex.; Monterey,
Calif.; Radcliff, Ky, and Washington.  Electronic Data, based in Dallas, will
set up a project headquarters in Washington. It plans to employ about 700
workers on the project.

Electronic Data's chairman and majority shareholder, H. Ross Perot, has
frequently been in the spotlight for such actions as an unsuccessful effort to
fly supplies to American prisoners in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 21, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

STILL IN SAIGON' CLIMBING

BYLINE: By Robert Palmer

SECTION: Section ZZZ; Page 1, Column A; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 509 words


''PEOPLE said it would either be a hit or a real dog,'' Dan Daley said this week
about ''Still in Saigon,'' the song he wrote last May about a Vietnam veteran's
unbearably intense memories of combat. This year, the Charlie Daniels Band
recorded the song, and four weeks ago it entered the singles charts at No. 75.
This week, it is No. 33, with intense sales action and airplay reported.

''I guess the pessimists have been proved wrong,'' added Mr. Daley, who has been
performing his songs on the Greenwich Village folk-club circuit for several
years and has been active in music in New York as a sideman or group member
since the early 70's. On Friday and Saturday, he will be at Kenny's Castaways on
Bleecker Street.

''I didn't start out to write a song about Vietnam,'' Mr. Daley said. ''I
started out trying to write a song about what combat must really feel like. To
tell you the truth, it grew out of my being a war-movie buff. But I was
draft-age when Vietnam was going on, though fortunately I wasn't drafted, and I
grew up at the dinner table with the TV on. By the time I'd written two or three
drafts of a song I was going to call 'MIG Alley,' I had 'Still in Saigon.' ''

Mr. Daley has been a professional songwriter since 1975, and his current
publisher paid for him to make a demonstration recording of the song not long
after he wrote it. It was picked up by NBC Radio's the Source network and began
to get attention, and at that point, Mr. Daley's publishers sent copies of it to
Bruce Springsteen and Mr. Daniels, the two rock performers who have been most
vocal in their support of the Vietnam Veterans of America.

''Springsteen was recording only his own material,'' Mr. Daley said, ''and at
first Charlie Daniels's people said he wasn't recording it either. By the time
we found out he had recorded it, he'd already performed it at the CBS records
convention and gotten a real powerful response.''

No Sabers Rattled

Mr. Daniels has recorded patriotic material with saber-rattling overtones in the
past, but ''Still in Saigon,'' whose protagonist is haunted by the death and
destruction he caused in Vietnam, isn't rattling any sabers. ''I've met Charlie
Daniels since the song came out, and he's a serious, sincere man,'' Mr. Daley
said. ''When he recorded that song 'In America,' which pleased the Baptists and
got a lot of other people mad, it was because he believed in it, and he believes
just as strongly in supporting the Vietnam veterans.''

And what kind of effect has the success of ''Still in Saigon'' had on Mr.
Daley's attempts to land a recording contract for himself?  ''Well, my publisher
sent out tapes of my songs to various companies right before Charlie's record
came out,'' Mr. Daley said. ''And a new batch just went out. I think the songs
are mostly the same as on the earlier tape; we'll see if the response is any
different.'' Robert Palmer

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 22, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Kissinger Calls Report About Nixon a 'Myth'

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 217 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, April 21


Henry A. Kissinger, the former Secretary of State, has denied a published report
that he once said former President Nixon, as a result of excessive drinking,
would be incoherent if awakened at night.

''That's one of the myths that's being put out that's absolutely not correct,''
Mr. Kissinger told Merv Griffin in an interview on ''The Merv Show,'' recorded
Tuesday for a syndicated broadcast May 6.

The report appears in an article in The Atlantic Monthly, based on a forthcoming
book by Seymour Hersh, a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist. In the article, Mr.
Hersh quotes Roger Morris, who was an aide to Mr. Kissinger, as saying: ''Nixon
drank exceptionally at night. There were many times when a cable would come in
late and Henry would say, 'There's no sense waking him up - he'd be incoherent.'
''

Mr. Kissinger also denied an assertion in the magazine article that Mr. Nixon
had told him, in reference to Vietnam, ''Henry, we've got to nuke them.''

Mr. Hersh, a former reporter for The New York Times, attributed that quotation
to a White House aide, Egil Krogh Jr. David R. Young Jr., a former White House
aide who was assigned to track down unauthorized disclosures, reportedly
overheard the remark while listening in on telephone coversations between Mr.
Kissinger and Mr.  Nixon.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 22, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

SHORTAGE OF ARMS, TROOPS AND FUNDS COMPLICATES JOB AHEAD FOR THE ARMY

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section B; Page 17, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1593 words


The mission of the Army is simple to state, but complex to carry out: The Reagan
Administration is asking it to create, from threequarters of a million men and
women, a flexible, high-technology force prepared to fight in desert, jungle or
forest.

To complicate the task, the Army must assume that, in the worst case, the enemy
would have a preponderance of personnel, tanks and aircraft.

To make things even more difficult, the service is receiving the smallest
portion of President Reagan's military budget for the fiscal year 1983, playing
third fiddle to the Navy and the Air Force as it has since the United States
pulled its troops out of Vietnam a decade ago.

Out of a proposed military budget of $258 billion for the next fiscal year, the
Army would get $61.2 billion. Of the 10 major weapons procurement programs in
the overall budget, only one Army item is listed, the M-1 tank, at slightly more
than $2 billion.

Little Controversy in Congress

Compared with the budget requests for the Navy and the Air Force, the Army's
programs have stirred little controversy. There has been no serious movement in
Congress to cut the Army's budget significantly. While the M-1 tank has its
critics, it has been received enthusiastically by the troops who are already
using it in Europe.

On the other hand, no one in Congress is pressing for an increase in resources
for the Army, despite the contention of the Chief of Staff, Gen. Edward C.
Meyer, that the service is ''stretched thin.''

The one Army item that has been challenged is the AH-64 attack helicopter. The
Senate Armed Services Committee voted to slice $700 million from the Army's
request for $965 million in the fiscal year 1983, which begins Oct. 1, by
delaying purchase of the aircraft for a year. The committee's rationale was that
the unit price of $16 million was far too high.

General Meyer argued that the AH-64 was the ''most potent weapons system
requested'' in the aircraft section of the budget and that the deployment of the
missile-firing aircraft would reinforce NATO's ability to deal with a Soviet
tank superiority estimated at 4 to 1 at the point of attack.

Training Is Sensitive Item

To the Army, the most sensitive item in the budget is the $889 million allocated
to training. The money would be used to acquire more training areas and to get
more improved training simulators such as the Multiple Integrated Laser
Engagement system. This system, which uses lasers to attack opposing forces, is
expected to add realism to exercises. The Army also hopes to improve battlefield
training by conducting live fire exercises in simulated environments of
biological, chemical and electronic warfare.

Commanders of brigades, battalions and companies in this country and in the
Seventh Army in Western Europe are sharply critical of what they consider
insufficient force strength, especially because the budget did not include the
money they had hoped for to create two more mechanized infantry divisions.

That means the Regular Army of 16 divisions, five brigades and three armored
cavalry regiments must cope with the prospect of operations in Europe, Latin
America, Southwest Asia and southern Africa. It would have to prepare for future
battles that, in Europe, might reach 140 miles from the West German frontier
deep into East Germany and Czechoslovakia.

But any sizable increase in the Army's strength would create new budgetary
problems. About 29 percent of the 1983 budget for the Army will go to military
personnel. An increase in the number of personnel from the present 775,000 would
cut into the money for the procurement of the weapons the Army believes it needs
to meet its increasing responsibilities.

Aiming to Raise Quality of Force

The alternative as the Army sees it is to raise the quality of the present
force. The goal for 1983 is that high school graduates should account for 75
percent of those who enlist. But officers warn that because the reservoir of
youths aged 17 to 21 is dwindling, the Army must offer improved educational
benefits to compete for young people qualified for college.

Officers are also concerned about what they see as shortages of key weapons. One
general in Europe who asked for anonymity said that while commanders ''always
have said that they don't have enough of this weapon or that type of ammunition
or that type of truck, this time it's true.''

''We just don't have the weapons and the transport we would need to fight a
limited war in the third world, let alone meet a Soviet invasion of Western
Europe,'' he said. ''Why? I don't know. Ask Congress.''

Commanders in Europe and the United States emphasize the importance of
flexibility, which depends on mobility. Achieving that, Army sources say,
depends as much on well-serviced trucks and jeeps as it does on acquisition of
more sophisticated weapons.

More than $1 billion is allotted in the 1983 budget for purchasing more than
33,000 vehicles to replace thousands on which the Army is now spending large
sums for repairs and spare parts.

Guard and Reserve Equipment

Other areas with equipment problems are the National Guard and Reserve, which
are crucial to strategy because of the comparatively meager manpower resources
in the regular Army.

The Pentagon estimates that eliminating major equipment shortages would cost
nearly $4 billion in the Guard and about $6 billion in the Reserve. The Army
Department's annual report adds that much of the equipment now on hand is ''old,
inadequate, obsolete or incompatible with equipment'' in the regular forces.

Besides the M-1 tank, the Army budget includes money for these major weapons
systems:

- The UH-60 Blackhawk helicopter for air assault missions at $733 million.

- The C-12 utility transport aircraft at $11 million.

- Guardrail V, an airborne ground and air communication system, at $41.2
million.

- The Bradley armored fighting vehicle fitted for infantry or cavalry combat at
$874 million.

- A light armored vehicle transportable by tactical as well as strategic airlift
planes at $151.9 million.  The Army has also asked for procurement of
sophisticated defensive weapons, including a divisional air defense gun system
at $673 million; the Patriot, a high-medium and high altitude surface-to-air
missile at $881 million; Hellfire, an airborne anti-armor missile at $249.2
million, and a multiple launch rocket system whose mission is counterfire and
suppression of an enemy's air defense.

Dispute About Western Europe

The defense of Western Europe, which has been an Army preoccupation since 1948,
is the focus of controversy inside and outside the service.

Steven Canby and William S. Lind, two prominent civilian critics, have attacked
the present NATO linear strategy under which the bulk of the allied forces would
move into position along the frontier between East and West Germany on warning.

The critics reason that this strategy invites the Soviets to mass overwhelming
force at one or two points, break through the line and race toward the sea with
subsidiary forces rolling up the flanks.

One alternative that has been suggested involves maneuvering national armies of
the NATO allies, operating under control of Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers
Europe.

Maneuver Strategy Criticized

Critics of this alternative contend that the front in West Germany is too
shallow, the standards of training and equipment among the NATO allies too
different and the command and control problems too great to permit this
strategy.

General Meyer says he believes misunderstandings about the linear strategy may
have arisen because of the way analysts have presented information about weapons
to Congress, emphasizing the number of tanks or aircraft or vehicles that each
weapon would knock out.

''The real emphasis is on maneuver,'' he said, with any war ''waged as far
forward as possible and with strategy stressing movement and the disruption and
destruction of enemy forces.''

The importance of adding the M-1 tank and the AH-64 helicopter to the Army's
arsenal, he said, is that the Seventh Army ''would be better prepared to take on
the first Soviet surge with dug-in tanks and antitank guided missiles fired from
the air or from land.''

The Role of the M-1 Tank

''At the same time we would reach out with air and missiles to attack the Soviet
second echelon of attack,'' he added.  Gen. Meyer emphasized that the M-1 is
intended solely for operations in Western Europe rather than other theaters, a
point on which it has been criticized.

''The point is that the M-1 is being sent to Europe to deter the Soviets and to
assure our allies,''he said. ''We need a protected platform that can take the
offensive against Soviet armor and survive.''

The Army has asked for 776 of the tanks at a cost of $2.025 billion in the
fiscal year 1983, a sum that does not include costs for research, development,
evaluation and testing.

Although the tank has been criticized by Senator Gary Hart, the General
Accounting Office and others, it has received an enthusiastic reception by the
men who would use it in battle.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photos of tank and helicopter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR ARMS PROTESTS GROW IN USUALLY PRO-MILITARY SOUTH

BYLINE: By WENDELL RAWLS Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1544 words

DATELINE: ATLANTA, April 22


In a region long recognized as conservative, intensely patriotic and
pro-military, Jesuits and Junior Leaguers, pediatricians and politicians,
scientists, soldiers and students are beginning to emerge in a broad-based and
growing movement against the use or buildup of nuclear weapons.

''I believe that opposition to the nuclear arms race is the movement of the
1980's,'' said James Olcese, who teaches biology at Southwestern University and
was one of the organizers of Ground Zero Week activities in Memphis, Tenn. ''It
really gets down to our whole moral fiber, our social structure, our economic
structure, all the things on which our country was based.

''And that's one reason why we have a much wider base of support in the South at
the beginning of this movement than we had at any time in the antiwar protests
of the 60's,'' he went on. ''That's also the reason President Reagan is so
worried about it.''

The demonstrations this week were not large or emotional, but, compared with the
few antiwar demonstrations in the South in the Vietnam years, they were
encouraging to organizers. The reaction of John J. Mawhinney, a Jesuit teacher
with the Blueprint for Social Justice at Loyola University, was typical.

Despite ''a lack of time and money,'' he said, things are going very well.
''Everything that is going on in this movement is not visible,'' he added.

According to a college teacher in Arkansas, who asked not to be identified, the
numbers of people actively protesting do not seem to accurately reflect the
numbers of people who feel strongly about nuclear arms.

''There are a lot of people who wouldn't be caught dead carrying a protest sign,
but are mad as hell about nuclear arms, and their anger runs deep,'' the teacher
said.

In Memphis, widely regarded as one of the most conservative cities in the
Southeast, the protest this week seemed to support that assumption.

Using a point at Memphis State University as ''ground zero,'' the surface area
directly below or above the point where a nuclear bomb would detonate, students
and teachers stood in the morning rush hour at designated distances along a
major thoroughfare running east and west. They bore signs with statistical
information indicating the level of destruction and the potential rate of
survival from the blast and information on what the heat, firestorm, wind
velocity and radiation would be at the varying distances from ground zero.

Only slightly more than two dozen students and teachers stood in a wind-driven
rain to state their messages, yet they distributed about 5,000 leaflets to
motorists who had to stop, lower their windows and reach out in the rain if they
wanted them.

At the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville, Art Hobson, a physics professor,
is teaching a course on ''World War III,'' with visiting lecturers discussing
the technology of nuclear war, cold war politics, male aggressive psychology,
religion in a nuclear society and the military view of the Soviet threat.

In Raleigh, N.C., the nine members of the Wake County delegation to the
Legislature have endorsed the efforts of the Raleigh Peace Initiative to end the
nuclear arms race. Senator Robert W. Wynne, the dean of the delegation, said:
''We've got enough nuclear weapons to destroy the world several times over. The
only way the people who make these decisions will take a stand is for the public
to adamantly get this across to them.''

Petition Drive in Florida

In Tallahassee, Fla., a campaign to petition the Congressional delegation and
demand support of a plan to freeze nuclear arsenals at current levels has
attracted more than 5,000 signatures, with almost half the time remaining in a
three-month drive.

Back in Memphis, on the 1,000-student Southwestern campus, no other class
attracted as many registrants as a religion course for which more than 70
students signed up to learn about ''living in a nuclear age.''

Elsewhere in the South, Katherine Senter, a former Junior League volunteer who
was one of the organizers of the New Orleans Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament,
participates in weekly vigils at St. Louis Cathedral in the French Quarter. She
and others distribute buttons and literature to both residents and tourists.

Other groups opposed to nuclear arms are active in New Orleans, as are others in
the capital, Baton Rouge, and in Lafayette, Slidell and other Louisiana cities.

''What's happening in Baton Rouge is like what's happening everywhere,'' said
Herbert Rothschild, associate professor of English literature at Louisiana State
University in Baton Rouge and one of the leaders of the Center for Disarmament
Education. ''Though Baton Rouge, like the rest of the South, is rather
militaristic traditionally, our work started in 1978, and at first it was rather
slow going. But in the last 12 months it's just been snowballing.  Every week
people are calling and saying, 'What can I do?' ''

'The Trend Is the Same'

''If you sample the population, Baton Rouge wouldn't look like Cambridge, Mass.,
or Berkeley, Calif., but the trend is the same.'' The Rev. Edward M. Brown, a
Georgia native who lives in Atlanta and serves as minister at large for the
Georgia and South Carolina Association of United Church of Christ, II, remarked
on the difference in the attitudes of Southerners now and in the Vietnam War
era.

Mr. Brown, a peace activist since World War II, said he could not recall much
''ministerial representation in the peace operation'' a decade or so ago. He
estimated that less that 10 percent of mainline churches were actively involved
in opposing American involvement in Vietnam.

Today, he said, ministers across the South are like those in other regions,
questioning a ''nuclear overkill that makes common sense blush.''

''Ministers are concerned about militarism,'' he went on. ''There are
denominational statements about nuclear proliferation, materials are displayed
on church bulletin boards and there is a recognition of the likelihood of a
nuclear holocaust where men become ashes, bouncing rubble or cancer victims.''

Doctors Join Protest Ranks

Dr. Horton Johnson, a New Orleans physician active in the New Orleans chapter of
Physicians for Social Responsibility, said that ''despite a general reluctance''
of doctors to become involved in causes, a ''very influential and articulate''
group had joined the antinuclear ranks there.

''Nuclear arms in no longer just a poltical issue,'' he said. ''It is a medical
issue. It's kind of like a plague, and there has to be preventative medicine
practiced.''

Jimmy Harper, a director of the chapter of the National Conference of Chrisians
and Jews in Birmingham, Ala., noted that the antinuclear sentiment seemed to
have come up ''more quickly than antiwar sentiment because it is not a partisan
issue, not an ideological issue.''

''Today's student is more interested in the quality-of-life issues and
survival,'' he said.  Professor Hobson of Arkansas noted that many of the
leaders of today's arms control movement were active in the antiwar movement of
the 1960's.

That movement, he said, was ''much more countercultural,'' with an atmosphere of
rebellion.  ''Today,'' he went on, ''the counterculturalists and the
conventional people are working together on this issue and not feeling at all
uncomfortable. Students are visiting the Kiwanis Clubs and the churches trying
to work within the system and are reaching out to try to educate the
mainstream.''

Cynicism and Immigration Cited

Ira Shorr, who leads the Tallahassee Peace Coalition, suggested that the
acceptance of a movement sometimes seen as anti-Pentagon, seemed to result at
least in part to a residue of distrust and cynicism from a decade of Watergate
and other Government scandals, and partly from the immigration of
non-Southerners to the Sun Belt.

''They don't have to picket to show concern,'' he said, ''but some of them
question spending more money for more nuclear bombs while cutting back on social
programs and help for the poor. They don't believe the Government.''

Professor Hobson noted that Betty Bumpers, wife of Senator Dale Bumpers, an
Arkansas Democrat, stressed the need for nuclear arms control in speeches to
women's groups across the state, and he cited such activity as one of the rasons
the movement had spread so quickly.

''There is grass-roots support from the bottom up and from the top levels of
leadership on down,'' he said.  ''This is not a movement of some weird, crazy
hippies off in left field smoking dope,'' he went on. ''This is an expression
from all kinds of people -mature, thinking, caring people who are concerned
about their future, the future of their children and their grandchildren.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Submarine Saves Refugees

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 77 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 22


A United States submarine, the Indianapolis, has rescued a boatload of
Vietnamese refugees in the Gulf of Siam, the United States Embassy here said
today. An embassy spokesman said that the submarine came upon about 30 refugees
in a small craft Wednesday and took them to the Thai port of Sattahip. The
submarine had been on its way to a port call at the beach resort of Pattaya in
Thailand.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DRUMS, SPEAKERS AND A 'DIE-IN' TELL NEW YORKERS OF NUCLEAR ARMS PERIL

BYLINE: By ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1012 words


With guitar, saxophone, tambourines and drums providing a compelling beat, the
singers belted out their message: ''If you love your baby, if you love your
friend, you know this arms race has got to end.''

The singing at the New School in Greenwich Village Monday night was one of a
host of activities in the metropolitan area connected with Ground Zero Week, a
nationally organized effort to educate the public about the nuclear arms peril.

While the turnout on many college campuses for lectures and films was only
modest, off-campus activities drew slightly larger and older crowds. The
artistic offerings ranged from spectral modern dance pieces to a ''Die-In''
staged yesterday afternoon by 30 Columbia University students on the Morningside
Heights campus.

The students, their faces painted white, lay on the ground as if struck by a
nuclear bomb while a band played funereal music. A campus chaplain, the Rev.
Paul Dinter, read a prose piece about mankind's demise. About 400 onlookers were
drawn to the bizarre scene.

Project Began 10 Months Ago

Ground Zero, a nonpartisan educational project was started 10 months ago by
Roger C. Molander, a former National Security Council staff specialist on arms
control. The project takes its name from the military term for the point on the
ground immediately below a nuclear explosion.

The week provided ironic moments as politically active people who remembered
their days of the Vietnam War protest listened to pleas for disarmament from
former Defense Department and Central Intelligence Agency officials who had
served under President Lyndon B. Johnson.

Whistles and cheers greeted Dr. Herbert Scoville as the elderly man made his way
slowly to the speakers' podium at the New School to face about 550 local
residents. ''I don't usually get applause for having been deputy director of the
C.I.A.,'' he said, smiling, ''certainly not from an audience like this.''

Cyrus R. Vance, former Secretary of State, met a generally friendly audience of
300 people Wednesday night at the Ethical Culture Society on West 64th Street as
he urged a resumption of disarmament negotiations with the Soviet Union. But
midway through the evening three hecklers screamed accusations about Mr. Vance's
activities as Deputy Secretary of Defense under Robert S. McNamara during the
Vietnam War.

''This is preposterous,'' one heckler shouted. ''Now he says he's for peace?''

'No Limited Nuclear War'

One man who screamed obscenities was evicted by members of the audience, which
was uniform in its determination to hear Mr. Vance.  The former Secretary said
he would ''reject the concept that there is superiority on either side'' in
nuclear weapons and that he believed ''there can be no limited nuclear war.''

The impetus for the educational week on many college campuses - where political
activism of most kinds generally has been low - came from faculty members and
administrators, and from community groups and religious organizations.

At Princeton University in New Jersey, three graduate students and a strong
community movement set up a program of Ground Zero Week speeches and films.

''Nationwide, I don't think students are a major part of the effort,'' said Rev.
Robert Moore, coordinator of the Coalition for Nuclear Disarmament, the
community group. ''It's much more church groups, religious groups and
professional groups. The students these days, because of the economic situation,
are a little more security conscious. They've got their nose to the grindstone
so they'll get a good job.''

100 Are Bused to Washington

Campus interest in the educational week was muted as well at New York University
where a rally yesterday afternoon on Washington Square drew 100 people. Hunter
College in Manhattan marked the week by busing 100 students and faculty members
to Washington to express their concern about disarmament to legislators and to
interview officials at the Pentagon and the State Department.

Physicians for Social Responsibility, a nonpartisan group, provided scores of
speakers in the region to describe the medical effects of nuclear war and
circulated a documentary film it produced called ''The Last Epidemic.''

Dr. William Greenberg returned to his alma mater, Queens College, on Tuesday to
give a harrowing and exact description of how a nuclear bomb would kill human
beings. About 100 of the campus's 11,000 daytime students attended the lecture.
Many put their knuckles to their mouths in horror as Dr. Greenberg, a
psychiatrist, read vignettes written by survivors of the bombs dropped on
Hiroshima and Nagasaki.

Having produced the desired effect in his listeners, Dr. Greenberg then
cautioned: ''This game is for keeps. We're not going to have a second planet to
play with.''

British Film of 60's Shown

At Wesleyan University, in Middletown, Conn., 100 students attended a screening
of ''The War Game,'' a British documentary of the 1960's depicting the effect of
a nuclear attack on a British town.

Organizers of the educational week at Wesleyan communicated their message by
drawing targets in chalk on campus walkways. Next to the marks were descriptions
of the damage that would be inflicted at that point if a nuclear missile were to
fall nearby. ''Seven miles from ground zero third degree burns,'' read one
marker.

During one lecture David Vann, a junior history major, circulated petitions
supporting a resolution calling for a freeze on nuclear arms, sponsored by
Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, and Senator Mark O.
Hatfield, Republican of Oregon.

Mr. Vann said he was not usually very active politically, but added: ''Right now
I have the feeling that this is the issue of the moment. If we blow each other
up, there won't be other problems to worry about.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of display at Columbia U.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

In the Nation;
REPEATING THE PAST;
by Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


Sometimes this seems to be an Administration without a memory, fated to repeat a
past of which it's unaware.  In his ''new federalism'' proposals, for instance,
President Reagan apparently did not grasp the historical fact that many of the
programs he wanted to turn back to the states had been developed at the Federal
level precisely because the states could or would not take on such tasks.

Just this week, the Supreme Court had to appoint a lawyer to defend the
Government itself - the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals is as much a part of the
Government as the Presidency - because the Reagan Department of Justice, which
ought to be doing the job, has so little knowledge of history.

The Department did not know that the issue of tax exemption for segregated
private schools had been settled in the Federal courts to the satisfaction of
three previous Administrations. The President and his advisers were dumbfounded
that Congress and the public were outraged at their attempt to create a new
version of the law that would have rewarded segregated schools with tax
exemption.

But in few areas has the Administration's collective memory seemed so nearly
absent as on the issue of secrecy. In just over a year, the Reagan
Administration has accomplished a reversal of one of Jimmy Carter's most
promising accomplishments - a substantial opening of Government operations to
public scrutiny. Congress, moreover, has appeared to be a willing accomplice in
much of what has been done.

Spurred on by the Administration, for example, Congress has passed -and is now
discussing the final terms of - an ''agents' identity bill,'' under which it
would be a crime to make public the name of an agent of the Central Intelligence
Agency. This will make it more difficult for the press to monitor agency
activities and for churches, universities and other institutions to keep
undercover agents from infiltrating their staffs.

Mr. Reagan used an executive order to reverse the Carter policy prohibiting the
intelligence agencies from penetrating and spying on domestic organizations.
This new permission for snooping - unjustified by any visible internal security
crisis - contradicts all those Reagan campaign promises to ''get the Government
off the people's backs.'' And the resignation of the respected Adm. Bobby Inman,
who as deputy chief of the C.I.A. opposed domestic spying, may signal even less
concern for the rights and liberties of American citizens.

The President also has signed an ex-ecutive order that will result in more
frequent classification of documents, again with no visible justification from
any known security breaks. The order strikes down the Carter requirement that
public interest be specifically weighed against potential security damage before
classification, and waives the rule that such damage be specifically
identifiable - not some vague, worst-case fear or political apprehension.

Such steps toward secrecy - which may at first glance seem ''limited'' or
''restrained'' - have been carried out, as they always are, under the glamorous
but deceptive cloak of ''national security.'' In fact, they constitute a
profound shift from an assumption of openness in government to an assumption of
secrecy.  When in doubt, officials are instructed, classify; if it doesn't
absolutely have to be made public, keep it secret; if you suspect it, spy on it.

The Reagan Administration and Congress may not remember, but many citizens will,
that just such a credo of snooping and secrecy, justified on grounds of
nameless, undefined threats to ''national security,'' led us straight into the
worst deceptions of Vietnam, and deep into the lies, lawbreaking and cover-ups
of Watergate.

The Administration also forgets, if it ever knew, that the label of ''national
security,'' with its intimations of high policy secrets and its invocation of
patriotism, has been used far more often to conceal political interests,
ineptitude, mistakes, venality and even criminality than it has to protect
legitimately confidential information.

For the truth is that the ability to operate in secrecy - which is what the
Administration has been developing for itself - ultimately is the ability to do
what you want to do, without hindrance from an informed public. But the ability
to operate in secrecy - as the fate of the Nixon Administration will forever
stand witness - is also a profound temptation to lying, power-grabbing,
political trickery, illegality and cover-up.

Thus Mr. Reagan's shift to secrecy and away from the openness Mr.  Carter had
established not only poses dangers to the public's knowledge of what the
Government is doing, despite the fact that no one in Congress or the
Administration has identified a security threat requiring heightened secrecy.
The President's inability to remember and profit from the past poses even
greater dangers to his own Administration, which has been granted no immunity
from temptation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

THINKING IRREGULAR WARFARE;
by F. Andy Messing Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 896 words

DATELINE: VIENNA, Va.


In Washington, hundreds of defense experts have been spending countless hours
debating how to use defense dollars to rejuvenate our conventional and nuclear
forces. While this thinking is necessary to develop a proper mixture of
deterrent powers, a crucial element is missing from our formula but not from
Soviet strategy - the ability to conduct efficient irregular warfare. By
irregular warfare, I mean unconventional warfare, limited conventional military
actions and reactions, and anti-terrorism.

Moscow understands the effectiveness and economy of irregular warfare. It
realizes that it is possible to project power worldwide while tiptoeing around
the nuclear tripwire. Thus, it has placed more than 200,000 military personnel,
called Spetsnaz - an acronym for Special Purpose forces -under the K.G.B.

These highly trained, politically oriented personnel have been sent to many
countries, among them Afghanistan, Cuba, Nicaragua, and Angola. In fact, South
Africans killed numerous members of Spetsnaz and their K.G.B. controllers in
recent battles in Angola. This, and other sizeable evidence, shows increasing
use of Spetsnaz for a wide range of missions - not even taking into account
similar units in the Warsaw Pact performing tangential operations for Moscow.

Conversely, for irregular warfare, the United States has only approximately
5,000 active-duty Army personnel in various stages of readiness. Furthermore,
the Special Forces (''Green Berets''), the main component of the Army's
irregular-warfare troops, is faced with a continual drain of combat-experienced
soldiers; 70 percent of those joining are first-term volunteers. The Navy has a
few hundred Seals, viewed as the best managed and organized of all people
trained in irregular warfare. The Air Force has a small, eclectic group of
aircraft that cannot meet irregular-warfare requirements worldwide.  Of a total
of 4,500 mainly Army reservists, except for a few soldiers and units there is
virtually no such combat-readiness.

All this does not come close to America's total requirements. More distressing,
because of a lack of coherent national strategy, we hardly use our
irregular-warfare forces to counter actual or potential Soviet actions. This
problem is further complicated by a multilayered chain of command that
diminishes the value of these units.

Some Pentagon bureaucrats say that an upgrading of our irregular forces is just
around the bend. However, most equipment and training funds to bring about this
change are being built into future armed forces budget requests, and this puts
them in direct competition with the rest of the military for finite resources.
Not since John F. Kennedy's revitalization of the ''Green Berets'' has an
Administration considered filling this void - until now.

Some key Reagan Administration officials see that even if we have 16
combat-ready divisions as well as a Rapid Deployment Force, their only use is
psychological deterrence or limited high-stakes missions that could quickly lead
to nuclear war. Accordingly, in looking for a low-cost way to protect and
project our strategic interests, the officials are settling on rebuilding and
consolidating our irregularwarfare forces to create a version of Spetsnaz. This
organization, which would be useful across the entire spectrum of warfare, would
consist of units like the Special Forces, Rangers, Army psychological operations
units, Navy Seals, and special Air Force units, among others.

Encouraged by Maj. Gen. John Singlaub (Ret.), a participant in three wars and an
irregular-warfare specialist, the key officials are making progress in their
thinking. General Singlaub has encouraged them not to regard our projected
Special Purpose Forces as a minor element of our conventional forces to be used
piecemeal. He feels that this entity should be a strategic-action element for
the Commander in Chief. While receptive, these officials are caught up in the
Vietnam backwash and today's focus on nuclear strategy, and an oafish
bureaucracy that guards expensive pet projects. One official who works in this
area concludes: ''Only a specific order by the President will get the
organization, and, most importantly, the immediate funding required to counter
the escalating level of violence promulgated by the Soviets.''

America is being blind-sided militarily. El Salvador is only an example of how,
because of a lack of organization and coherent policy, we are losing this
undeclared world war. President Reagan must heed what the Chinese military
expert Sun Tzu said in 350 B.C.: ''One who has a few must prepare against the
enemy; one who has many makes the enemy prepare against him.'' The Pentagon must
prepare to respond to the Soviet Union's continuing engagement in irregular
warfare in order to keep America free and away from nuclear conflict.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
F. Andy Messing Jr. is executive director of The Conservative Caucus, ''a
nonpartisan grassroots lobby,'' and a major in the Special Forces Reserve.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a knotted rope

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              81 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 23, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies

BYLINE: By Aljean Harmetz

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 4; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1461 words


HOLLYWOOD DURING a spring that has been described by most movie distributors as
''chilly,'' ''Porky's,'' ''Chariots of Fire'' and ''On Golden Pond'' are the
sunny exceptions. ''Porky's,'' a raunchy tale of sexobsessed high-school boys,
has taken in more than $53 million at the box office in one month. ''On Golden
Pond'' is closing in on $94 million, while ''Chariots of Fire,'' winner of the
Academy Award as best picture of 1981, has earned $39 million.

The effects of winning - or losing -Academy Awards are plain. The night after
its Academy Award victory, ''Chariots of Fire'' sold almost 100 percent more
tickets than it had sold a week earlier. The inspirational movie about two
British runners in the 1924 Olympic Games has earned $14.6 million since the
Academy Awards three weeks ago. ''On Golden Pond,'' which won Academy Awards for
best actor, Henry Fonda, and actress, Katharine Hepburn, has grossed $16 million
in the last three weeks. Conversely, losing the Academy Award as best picture
has been devastating to ''Reds,'' Warren Beatty's $32 million epic. That movie,
which needed the imprimatur of best picture, is essentially dead.

This spring has also reinforced Richard Pryor's reputation as a major box-office
star. For the last few weeks, two movies starring Mr. Pryor have been competing
at the box office, and both have done well. In five weeks, Columbia's ''Richard
Pryor Live on the Sunset Strip,'' a filmed concert that cost only $4.2 million,
has taken in nearly $31 million. In slightly more than two weeks, Paramount's
''Some Kind of Hero,'' a tragicomedy about a Vietnam veteran, has earned $16
million. Although each movie has hurt the other somewhat at the box office, most
sales executives believe that concert movies have a limited audience and that
''Live on the Sunset Strip'' had pretty much played out its potential before
''Some Kind of Hero'' was released.

''Disappointing'' is the appropriate word for ''Deathtrap,'' ''Quest for Fire,''
and ''Missing,'' while ''disastrous'' fits ''Cat People'' and ''I Oughta Be in
Pictures.'' ''I Oughta Be in Pictures,'' a Neil Simon comedy starring Walter
Matthau, which was widely expected to be a box-office winner, has grossed a
pitiful $6 million. The verdict is not yet in on M-G-M-U.A.'s
''Victor/Victoria,'' Blake Edwards's farce about sexual identities, which opened
poorly nationally after doing excellent business in New York and Los Angeles.
However, ''Victor/ Victoria'' seems to be building good word of mouth and may
have staying power. M-G-M's inline surveys at theaters show that the audience is
getting younger, a good sign.

Another movie, ''Diner,'' may have cost Nathaniel Kwit, head of distribution at
M-G-M-U.A., his job. ''The mallet that hit the camel on the head,'' says one
M-G-M-U.A. production executive, was Mr.  Kwit's decision to shelve ''Diner''
after it had performed poorly in a few test engagements. Jerry Weintraub, the
producer of ''Diner,'' and two studio marketing executives who loved the film -
Jerry Esbin and Richard Kahn -argued fiercely that the movie should be put into
a small East Side theater in New York to get what they thought would be
excellent reviews. ''Diner,'' a film about coming of age in a Baltimore diner,
has both had sensational reviews and done sensationally in New York, breaking
the Coronet's house record with $69,909 its second week. Mr. Kwit was removed,
Mr. Esbin and Mr. Kahn were promoted, and ''Diner'' opened well in Boston last
weekend.

For the next month, Hollywood expects the box office to be awash in post-Easter,
presummer doldrums. ''Until Memorial Day, people will be preoccupied with their
lawns, their gardens and polishing their picnic equipment,'' says Norman Levy,
vice chairman and head of distribution at 20th Century-Fox. ''I expect the next
five or six weeks to be 'Death Valley Days.' ''

Gordon Davidson, Tony Award-winning stage director of ''The Shadow Box,'' will
direct the movie version of ''Gentle Vengeance,'' Charles LeBaron's account of
his first year at Harvard Medical School.

''Gentle Vengeance,'' which is in a development deal at Paramount, will be the
first production of the Pakula Company, recently formed by the director-producer
Alan J. Pakula (''All the President's Men''). Mr. Davidson, who will be taking a
year's leave of absence from his job as artistic director of the Mark Taper
Forum theater in Los Angeles, starting July 1, hopes to complete ''Gentle
Vengeance'' during that year. ''Since I negotiated a sabbatical not to make a
movie but as a break from running the theater after 15 years, a part of me just
wants to slow down a bit,'' Mr. Davidson said. ''But the conflict between
humanistic medicine and pure science in 'Gentle Vengeance' struck close to
home.''

''Gentle Vengeance'' will not quite be Mr. Davidson's movie debut.  Ten years
ago, he directed a movie from ''The Trial of the Catonsville Nine'' that was
almost a filmed version of the play.

By the end of this weekend, ''Porky's,'' the deliberately vulgar comedy about
high-school boys trying to crash their neighborhood brothel, will have sold more
than $60 million worth of tickets.  What's most surprising is that the success
of ''Porky's,'' which cost a frugal $4.5 million, is no surprise -except to the
public..

Hollywood has been prepared for ''Porky's'' since the movie opened in test
engagements in Columbia, S.C., and Colorado Springs last November and audiences
grew larger week after week.

Why could national success be predicted from two small cities?  ''We saw the
consistency and strength of the picture in two very different places - one in
the West and one in the South,'' says Norman Levy, vice chairman and head of
distribution at 20th Century-Fox. ''The second week was better than the first,
and the third week was better than the second, indicating that word of mouth was
very good. Our initial core audience was strongly male and between 16 and 24.
But as the run continued, older people started to come. And the picture's still
there. It's unusual to stay in the same theaters for 20 weeks.''

The marketing lessons Fox learned in the test cities were refined for further
use when ''Porky's'' opened nationally on March 19.  ''When we sneak previewed
'Porky's' in Columbia and Colorado Springs three weeks before we opened, no one
came,'' says Mr. Levy. ''So we set up two sneaks across the country. The first
was in very small theaters so we could advertise, 'Last week in this town we had
a preview so crowded we had to schedule another one.' We knew enough people
would be talking about the movie for the second preview to do well. Since the
picture succeeds best in the third and fourth week, we keyed our openings to
mid-March, two weeks before Easter vacation from school. So we didn't overkill
with advertising the first week.  It's the most meticulously planned campaign
I've been involved with in a long time.''

Like ''Animal House,'' a movie it resembles in its delighted slobbiness,
''Porky's'' is now beginning to draw an adult audience curious to know what the
shower-room scene or the roadhouse called Porky's are all about. Fox has begun
to run a series of 30-second television commercials that are simply testimonials
by people older than 30. Attractive men and women giggle about how they can't
possibly describe their favorite -dirty - scene on television.

''Porky's'' is the 18th and last solo production for its financier and executive
producer, Melvin Simon. Although Mr. Simon, a shoppingcenter developer, made
money through cable and television sales on many of his movies, including ''My
Bodyguard,'' only ''Love at First Bite'' and ''When a Stranger Calls'' were
box-office successes. The other movies he financed range from the critically
acclaimed ''The Stunt Man'' to the unreleasable ''Tilt.'' Mr. Simon will
continue to make four to six movies a year, but in partnership with Alan
Landsburg, producer of ''That's Incredible,'' a way, he says, of getting
involved with ''fine production people.''

And, of course, there will be a ''Porky's II.'' That movie starts shooting in
June with the same writer-director, Bob Clark, and the same
something-less-than-star-name actors - Kim Cattrall, Scott Colomby, Kaki Hunter,
Alex Karras and Susan Clark.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alex Karras

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 24, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

LIVING COSTS DOWN FIRST TIME SINCE '65; OFF 0.8% IN REGION

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FUERBRINGER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 6; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1204 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 23


Consumer prices declined last month for the first time in almost 17 years,
falling three-tenths of 1 percent, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported
today.

A sharp drop in gasoline prices, combined with declines in food and housing
costs, accounted for most of the decrease in the March Consumer Price Index.

For the first quarter of the year consumer prices are now up at a rate of only 1
percent annually, the slowest quarterly pace since 1965. The index rose
three-tenths of 1 percent in January and twotenths of 1 percent in February.

While most economists do not expect the trend to continue, the rate of inflation
in the last year has declined much more quickly than forecast. The decline is
being seen as an added stimulus to the hoped-for economic recovery. Many
economists are now predicting that consumer prices will rise only about 6
percent this year.

Rose 8.9 Percent Last Year

For the last 12 months, the Consumer Price Index has risen 6.8 percent. The
index rose 8.9 percent last year, 12.4 percent in 1980 and 13.3 percent in 1979.

Economists attribute the slowdown to the recession, which pushed the
unemployment rate to 9 percent in March, and to the Federal Reserve's tight
monetary policy, the worldwide oil surplus and favorable crop developments.

For Social Security recipients, the rise in prices for the first quarter means a
7.4 percent benefit increase on July 1, unless Congress and the Administration
move, as part of a budget compromise, to delay this scheduled rise. On average
the increase would be $27 a month. This is significantly below the 1981 rise,
which was 11.2 percent, or an average of $37.

The July 1 increase is based on the rise in the index from the first quarter of
1981 through this year's first quarter. The increase is also for recipients of
Supplemental Security Income payments, railroad retirees and some veterans.

The Administration's budget had assumed that the July 1 increase would be 8.1
percent. There will thus be a $300 million saving on the increase for the 1982
fiscal year, $1 billion in the 1983 fiscal year and just over that each year
through 1987.

If the March decline of three-tenths of 1 percent continued for 12 months, it
would translate into a compound annual rate of decline of 3.3 percent, according
to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. (The compounding is based on a number taken
to the eighth decimal point, which is rounded off for publication. The actual
decline was 0.28159099.)

The reduction in the rate of inflation is the only good news that the Reagan
Administration has had on the economy so far. The recession has plagued the
Administration since July and gotten deeper. Despite the decline in the
inflation rate, interest rates have remained stubbornly high and are still a
threat to any recovery.

Larry Speakes, the deputy White House press secretary, said: ''This
Administration set about a little over a year ago to reduce the burden of the
American people. Today's good news is evidence of the dramatic progress made in
this area.''

During testimony in Congress today before the Joint Economic Committee, Murray
L. Weidenbaum, the chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers,
avoided mentioning the recession as a reason for the decline in inflation.
Instead, he credited the Federal Reserve's monetary policy, which many
economists have said was the key cause for the recession.

Mr. Weidenbaum also played down the impact of the current rate of unemployment,
saying that, on average, the people unemployed have only been out of work for an
average of 13 weeks.

Mr. Weidenbaum cautioned against thinking that the battle was won.  ''It is too
soon, in my judgment, to declare victory in this war,'' he said.

On the question of why interest rates have stubbornly remained high, Mr.
Weidenbaum cited budget deficits. The financial markets, he said, ''are
concerned about deficits.''

''They want a signal that deficits are coming down,'' he added.  After the
hearing, Mr. Weidenbaum said that he now expected the Consumer Price Index, on
average for the year, to rise about 6 percent or less, which is down from a
forecast of 7.3 percent in the budget submitted in February.

The added good news in the decline in the rate of inflation, many economists are
now saying, is that it would help the recovery by leaving people with more real
income to spend.

''Come July we will have an employed consumer whose paycheck can now buy more,
and on top of that we'll have a tax cut,'' said Joel Popkin, a Washington
economic consultant.''

First Since August 1965

The decline in March was the first since a drop of one-tenth of 1 percent in
August 1965 and the sharpest decline since a fall of fourtenths of 1 percent in
November 1953. In 1953, the decline came as the nation was in a recession more
severe than the current one.

But the 1965 decline came during the height of the nation's last period of rapid
economic growth without inflation, before the Vietnam War buildup and continued
spending for the Great Society programs of the Johnson Administration ignited
the inflationary spiral. For the year, the rate was 1.9 percent. The decline
that August was paced by a sharp drop in prices for fresh vegetables and used
cars, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

The slowdown in the rate of inflation in the last year is also confirmed by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics experimental index, which is designed to avoid the
distortions in the current index because of the overemphasis on rising and
falling interest rates and the overall housing component.

In March, this experimental index rose two-tenths of 1 percent. But for the
first quarter it is up only 2.7 percent at an annual rate.  And for the last 12
months it is up only 6.4 percent.

In March, gasoline prices fell 4 percent, following smaller declines in the
previous two months. Without this drop, the overall index for the month would
have manifested no change.

The housing component of the index fell three tenths of 1 percent, following
increases in the previous two months. A 1.3 percent decline in interest rates
and a drop of four-tenths of 1 percent in house prices offset increases in the
cost of home heating and home furnishings.

Most of the decline in mortage interest rates came from the drop in early March
in the Federal Housing Administration and Veterans Administration insured
mortgage rate, to 15.5 percent from 16.5 percent. There will be no such drop in
the April numbers.

Food and beverage prices, over all, fell three-tenths of 1 percent after rising
in the previous two months. Lettuce, down 33 percent in the month, and tomatoes
led the overall 12.5 percent drop in fresh vegetables. Beef and veal dropped
four-tenths of 1 percent and poultry fell four-tenths of 1 percent. Pork was up
three-tenths of 1 percent.

Donald Ratajczak, the director of the economic forecasting project at Georgia
State University, said that there were ''special factors'' in the March decline
that are not likely to be repeated. He predicted that the April index would be
flat or up slightly.

Donald Strazheim of Wharton Econometrics said he thought there would be a small
decline, maybe one-tenth of 1 percent, in April.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 27, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
An article Saturday on the effects of lower inflation rates bore an incorrect
dateline and misidentified a bank. The article was sent from Richfield, Minn.
The bank is the Richfield Bank and Trust Company.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: graph of consumer price index Feb 81-March 82(page 32)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. SEES A RISING SOVIET PERIL IN ASIA

BYLINE: By ROBERT TRUMBULL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 724 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, April 24


Senior American diplomatic and military officials in the East Asian and Pacific
region, meeting in Hawaii this week, stressed the common interests of China,
Japan and the United States in countering what the officials said was a growing
Soviet threat in the area.

In an analysis of United States security concerns in the region, Adm. Robert L.
Long, the Hawaii-based commander of American forces in the Pacific and Indian
Ocean and Persian Gulf areas, gave priority to what he termed ''the growth of
Soviet military power'' and ''a comprehensive Soviet strategy for military power
projection.''

''We have long passed the point where we can defend against the Soviet Union
alone,'' Admiral Long declared.  The diplomats and Admiral Long, who took part
in a three-day closed-door policy conference at the admiral's headquarters at
Camp Smith, near Honolulu, spoke and answered questions before an audience of
600 civic and business leaders at a forum on ''U.S. National Security Interests
in Asia and the Pacific,'' sponsored by the Pacific and Asian Affairs Council, a
private foreign affairs study group, at the Hilton Hawaiian Village Hotel in
Waikiki.

'Friendly, Informal Triad'

''There is no doubt that the maintenance of this friendly, informal triad is the
foundation of long-term stability in East Asia,'' Arthur W. Hummel Jr., the
United States Ambassador to China, said of the ties linking Washington, Peking
and Tokyo. ''In addition,'' he said, ''this three-way friendship and cooperation
has wide-ranging strategic impact throughout the globe.''

Mr. Hummel, who was born in China and speaks Chinese fluently, declared that
while the current ''level of hostility'' between Peking and Moscow ''probably
will be damped down,'' he could not foresee ''a real Sino-Soviet rapprochement
and partnership'' such as existed before ideological differences separated the
two Communist giants more than two decades ago.

''U.S. military planners no longer consider China as a potential adversary,''
Mr. Hummel said, adding that ''China implicitly supports U.S. military
deployments and security arrangements throughout the area.'' The only serious
differences of view between Washington and Peking concern China's support of
North Korea and American arms sales to Taiwan, he said.

Taiwan Issue Called a 'Minefield'

John H. Holdridge, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific
Affairs, referred to the disagreement between Washington and Peking over Taiwan
as a ''minefield'' that ''I'm not even sure we can find a way through.''

''But,'' he said, ''we are working very hard to establish a balance, to
establish a bridge, to maintain an official relationship wtih China and an
unofficial relationship with Taiwan.''

The United States Ambassador in Tokyo, Mike Mansfield, and other speakers called
for an improved Japanese military ability, but conceded that domestic political
considerations limited Japan's role to the defense of its own territory. Another
consideration mentioned was the lingering suspicions of a rearmed Japan among
Asians who suffered at Japanese hands in World War II.

Soviet Bases Cause Concern

''The prospects for future development of the Soviet Union's newly gained
Vietnamese bases are alarming and raise new questions of our preparedness to
cope militarily in the Western Pacific,'' said John Gunther Dean, the United
States Ambassador to Thailand.

Extension of the Soviet perimeter to Vietnam enhances the key role of the only
American bases in Southeast Asia, the Subic Bay naval facility and Clark Air
Base in the Philippines, said Michael H.  Armacost, the United States Ambassador
in Manila.

Mr. Holdridge, in answer to a question, said that the opening of diplomatic
relations between the United States and Vietnam must await a full Vietnamese
withdrawal from Cambodia and free elections in that country, and a Vietnamese
accommodation to the problem of American servicemen missing in action, among
other problems. He added, however, that the United States did not wish ''to
bleed Vietnam white.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
Vietnam Shuffles Cabinet In Move on Economy

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 5, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 95 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, April 24


Vietnam has shuffled its Cabinet to change the country's economic leadership,
the Vietnam press agency said today.

The shuffle, which affected 14 of the 42 portfolios, came after last month's
Fifth Communist Party Congress in Hanoi, which stressed the need for economic
change.

Almost all the 14 posts are related to the economy, which in recent years has
been hurt by food deficits, low foreign exchange reserves, flagging industrial
production and a large diversion of resources to support Vietnamese troops in
Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              85 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CHINESE ARMY'S QUEST FOR EGGS CREATES ECOLOGICAL NIGHTMARE

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 8, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: PEKING, April 24


From a cluster of bleak islands in the South China Sea comes word of a
beleaguered unit of Chinese soldiers locked in bitter ecological combat over a
flock of chickens.

The islands, called the Xisha by China, also happen to be claimed by Vietnam,
which refers to them as the Paracels.  To prove that the disputed islands are
really the Xisha and therefore Chinese, Peking has stationed troops on some of
the more hospitable atolls and reefs, which are prized for bird fertilizer
onshore and potential oil reserves offshore.

Raising chickens as a sideline is nothing new in the Chinese Army, whose
soldiers, usually country boys, grow assorted livestock and crops to augment
their military rations. No problem was foreseen when the soldiers had some
chickens shipped over to relieve their monotonous diet with occasional fresh
eggs.

But as China Daily related the story from the latest issue of the Peking-based
magazine Nature, the chickens were not so docile. They flew the coop for the
call of the wild, laying eggs haphazardly as they wandered.

For a while, the soldiers beat the nearby bushes for their eggs.  Then the
island's chickens, which had been hatching and multiplying from unrecovered
eggs, began to disappear. The soldiers discovered on their patrols that
predatory rats, some weighing more than two pounds each, were getting to the
chickens first and making meals of them.

Rat-control experts were sent over from headquarters to assume the offensive
against the gigantic rats. The rodents, heeding Mao Zedong's classic dictum on
guerrilla warfare, retreated as the enemy advanced and, when the rat-control
experts departed, scurried back in force.

The embattled garrison requisitioned cats from the mainland. The cats appeared
and went AWOL. They dodged combat with the fierce rats and more prudently
concentrated on stalking and devouring the rare birds that also inhabit the
island.

Dogs were sent in to discourage the cats who were chasing the birds instead of
the rats who were killing the chickens that laid the eggs that the soldiers had
wanted for dinner.

The cats scampered up trees and bushes and the dogs were left with nothing to do
but bark and fight with each other.  According to Li Hengmao, Nature's
correspondent, the soldiers have requested the help of ecologists who can come
in and untangle the order of battle.

The moral: watching the Vietnamese tiger at the front door of your island won't
do much for your diet unless you keep an eye on the rats at your back door too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. General Sees Dividends Gained From the Vietnam War

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 12, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 106 words

DATELINE: NEWPORT NEWS, Va., April 24


The United States gained strategic political dividends from the Vietnam War by
''holding the line for 10 years against Communist expansion,'' Gen. William C.
Westmoreland said today.

General Westmoreland, who led United States forces during that war, told 200
people at the War Memorial Museum of Virginia that the American military effort
erected a shield against Communism in southeast Asia.

General Westmoreland's speech was part of the museum's weekendlong exhibit, ''
Vietnam: A Remembrance.'' The museum set up a display of 27 paintings rendered
by soldiers who served in Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FORMER P.O.W. WHOSE WIFE TOOK $121,998 REJECTS $38,449

BYLINE: By BEN A. FRANKLIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 28, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 929 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 24


When Col. Fred V. Cherry of the Air Force, a decorated fighter pilot, was
released in 1973 after more than seven years as a prisoner of war in North
Vietnam, he came home to find that his wife, who had deserted him, had been paid
a total of $121,998 by the Air Force - his salary, his subsistence allowance,
his flight pay and his savings.

Colonel Cherry, who is 54 years old and has retired from the service, recalls
that he was not only ''wiped out because I had lost everything I had stayed
alive for for seven years,'' but penniless until the Air Force advanced him
money.

Two years ago, the United States Court of Claims upheld in principle his lawsuit
demanding payment of back salary and allowances, which the court said his wife,
Shirley, had ''dissipated without let or hindrance by the Air Force.'' But the
Air Force contested Colonel Cherry's claim to the full amount, which he held was
due him because of its negligence in supporting a serviceman's unfaithful wife.
This week, 16 years and six months after his F-105D was shot down, the Court of
Claims tentatively granted him $38,449.

Heeding the Air Force's argument, the court deducted the balance as support
payments for the Cherrys' four children, which it said would have gone to his
wife even if she had been denied his salary for deserting him and bearing an
illegitimate child.

Colonel Cherry is divorced and living in Maryland with his youngest son and a
daughter of college age. In an interview, he termed the figure ''unsatisfactory,
really kind of gross.'' He said he had instructed his lawyer to appeal, since
this is regarded in the military services as a leading case on the rights of
prisoners of war.

'I'd Be Letting Them Down'

''There are at least two other similar cases pending, awaiting decision behind
mine,'' Colonel Cherry said. ''I'd be letting them down, too, if I accepted
this.''

While he is looking for a job in industry, Colonel Cherry is living on his
retirement pay and disability benefits for combat injuries. His lawyer, Kaletah
Carroll, an Air Force wife herself, said that he did not know where his ex-wife
was.

Any appeal is likely to be long and dragged out, according to court officials.
The Court of Claims will go out of existence Oct. 1 when it is to be merged with
the United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals and become the Federal
Court of Appeals.

The award is ''tentative'' because, under current court procedures, this week's
decision by Judge John P. Wiese is a only a recommendation to the full court by
a hearing officer. The opinion can be accepted, modified or rejected by a
three-judge panel of the Court of Claims. If the case is not acted on before
Oct. 1, it will probably have to become a formal appeal to the merged court. The
trial examiner system is being abolished.

Most of the tentative opinion is conflicting testimony about when the Air Force
was told that the former Mrs. Cherry had abandoned the marriage. According to
records cited in the opinion, Colonel Cherry, at the time a major, was shot down
in October 1965 and listed as missing. The next month his wife and children were
returned from Japan to Portsmouth, Va.

In the fall of 1967, Colonel Cherry's sister, Beulah Watts, who lived nearby in
Virginia, learned that although the Air Force had by that time confirmed that
Colonel Cherry was alive, Mrs. Cherry would not be sending him an Air
Force-authorized Christmas package.  Indeed, while he was still officially
missing, she asked the Air Force if it would be possible to have him declared
dead.

In 1968 Mrs. Watts told the Air Force Mrs. Cherry was living with another man.
In 1969 she reported that Mrs. Cherry had given birth and was ''squandering
Colonel Cherry's money.''

'Irrefutable Proof' Asked

Mrs. Watts conveyed this information by telephone, however, and the Air Force
has since said it needed ''irrefutable proof of misconduct'' in writing. Colonel
Cherry says Air Force records show that Shirley Cherry's own requests for
''emergency'' money, most of them written, should have alerted the service to
its obligation to protect the interests of a ''missing member.''

From October 1968 to January 1973, when the Air Force finally cut off payments,
the court record shows that Mrs. Cherry obtained nearly $17,000 from her
husband's service savings account, in addition to her monthly allotments. To do
so, she cited unverified losses or thefts of cash, the cost of summerlong trips
and ''bad investments'' and medical expenses. One such expense was the cost of
the delivery of her child by another man.

Criticism of Air Force

The court's finding admonishes the Air Force for failing to investigate the
warnings by Colonel Cherry's sister, or his wife's demands for money. Yet what
the court calls ''self-contradictory regulations,'' along with regard for the
privacy and due process owed military dependents, led it to fix April 1970 as
the date when the payments should have stopped.

At that time, the opinion said, the wife's monthly allotments from the Air Force
''should have been reduced to an amount necessary to provide for support of the
children only,'' or 40 percent of her husband's gross pay. The difference came
to $38,449, which Colonel Cherry now says he will not accept.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Col. Fred V. Cherry

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CAN NEW ZEALAND RIVAL AUSTRALIA FOR MOVIE HONORS?

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2126 words


''You must understand,'' says Roger Donaldson, the 36-year-old New Zealand
filmmaker, ''that in New Zealand there was no way you could go to any film
school. There was no way you could learn about filmmaking. The only way to learn
was to do it.''

Mr. Donaldson has done it well. His latest film, ''Smash Palace'' opens Friday
at the Paris Theater fresh from the honor of having been chosen as the opening
attraction in the prestigious annual New Directors/New Films series presented by
the Museum of Modern Art and the Film Society of Lincoln Center. Like ''Sleeping
Dogs,'' Mr.  Donaldson's previous movie, which dealt with revolution in New
Zealand, ''Smash Palace'' has earned the director strong critical plaudits, and
now linked him with Australia's Bruce Beresford, who made ''Breaker Morant,''
and Peter Weir, the director of ''Gallipoli,'' as another filmmaking wunderkind
from Down Under.

Directed, written and produced by Mr. Donaldson, ''Smash Palace'' is an account
of the breakup of a marriage of an automobile racer who runs a wrecking yard at
an isolated New Zealand railroad crossing and his French-born wife - and of the
consequences for their 8-yearold daughter.

For American audiences who are familiar with ''Breaker Morant,'' which dealt
with the Boer War, and ''Gallipoli,'' about World War I, and who are perhaps
prone to lump together all films from Down Under, Mr. Donaldson notes
significant differences between life and filmmaking art in Australia and New
Zealand.

Australian-born, he lit out for New Zealand as a rebellious, anti-Vietnam war
college dropout in the mid-60's, telling himself it was just a holiday.

''When I got there,'' he says, ''I really fell in love with New Zealand. New
Zealand is a much smaller country than Australia, and at that stage it was a
much more friendly country. New Zealand has a large Polynesian community, which
gives it a different quality from Australia. It's difficult to describe. When
you go there, your initial impression of New Zealand is being less competitive,
slow - the people more friendly, more genuine.''

He says, ''New Zealand is a very isolated place and creatively you have to
inspire yourself. That has advantages and disadvantages. The advantages are that
you are not continually being distracted by other people's ideas and so your
ideas can be more original. The disadvtanges are that you don't have the
creative input that sparks off ideas.''

Still, he says, ''I value that isolation I've had. It's given me opportunities
to do things, think things and just discover things for myself, and in that
discovering process I've learned a lot about what makes a film work. I approach
my filmmaking from instinct. I don't rely on having seen it done somewhere
else.''

As for New Zealand's films, he says, ''New Zealand films have tried to confront
contemporary issues that Australian films have avoided.  Until recently,
successful Australian films have been period films. I think it's harder to make
a contemporary movie than a period movie.

''I think people know what it's like to live right now. They're judging a
contemporary movie on a totally different basis. They're relating it to life as
they live it or know it.''

But when it comes to marital discord -the subject of ''Smash Palace'' and such
current American films as ''Shoot the Moon'' and ''Too Far to Go'' - he says New
Zealand and Australia are not so different from each other and from the United
States.

''One of the things about 'Smash Palace' is that it's contemporary and means
something in New Zealand. But it also travels. The idea travels - divorce,
separation, victims of divorce, children. It's an idea that people in New York
or Sao Paulo or Moscow will understand.  They can relate it to their own
lives.''

Mr. Donaldson, who has three boys and a girl by a 12-year marriage begun shortly
after arrival in New Zealand and ended by separation in 1977 and subsequent
divorce, married again last year and has a 10-month-old boy by his second
marriage.

''When I think of all my friends,'' he says, ''I can think of only two couples
whose marriages have survived, and both those couples have been through
separations and decided to get back together again.''

Despite having been raised - like the child in ''Smash Palace'' - by a father
who bought, sold and fixed cars, who drove a tow truck, who took him rabbit
hunting and to car races and who masked his love; and despite having been raised
by a mother who -like the mother in ''Smash Palace'' - was liberated and
ambitious for her children; and despite having gone a divorce, Mr. Donaldson
sounds a caveat to those who see ''Smash Palace'':

''None of the characters or events are autobiographical.'' But, he says, ''I've
obviously taken from my own childhood.'' Mr. Donaldson was born Nov. 15, 1945 in
Ballarat, Australia, about 60 miles west of Melbourne - ''a small country town,
really'' he says, a place that had once been a gold mining community and then
became a center of sheep-raising and wheat-farming.

His English-born father, Frank, who came to Australia as an infant, who had been
a medical student and who spent most of his life involved with cars, had been
previously married. His mother, the former Dorothy Gumm, helped run a sawmill.

Mr. Donaldson has a younger brother, Peter, who holds a doctorate in physical
chemistry. His two half-sisters by his father's first marriage, Frances and
Lois, became doctors.

''My mother was - and still is - a very ambitious woman,'' he says, ''especially
ambitious for my brother and me. She felt there were better things for us than
Ballarat, I guess.''

He remembers his father taking him to the local drive-in on Wednesday nights to
see the latest Audie Murphy movies. He remembers his mother enrolling him in
arts classes that took him sometimes to Melbourne to see movies such as Ingmar
Bergman's ''The Virgin Spring.'' He thinks it is fair to describe his mother as
a woman of intellect and his father as a man of action, like Al Shaw, the father
in ''Smash Palace.''

''I didn't really realize until very recently that he had any feelings toward me
because of this distance that males put between themselves and their children in
New Zealand and Australia,'' Mr.  Donaldson says.

''In New Zealand sentimentality is seen as weakness. A male in New Zealand
shouldn't be seen to be weak,'' he says.  As a teen-ager, Mr. Donaldson was a
rebel, asserting his independence. ''It was fairly minor,'' he says, ''but it
seemed major to everybody else involved. Getting drunk, pinching cars.''

Because of his interest in science, and because of the scientific attainments of
his half-sisters, his parents decided he should pursue a metallurgy course at
the Ballarat School of Mines. At 17 or 18 Mr.  Donaldson switched to geology
then - rebelling again - prompted his parents to suggest that he leave school
and work for a year.

Next thing he knew, he was based in the isolated mining town of Mt. Isa - 16,000
men, 2,000 women, plenty of drinking, brawling and shooting - prospecting in the
desert for metals.

''I was just a little boy from home, so I grew up very quickly. It was at this
stage,'' he says, ''that I became very determined I was going to become a
photographer.''

He'd been introduced to photography through a school friend and he found it an
interesting combination of the scientific and the artistic. ''It seemed such a
perfect way to express yourself quickly - to capture images, ideas - and it
really appealed to me. The creative process could play a major part, but it was
achieved through scientific understanding.''

Inventing an excuse, he returned from Mt. Isa, tried college again, was sent
back to another desert area, and came home to find himself an antiwar activist
pitted against his father in a family sundered by the Vietnam war. ''It became
obvious that we couldn't live in the same house.''

It was then that he left for New Zealand with the equivalent of $30. Eventually,
armed with the names of two well-known photographers, he made his way to
Auckland. ''I knocked on their door with my suitcases and said, 'I've come to
work for you. I don't want to get paid. I just want to learn.'

''It was sort of like an apprenticeship over a short period of time. I can
remember one night they said, 'If you're going to be a photographer, you're
going to have to have some photographs. So they organized a model for me and
this girl showed up. I can remember in horror as this very sophisticated young
girl asked me which of her clothes I'd like her to put on. When I said, 'Well,
I'll try those,' and she stripped off all her clothes, it was such a shock to me
I had trouble coping.''

Mr. Donaldson's discomfiture under such circumstances might surprise audiences
who witness a scene in ''Smash Palace'' where a fight between Al Shaw (Bruno
Lawrence) and his wife, Jacqui (Anna Jemison), ends with what could be described
as a brutish sexual encounter.

''Sexuality is a key to marriage,'' Mr. Donaldson explains. ''It is usually an
area where, ultimately, frustrations with a marriage are brought out into the
open. To avoid the most crucial part of a relationship for the sake of good
taste would be to avoid my responsibility as a filmmaker.''

Within a short time of having served his photographic apprenticeship, Mr.
Donaldson got married and set up in business for himself. His photography proved
successful and evolved into the making of television commercials and eventually
into documentary films and dramatic films of short stories that earned him
considerable renown.

After making ''Sleeping Dogs,'' he went to England in 1979 with Melvine Clark, a
teacher who is now his wife. He was thinking about making a movie to be called
''Killer Curry,'' about two wrestlers.

''I decided rather than try to persevere with the script I would have a holiday.
And as soon as I decided that, the ideas came flooding in.

''Then I thought, 'Why not be cheeky and write a movie about a subject that you
really know what you're talking about and have the courage to draw on your own
experiences of life and give it a realism that only experience can bring to it?'
So I was sitting in a coffee bar one day and I saw a poster from that day's
newspaper. It said: 'Boy, 5 in Gun Siege.'

''That was sort of the final little key. I felt that if you're going to make a
movie about children and separation - people pay to be entertained, and so the
movie had to be more than just a sort of low key representation of a realistic
situation. This 'Boy, 5, in Gun Siege' gave me an idea you could work toward.''

With regard to the subject matter, he says, ''I didn't personally have an ax to
grind. I was just trying to come up with attacking the problem that it is
ultimately the child - or children - who is the victim.''

The idea of a conflict over a child, played in ''Smash Palace'' by Greer Robson,
was augmented by Mr. Donaldson's feelings about being an immigrant to New
Zealand - a concept that informs the character of the French-born Jacqui Shaw.
''To people who are used to a highly sophisticated way of living, things are
quite different. It's isolated. It's culturally different.''

Despite its seriousness, action and violence, ''Smash Palace'' is also a film
lit by unexpected humor. ''I think life is funny,'' Mr.  Donaldson says, ''All
the time. Even at its worst. I think without humor you lack humanity. I think
the humor is what saves the movie.''

Filming on ''Smash Palace'' began February 2, 1981 and was finished in time for
the movie to be shown out of competition last May in Cannes, where it attracted
critical admirers and distributors.

Now, like other highly regarded new directors from Down Under, Mr.  Donaldson is
being tempted with American projects.  ''I've spent a lot of time in America,''
he says, referring to some of his documentary films. ''It's a very exciting
place. You can't deny that. There's a major difference between filmmaking here
and in New Zealand. Where we do it, it is a luxury. Here it is a business.  And
it's nice to do some business sometimes, and it's nice to have some luxury.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Greer Robson, Anna Jemison photo of Roger
Donaldson

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LOUIS LYONS IN 'SCOUNDREL TIME': A CASE IN POINT

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 495 words


To the Editor:

To your editorial tribute (April 17) to the New England Yankee rectitude of
Nieman curator Louis Lyons I should like to append a personal experience.

Just before Christmas during my 1956-57 Nieman year at Harvard, a cablegram
arrived from Peking authorizing a visa. Courtesy dictated that I notify the
curator, inasmuch as the Nieman Foundation is taxexempt and U.S. policymakers
were violently opposed to any travel to China.

With Calvinistic fervor, Secretary of State Dulles was proclaiming that (1) the
First Amendment protected only the right to publish the news, and not the right
to gather it, and (2) the presence in the People's Republic of U.S. journalists
would ''lend respectability'' to an ''outlaw regime.''

Without a moment's hesitation, Louis Lyons bestowed his blessing on my going.
During my six weeks in China, when Harvard began to feel the heat, he never
wavered in his defense of the right to travel and the public's right to know.

Washington was especially disconcerted because my CBS broadcasts contradicted
the official nonsense about the ''imminent collapse'' of Mao's Government.
Deputy Under Secretary of State Robert Murphy personally telephoned CBS
president William Paley, and Assistant Secretary Walter Robertson tried to
pressure The Baltimore Afro-American into summoning me home.

On my arrival back in the U.S. early on a wintry Sunday morning, Louis Lyons and
two Nieman classmates (Anthony Lewis of The Times and Hale Champion of The San
Francisco Chronicle) met my plane in a much-appreciated - in fact, indispensable
- gesture of solidarity.  Officials in the

State and Justice Departments who had begun threatening prosecution under the
1917 Trading With the Enemy Act got the message.  Several weeks later, at a
private luncheon at the Nieman Foundation, Louis Lyons assembled Mr. Lewis and
Harvard Law professors Paul Freund and Roger Fisher to coach me for testimony
before the Senate Subcommittee on Constitutional Rights, where I disclosed all
the improper governmental arm-twisting that had gone on behind the scenes.

When a Louis Lyons passes from the scene, one's pessimism, indeed despair, about
the future of this country and its impact on the outside world tends to deepen.

But then comes the healthy reminder that Louis Lyons was not some disparate,
disembodied journalistic phenomenon but rather a true heir of Boston's rich
legacy and vanguard traditions - from Tea Party to Abolition and Underground
Railroad; from anti-Manifest Destiny and anti-imperial-expansion to the
suffragette movement; from anti-Vietnam to anti-El Salvador.

It's true, as Lillian Hellman has said, that this is ''scoundrel time.'' But
there's no reason to worry that our present moral crises at home and abroad
won't produce stalwarts of the Louis Lyons mold who will refuse to fawn upon the
scoundrels and who will (as the Quakers put it) ''speak truth to power.''
WILLIAM WORTHY, New York, April 17, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              90 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BATTLING IT OUT IN HOLLYWOOD;
by Sally Ogle Davis

SECTION: Section 6; Page 100, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5064 words


Sally Ogle Davis is a Los Angeles based writer.

The day is almost over and in his CBS Studio Center office-dressing room on the
edge of the San Fernando Valley, Ed Asner has spent most of it trying not to
talk. For the 52-year-old actor, it's an unnatural act, but silence, or as close
to it as he can manage, is the Screen Actors Guild president's new ploy in a
philosophical battle with the Charlton Heston faction in the guild, and Asner is
going to manage it even it if it kills him.

Having been stung by the reverberations his support of the rebels in El Salvador
and his commitment to raise $1 million for medical aid to that country have had
on union matters, Asner now intones, most un-Asnerlike: ''We no longer wish to
conduct the battle in the trades and the media. The opposition will not stop,
but we are not going to respond to their accusations and charges, because they
are ceaseless.''

What he has ceased responding to is the accusation, made most vociferously by
Heston, a former guild president, that he is abusing his power as a union
president to espouse a number of left-wing causes with which the majority of the
guild is not in sympathy.

To actor Robert Conrad, it was not simply Asner's support of El Salvador that
incensed him. ''It was his atti-tude, standing on the State Department steps
saying, 'These people are not my enemy.' The reason I am pursuing Mr. Asner is
that unless people are up in arms, he will be blatantly pursuing his own ends.
In Asner, they've got someone who's highly visible, aggressive and
inexperienced. That's a dangerous combination.''

The confusion over Asner's affiliations was accentuated at a press conference
immediately following the State Department incident. Not until half-way through
that conference did Asner make clear that he was speaking as a private citizen,
not as president of the actors' guild.

So far, Asner's actions have spurred a recall petition (now defunct), several
death threats, the defacing of the guild's Hollywood headquarters with posters
labeling him ''a Communist swine,'' calls for a sponsor boycott of his CBS-TV
series, ''Lou Grant,'' and the formation of a watchdog committee to monitor his
future actions, and those of the guild board, for political transgressions. His
Salvadoran-related actions have also produced considerable public controversy
and some virulent newspaper editorials.

What Asner later called his ''slight goof'' - not separating clearly enough his
personal views on Central America from his representation of the actors' guild -
was, in strategic terms, an enormous blunder. In one fell swoop, he handed his
opposition in the union blockbuster ammunition and brought about a war that
diverted attention from the real battle within the guild.
That war has now escalated from a minor flurry of offscreen political muscle
testing to a major conflagration involving everyone from the President of the
United States to the lowliest movie extra.

The furor that erupted over Asner's Salvadoran pronouncements triggered a
dissension that had been festering for years, and which currently is centered on
a Screen Actors Guild (S.A.G.) referendum over merger with the Screen Extras
Guild (S.E.G.) as the first step toward creating a single entertainment union in
Hollywood similar to umbrella ones in Europe. Beset by one of the highest
unemployment and lowest per capita income rates of any group within the labor
movement, a faction within the actors' guild is pursuing merger as a way of
strengthening its position when negotiating with the conglomerates that now own
many of the movie studios.

Passions have not run this high in Hollywood since the days of the blacklists,
when Ronald Reagan was president of the actors' guild. In fact, the guild's
withdrawal of an award to President Reagan is a major factor in the current
uproar.  The proposed merger between the 50,424 member Screen Actors Guild and
the 5,000-strong Screen Extras Guild (half of whose members also belong to the
Screen Actors Guild) has already been approved by the extras, and earlier this
month ballots went out to actors' guild members all over the country. The
deadline for returning them is May 7, and the re- sults are expected to be
announced a day or two later.In Hollywood, the merger war has turned personal
and nasty, particularly in the skirmishes between Asner and Heston - hence
Asner's desire to cool the rhetoric, ''to let the real message get through the
invective,'' as he puts it.

Strategy is discussed in union halls and on late-night television news programs,
where, in fact, Asner's leading role in this particular drama began almost two
years ago.

When the Screen Actors Guild and AFTRA (the American Federation of Television
and Radio Artists) went on strike in 1980 for a greater share of earnings
resulting from the future sale of movies and television shows to the cable and
video-cassette markets, Asner dutifully showed up for picket duty. His
articulateness and aggressiveness in the cause were not lost on union activists.

During the strike, it was Asner, one of the most popular television performers
in the country, rather than the guild's then president, William Schallert (''The
Patty Duke Show''), a fellow liberal but a low-profile personality, who was
invited to go on ABC-TV's ''Nightline'' to articulate the strikers' position.
For Asner, the strike was an education. ''It impressed on me,'' he says, ''all
the stuff I'd put to the back of my mind - the antiunion feeling in this
country, the fact that you can't pussyfoot around - you're either a union or
you're not; you either go on strike for issues and know what you're striking for
or you don't.'' When the strike ended, Asner made no bones about his
dissatisfaction with the new contract, which permits one year's use of a film,
or 10 showings per system, whichever occurs first, before actors receive
residuals. He joined a new movement, formed outside the guild, called the Caucus
of Artists for Merger.

Shortly thereafter, a group of actors favoring merger asked Asner to run for the
national presidency. He was elected to a two-year term by a comfortable margin
in November 1981.

Robert Conrad (''The Wild Wild West'') has been very vocal in his opposition to
merger. Conrad, and those who agree with him, fear that merger with the extras
would pull down the actor's hard-won status as someone who has a professional
craft that requires years of studying and experience. ''They want to call us the
Performers Guild,'' he snaps. ''Seals perform. I still think I act.''
Charlton Heston, while deeply concerned about maintaining the dignity of actors,
also opposes merger on the grounds that the inclusion of extras would add more
unemployed people to the guild's rolls.

Heston and his supporters have formed a group called Actors Working for an
Actors Guild (AWAG) and have taken out advertisements in The Hollywood Reporter
opposing merger. They have recently received the support of such industry
heavyweights as Frank Sinatra, James Stewart and Clint Eastwood.
''We're a guild, not a union,'' emphasizes Robert Conrad. ''How can you have a
union where some members earn over $1 million a year and some less than
$2,500?''

Over 74 percent of the members of the actors' guild do earn less from just
acting alone than $2,500 a year. But as many actors point out, the vicissitudes
of the acting business are such that today's superstars, like Asner or Alan
Alda, spent many more years in the struggling category than in the
million-a-year bracket, and they see no inconsistency about solidarity with a
fellow actor who, on the face of it, earns below the poverty line in his chosen
profession.  (Annual-income figures for members of the actors' guild show a
dramatic spread of earnings: 59 percent earn less than $1,000; 1.1 percent,
$50,000 to $75,000; .4 percent, $75,000 to $100,000 and .9 percent earn $100,000
or more.)

Those in favor of merger maintain that it would elevate extras rather than
demean actors. And, says Paul Kreppel (''It's A Living''), a member of the
promerger caucus, ''It would mean that S.A.G. members, if need be, could
supplement their income as extras.''

In New York, where extras have always been represented by the Screen Actors
Guild, most guild members favor merger. The stigma attached to extra work on the
West Coast has never existed in the East. ''We think it's nonsensical elitism,''
says Larry Keith, the guild's New York branch president. ''Work is scarce,'' he
points out, and ''extra pay is not bad. It's better than driving a taxi or
waiting tables. At least you're still working in your own industry.'' On the
West Coast, the merger is harder to sell because the extras' guild, while it may
not deliberately restrict memberships, has always been one of the toughest
unions in the country to get into. (The Screen Actors Guild says it accepts
anyone who has belonged for at least a year to an affiliated professional union,
such as AFTRA, Actors Equity and the Screen Extras Guild, and can furnish proof
of work, or who has a written guarantee of an upcoming job.) All of which casts
considerable doubt on the final outcome of the actors' referendum.

But Asner feels that merger is vital. ''S.E.G. is withering on the vine in this
town,'' he explains. ''What work there is is going non-S.E.G. If merger passes,
no actor will work in a movie that does not have an agreement concerning
atmosphere (extra) work, and it won't make any difference if that drives
production out of Hollywood. If they plan on shooting in Denver, they're going
to face it in Denver, too, because the extras will fi- nally have a national
union.'' While defeat of this merger might well slow the impetus toward an
umbrella union, it would not finish it off. The push toward a merger with AFTRA
will continue and escalate.  The board over which Ed Asner presides is a very
different one from Ronald Reagan's (1947-52 and 1959-60) board, though scarcely
less political.
The Reagan board, in a 1951 reply to a plea from the ac-
tress Gale Sondergaard for the guild to protect her from the House Un-American
Activities Committee, said it believed ''that all participants in the
international Communist Party conspiracy against our nation should be exposed
for what they are - enemies of our country and of our form of government.''

And in 1960, shortly before he resigned from the guild, Ronald Reagan was
involved in one of the most controversial contracts in the guild's history. The
actors had been on strike for 33 days on the issue of residual payments for
movies shown on television. The terms of the agreement that called for payments
by producers into a pension, health and welfare funds for the actors were well
received, but the settlement for prospective payments from films made after
Janury 1960, rather than the 12-year retroactive contract the actors wanted, was
roundly denounced. It represented a huge loss of income to the actors, some of
whom tied the agreement to a production deal Mr. Reagan made soon afterward. But
John Dales, a Reagan supporter and executive secretary of the actors' guild at
that time, protests: ''That went to a vote of the membership. How long were we
supposed to stay on strike?''

The Asner union is different also from the league of gentlemen over which
Charlton Heston presided from 1965 to 1971, when ''name'' actors of big salaries
and conservative bent predominated. Heston, who was a strong advocate for actors
when he headed their guild, regards what he now sees as the politicization of
the Screen Actors Guild as anathema.

It was under Dennis (''McCloud'') Weaver's presidency (1973-75) that the guild's
board began to change. An interesting alliance began to emerge between some
older members, several of them survivors of the 1950's blacklists, and young
actors baptized by the anti-Vietnam War and free-speech movements.

Before long, the board began to consider issues that, on the face of them, had
little to do with acting.  It was then, Charlton Heston says, that he began to
take a renewed interest in the board's activities. (He had, in fact, interceded
once before, when he sent out 10,000 letters in behalf of the candidacy of the
man who succeeded him as board president - John Gavin, now United States
Ambassador to Mexico. Heston walked in uninvited to a meeting called by the
opposition slate and told them that ''they owed their allegiance to a shadowy
constituency,'' a term some construed as subtle Red-baiting.) Heston became even
more displeased by the board's actions after Asner became its head. ''There was
increasing evidence of a shifting focus,'' Heston says, ''a search for radical
chic, trendy issues.''

Mark Schubb (''Only When I Laugh''), who sits on the guild's legislative
committee, has been instrumental in bringing what the opposition regards as
''trendy'' issues to the board. One of the causes he tried to get them
interested in was automobile insurance.  ''Actors are routinely redlined as
assigned risks by some companies,'' Schubb says, ''and denied outright by
others.'' But Schubb denies there has been a radical takeover of the board.
''In fact,'' he says, ''we've always moved very slowly. The idea that somehow Ed
has been behind some kind of revolution is nonsense.''

The battle over the direction the union should take stayed, for the most part,
behind board-room doors until Kim Fellner, formerly with the Service Employees
Union International, was brought to Hollywood in 1979 as public-relations
director for the guild by Kathleen Nolan (''The Real McCoys''), who headed the
board from 1975 to 1979.

Kim Fellner is a 33-year-old ardent trade unionist who makes no bones about her
sympathies. ''I'm a child of the 1960's and a spiritual disciple of the unions
of the 30's,'' she says.

Although she denies it, some actors feel she was instrumental in bringing the
union battle into the open by persuading Asner to announce a $5,000 donation to
the dependents of striking air-traffic controllers, a move that antagonized the
right wing of the union.  ''The membership was neither asked, nor even clearly
in-formed on that,'' says Charlton Heston, ''while $5,000 of money they have to
work extremely hard to get was handed over.'' During the 1980 strike, Miss
Fellner filled a political vacuum within the union, thereby gaining more
prominence than she might otherwise have. She has since emerged as one of the
guild's chief political strategists, and has recently sat in on
televisioncommercials contract negotiations in New York.

Her critics see her as some kind of wild-eyed radical, planted by the labor
movement in Hollywood to make cannonballs for Asner and his board to fire.

''Her voice is clearly evident in what is said and what is not said,'' says
Charlton Heston. ''Over the last
months, the board's minutes are preoccupied with the problems of other unions,
and the guild speakers' bureau has turned into storm troops for the A.F.L.-
C.I.O.'' But all this was a tempest in a teapot compared with the storm that
burst over what became known as the Reagan-award affair.  Each year, the Screen
Actors Guild gives an award ''for outstanding achievement in fostering the
finest ideals of the acting profession.'' Former recipients have included Bob
Hope, James Stewart, Edward G. Robinson and Charlton Heston.

When Kim Fellner learned that President Reagan was to be the recipient of the
1981 award, she wrote a letter to the national board's executive committee
asking them to intervene. Such an award, she said, would alienate the guild from
the rest of the labor movement. The board withdrew the prize, although overtures
had already been made to the President to see if he could attend the
presen-tation. A loud outcry immediately ensued.  Charlton Heston called the
rescinding of the award ''in the worst possible taste,'' and added that were he
president of the guild he would dismiss Kim Fellner.

Asner, whose board has supported him 29 to 4 on most issues, stood by Miss
Fellner. Several board members went so far as to accuse Heston of allowing
himself to be used as a mouthpiece for the Administration.

''Why,'' asked Heston, ''would the President of the United States concern
himself with the problems of the Screen Actors Guild?'' Why indeed? It is a
crucial question, the answer to which may explain why a show-business battle has
assumed such significance.  There is no doubt that the guild's closer
identification with the A.F.L.- C.I.O. gives that body increased visibility. As
one guild member observes, Lane Kirkland, A.F.L.- C.I.O. president, is ''one of
the chief critics of the Reagan Administration, but when Lane Kirkland says
something, do people hear as well as when Ed Asner, or some other well-known
voice, says it?''

Asner himself has addressed a group of the United Professors of California, and
others in the guild have associated themselves with various labor issues. Joan
Hackett (''Only When I Laugh'') spoke to the Coalition of Labor Women in San
Francisco. Valerie Harper (''Rhoda'') is another of those who have spoken out on
women's issues. Jessica Walter (''Play Misty for Me''), vice president of the
union, emceed the Labor Solidarity Day rally in Los Angeles. And the Asner-led
union has sent a letter in support of the National Union of Hospital and Health
Care Employees in Kenosha, Wis., and it has asked actors' guild members not to
perform in a Seattle hotel involved in a union dispute.

Kim Fellner is convinced that the White House has a vested interest in the
direction the actors' guild is taking. ''There is a large community in the
entertainment industry that does not approve of this Administration,'' she says.
''It has largely been quiet about it, but Ed Asner is enough of a potential
leader to change that, to create a sense of col-lective group activity, even to
create another antiwar movement. It is in the interests of the Administration to
see that doesn't materialize.''

It is difficult to separate truth from possible paranoia here.  However,
President Reagan - who often uses his presidency of the actors' guild to counter
charges that he is antilabor and who, a recent story in The Washington Post
suggested, may even make decisions as President of the United States based on
his experience as a hardbargaining guild negotiator -does not take what is
happening to his old union lightly. After Asner's State Department appearance,
Mr. Reagan said he was ''very disturbed'' about the politicalization of the
union he once headed.  As well as encouraging members of the actors' guild to
use their special skills to benefit the labor movement, Kim Fellner feels it is
also her job to alert actors to what she sees as the realities of the new
Hollywood.

''There's always been a sense of community here which extends even to Reagan and
Heston,'' she says. ''It's a 'they're our colleagues' kind of thing. There's
something quite touching about it - a reluctance to play really hardball. Louis
B. Mayer may have been a so-andso but he helped them all make movies. They've
begun to realize that now when they sit down across a table to negotiate they're
dealing with multinational corporations whose interest in movies as a craft
doesn't exist anymore. A different industry requires different kinds of
responses.''

This became more obvious to striking actors in 1980 when conglomerates sent
attorneys from their corporate headquarters in New York to the West Coast to
conduct negotiations. ''We found ourselves dealing with a powerful,
well-organized production apparatus,'' reports Pat Harrington Jr. (''One Day at
a Time''), ''with enormous amounts of money to spend. We simply couldn't stand
up to them. We knew at that point we had to change.''

But in putting Ed Asner in front of the troops, the union may have exposed him
to a few political realities he was not prepared for. In Hollywood, it has
always been acceptable to be political if one spoke from the right side of the
field, as did John Wayne, George Murphy and Shirley Temple Black. Politicking on
the left often exposed one to the ''Red'' brush. This particular battle is no
exception.  Accusations that the left is trying to take over the entertainment
industry are once again being bandied about.

Immediately after the death threats and the daubings of the actors'
headquarters, the guild's board called a special meeting.  John Randolph, a
board member and victim of the '50's blacklist, was not able to attend, but sent
a letter in which he said: ''I hear the echoes of a sad, sickening period in
American life that most of us thought would never happen again.'' At the
meeting, the board declared its support of Asner's right to free speech.

But, says Charlton Heston, ''no member of the guild ever questioned that right,
passed on to Mr. Asner by the First Amendment, a protection he shares with his
fellow citizens and damn few others on this earth. The issue is that, when one
is speaking on behalf of an organization, one should take care to separate one's
personal views from those of the group. The only way to keep yourself out of
trouble is to try not to make a fool of yourself.''

The Coalition of S.A.G. Members Against Merger With the Screen Extras Guild held
a strategy meeting from which those who would not sign a petition against merger
were excluded. Those who eluded the guards at the door were pointed out by
others inside the hall, sometimes with cries of ''He's a Red, get him out,'' and
ejected by burly stuntmen.

Heston is careful to disassociate himself from such tactics. ''If Mr. Asner has
Communist sympathies, I neither know nor care, and Redbaiting distresses me.
That is not the issue. The issue is, we belong to a profession with the highest
unemployment and the lowest per capita income of any organization in the union
movement. That's what Mr. Asner and his board should concern themselves with.''

Those in favor of merger contend that's precisely what they're doing and that
without a single strong union representing all actors, they will never have the
clout to improve things.  Whatever the outcome of the proposed merger between
the actors and extras, the next big push by the actors' guild will be toward
union with AFTRA. But although AFTRA and the actors' guild already share some
joint committees, uniting them will be no inconsiderable task.  There are
thousands of AFTRA members - disk jockeys, newsmen, staff announcers - manning
radio and television stations around the country who might be hard-pressed to
see what membership in an actors' union could do for them.

''Our great hope,'' says Ed Asner, ''is that in terms of size, in terms of
identification, and the constant search for the ability to apply pres-sure
nationally on the organization that owns those stations, we can convince all
those radio and television people that this is to their benefit. And even if
they continue to be against it, perhaps they will not swing a large-enough
number of votes to counteract the number of actors who are going to wish this
marriage.''

Some actors favoring merger see it as a way of averting future jurisdictional
disputes between AFTRA and their union over the burgeoning video and cable
markets. It could also mean that all their work time would count toward one
pension plan. As it is now, actors need 10 years in one union to qualify for a
pension, so an actor who may have worked seven years in television, three years
on the stage and five in films still does not qualify.

These are bread-and-butter issues that most actors get considerably more
agitated about than they do over politics. But sometimes the two are hard to
separate.

''The AWAG group says they don't want us to be involved in anything other than
wages, welfare and working conditions,'' says Kent McCord (''Adam 12''), first
vice president of the actors guild. ''But, for instance, we've sent letters to
the President objecting to his Administration's weakening of the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration. We work with catwalks and heavy lights and
electrical outlets. If inspection of our work sites is decreased, it's exactly
the same as if there's insufficient inspection of mines. Our members are at
risk. So we protest. Some people may call that political. I don't.''

Kim Fellner sees the issue more broadly. ''We're simply trying to prepare this
union for the 21st century. There's the question of size. How do you remain
viable by yourself? Or is it preferable to pool your resources through merger?
Then there's technology. In other industries, they have robots; we have
telecommunications, which will also radically redefine the industry and the jobs
we do. And where do we fit into the political structure? How do unions
effectively endorse candidates? That question is on a different level here
because we've never done it before.'' What appears certain is
that the controversy surrounding merger proposals will not soon go away, and Ed
Asner's friends fear that he may be in over his head.

Grant Tinker, now chairman of NBC and formerly president of M.T.M.  Enterprises,
which created ''Lou Grant,'' says, ''Ed is politically naive, in the sense of
not being devious or a clever guy. He's a simple, honest man and not really up
to the trickery of some in this business. I worry about him a bit.''

Asner acknowledges that ''all of this mess has astounded me in terms of the
deviousness and chicanery of people.'' Charlton Heston allows that he has ''some
sympathy for Mr. Asner; not a lot, but some. I'm sure he had no idea what he was
getting into. He thought it was just like being head of the cancer fund. He's
been very used.''

To charges that he has been used, Asner replies: ''I regret none of what I did,
or what I said, or what I championed. Now if I become sacrificed, that's all
right, too. I've had a wonderful career and if someone tries to cut it short
because of what I may be doing, that's too bad. I'm getting a lot out of my
system this way.''

If the actors, extras, television and radio performers, and possibly even
writers and directors, ever succeed in their merger efforts, the resultant
bigger and stronger union could have a profound effect on the industry, already
facing outrageously spiraling costs.

Paul Monash, producer of ''Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid,''
''Slaughterhouse Five'' and innumerable television films, says that ''unions
could then dictate, either malignly or benignly, the economics of the
industry.''

He goes on to explain: ''Last year, I did a television film in Utah. The only
way I could come in anywhere near the license fee (the amount of money the
network gives the purchase company per episode for broadcast rights) was to use
a mixed crew -some union, some non.  But if the union has the ability to
escalate its demands, the producers will be functioning with the permission of
the union.''

Monash, however, regards the progress toward one union as ''the march of history
- inevitable, right and, from a performer's point of view, long overdue.'' He
fears, however, that motion-picture production will simply shift to
right-to-work states like Utah and Georgia.

Aware of that danger, the single-union faction in the actors' guild says that
right after merger with AFTRA the next item on the agenda will be organizing in
such states. Getting rid of right-to-work laws, Kim Fellner says, is ''the
answer to runaway production, whether it's in movies or the auto industry.''

Such talk, of course, horrifies the Heston faction, but those who advocate
getting rid of right-to-work laws are resolved to pursue the matter.

The Alliance of Motion Picture and Television Producers, which handles labor
relations with the unions, recently strengthened its bargaining position by
expanding its membership to include several more large production companies.

The days ahead promise to be stormy. But at a time when the need for a product
to feed the maw of the video-cassette revolution continues to rise and
unemployment in the industry is very high, producers need to make pictures and
actors need work.

Both sides hope intelligent compromises can be reached. ''The industry will
survive,'' says Paul Monash. ''This is one product they can't import from
Japan.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Ed Asner Photo of Charlton Heston

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A WOMAN OF THIS CENTURY

BYLINE: BY PETER L. BERGER;
Peter L. Berger, University Professor at Boston University, is the author of
''The Homeless Mind,'' ''Facing Up to Modernity'' and other works of sociology.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 2319 words


HANNAH ARENDT For Love of the World.  By Elisabeth Young-Bruehl.  563 pp. New
Haven and London: Yale University Press. $25.

HANNAH ARENDT'S contribution to the self-understanding of our age was heatedly
debated during her lifetime and will undoubtedly be a continuing subject of
controversy for a long time to come. What can already be said, however, is that
both her life and her work constitute a passionate trajectory through some of
the crucial areas of European and American thought in this century. She was
deeply touched by several of the major events and ideas of the century, and her
intense efforts to master them intellectually have earned her the respect of
even the many who strongly disagreed with her. It may well be that her
understanding of the age was imperfect. It is certain that she suffered from the
age, and that she tried with courage and honesty to transmute this suffering
into insight. In this sense, at the very least, Hannah Arendt is a paradigmatic
figure.

For this reason, the appearance of ''Hannah Arendt: For Love of the World'' is
very welcome. It is both a personal and an intellectual biography. Elisabeth
Young-Bruehl (a former student of Arendt's, now teaching at Wesleyan University)
has produced a scholarly, carefully researched and lucidly presented work. She
leaves no doubt that she admires Arendt, but her book is not adulatory, and it
does not gloss over the rougher aspects of its subject. It represents biography
at its best.

It is also quite a story, leading from Konigsberg (the city of Immanuel Kant),
where Arendt was born into a very bourgeois and very emancipated Jewish family
in 1906, to an apartment on Riverside Drive in New York City, where she died in
1975. One of the most interesting parts of the book deals with her formative
years in the intellectual and political ferment of Weimar Germany: Arendt's
university years, from 1924 to 1929, when she was decisively influenced by her
encounter (romantic as well as intellectual) with Martin Heidegger; the
beginnings of her lifelong relationship, first as a student and then as a
friend, with Karl Jaspers; her nervously intense peregrinations through the
intellectual milieus of the major German university centers; her early
involvement with Jewish and Zionist affairs.

EQUALLY formative, though in a different direction, were Arendt's years as a
refugee in France, from 1933 to 1941. Her most important encounter there was
with Heinrich Blucher - a Berliner, a proletarian bohemian, at that time still a
Communist (he became disillusioned with the party in due course), later a
teacher at Bard College, an admirer of Brecht and a lifelong practitioner of a
Brechtian style. Arendt and Blucher were married in Paris; the marriage, which
by all accounts was a singularly happy one, lasted until Blucher's death just a
few years before Arendt's. It was through him that Arendt first entered a
decidedly gauchiste intellectual and political milieu, which she never really
abandoned.

Her life as a widely known author and teacher all took place in America, where
she arrived in 1941 and became a citizen a few years later (an event of great
importance to her). Arendt always emphasized her European identity (and her
influence had much to do with her status as a European intellectual); perhaps
paradoxically, hers is a very American success story. Arendt's career as a
public figure dates from the 1951 publication of her first book, ''The Origins
of Totalitarianism,'' which immediately gained very wide attention. She wrote
and published unceasingly after that, but the clear milestones of her career are
the major books: ''The Human Condition'' (1958), ''Eichmann in Jerusalem''
(1963), ''On Revolution'' (1965), ''On Violence'' (1970), ''Crises of the
Republic'' (1972), and ''The Life of the Mind'' (left uncompleted at her death
and published posthumously in 1978 by her friend Mary McCarthy). It is a massive
and impressive opus.

Arendt's intellectual roots were in philosophy, but even her properly
philosophical interests had a practical-political bent from the beginning. (She
wrote her doctoral dissertation on Augustine's idea of neighborly love.) In
America she turned her attention to what she called political theory (in a
nonconventional sense and perhaps for lack of a better term). She tried to
understand the manifold ramifications of the modern age of revolution. She tried
to understand the history of the Jews in this age. And she tried to understand
America. These three themes dominate her work. The most bitter controversies of
Arendt's career arose in connection with the Jewish theme, especially after the
publication of her account of the Eichmann trial and her interpretation of some
of the events of the Holocaust, particularly the role played by the Jewish
councils in the Final Solution. Passions still run high on all sides of the
issue, and Arendt's analysis is still bitterly disputed and defended. Of more
general significance, however, are Arendt's vision of revolution and her vision
of America, and the manner in which the two relate to each other.

IN an open letter written during the controversy over the Eichmann book, Gershom
Scholem (a close friend who severed his relationship with Arendt because of his
sharp disagreement with her views) called Arendt one of the ''intellectuals who
came from the German Left.'' She retorted: ''I am not one of the 'intellectuals
who came from the German Left.' ... If I can be said to 'have come from
anywhere,' it is from the tradition of German philosophy.'' That was true, as
far as it went. Arendt did not come from the Left, and the politics of her
German years were Jewish-Zionist rather than German-socialist.  But Arendt came
to the Left, to the cosmopolitan, antibourgeois and rhetorically revolutionary
circles into which Blucher introduced her in Paris. It is during this later
period that she developed her vision of revolution, which she pursued through
several of her works and which determined her reaction to the events of the late
1960's.

This was never an ideologically doctrinaire or Marxist vision, and Arendt viewed
the empirical realities of communism without the illusions of so many other
Western intellectuals. (Indeed, one reiterated criticism of her analysis of
totalitarianism has been directed against her contention that Nazism and Soviet
Communism were subspecies of the same totalitarian phenomenon - a contention she
never gave up.) Rather, her vision of revolution was, if anything, syndicalist,
perhaps romantic. Thus she wrote about the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 as a
resurgence of ''a form of government which, it is true, was never really tried
out ... the council-system, the Russian soviets, which were abolished in the
initial stages of the October Revolution.'' This was the revolution, or rather
the revolutionary idea, that Arendt admired. It was this peculiar vision that
carried her away in the late 1960's. Thus it is no accident that she admired
Rosa Luxemburg - to the point that, as her biographer points out, during
Arendt's first teaching job, at Berkeley in 1955, a student observed: ''Rosa
Luxemburg has come again.''

The Old Left and the self-consciously Marxist Leftists never liked Arendt, and
the dislike was mutual. The New Left celebrated her.  Though she had too
critical a mind to assent to the inanities spouted by some of the celebrants
(such as their identification of ''Amerika'' with Nazi Germany), her sympathies
were evident. She was enthusiastic at the beginnings of the student rebellions,
which she experienced at the University of Chicago. Her rejection of any
''lesser evil'' principle of political action, her admiration for spontaneous
revolution and participatory democracy, her ideal of passionate personal
commitment - all these themes were taken up enthusiastically by student rebels
both in America and in Europe.

This vision colored her perception of specific events. Thus she insisted that
the turbulence of les evenements du mai in 1968 was ''essentially nonviolent.''
A month after these events she wrote to Daniel Cohn-Bendit (''Dani le Rouge,''
whose parents she had known as fellow refugees in Paris): ''I want to say ...
that I am quite sure that your parents, and especially your father, would be
very pleased with you if they were alive now.'' It is clear that she was pleased
with him too. When the students took over Columbia University that same spring,
she announced: ''The students are demonstrating, and we are all with them.'' To
be sure, she was disappointed by some of the students' actions a few days later.
The disappointment, though, did not lead her to question the revolutionary
vision that had inspired her first sympathy. Like others with an eschatological
vision, she only postponed her hope.

There is poignancy in all of this. Arendt was a relentlessly honest thinker. She
refused to indulge in sentimentality (an expression of a Brechtian style, one
may say), she always tried to see clearly, and these qualities inevitably
collided with her hopes and therefore led to disappointment. The same poignancy,
in a curious way, marks her vision of America. Arendt loved America. She was
deeply grateful to the country that had taken her in as a stateless refugee and
had granted her the full rights of citizenship, including the right to political
opposition. One is moved by a letter, quoted by her biographer, that Arendt
wrote to Blucher during the Suez crisis of 1956, only shortly after her
naturalization, in which she expresses the hope that ''we Americans'' will stay
out of the Middle East conflict. Over and over again, during the ''dark times''
of Vietnam and Watergate, she defended the ideals of the American republic
against those who would identify the latter with fascism, totalitarianism and
tyranny.

Yet her vision of America was an idiosyncratic one. What she admired in America
were the institutions of its political order rather than the society or the
culture in which these institutions are embedded. She admired the American
Constitution, an 18th-century construction, but she felt that it had been
profoundly distorted by the social developments of the 19th and 20th centuries.
Her America was, in the final analysis, the product of the revolutionary dreams
of the Enlightenment, as such a precursor of all the other revolutions in which
Arendt invested hope. Given this vision, it was inevitable that America too
would be disappointing.

MANY of Arendt's basic understandings led to her peculiar perceptions of the
revolutionary movements of the age on the one hand and of America on the other:
her sharp differentiation between the ''social'' and the ''political,'' her idea
that the fatal degeneration of the revolutionary ideal was the conversion from
''citizen'' to ''bourgeois,'' her notion that the bourgeoisie of the 19th
century was the seedbed of totalitarianism. Although there is no room to
criticize these conceptions in detail, it is possible to indicate, however
briefly, why Arendt's vision of America, despite her high sense of American
patriotism, missed essential components of American reality.

Probably the most important reason was her inveterate antagonism to bourgeois
culture (her Brechtian heritage, so to speak). The European bourgeoisie had
produced all those ''job-holders and familymen'' who passively (or, as in the
case of Eichmann, actively) supported the horrors of Nazism. That ''banality of
evil'' was endemic to the bourgeoisie, an ever-present threat. Given this
perception, what could she make of a society as profoundly bourgeois as America?
Well, what she made of it was a fiction -that of the alleged conflict between
the revolutionary republic and the grubby self-interest of a bourgeois society.
What she could not perceive was the necessary linkage between the American
political order and the bourgeois culture of America.

Nor was she sensitive to the religious dimensions of this culture (despite her
own and her biographer's claims to the contrary).  Needless to say, she was also
unable to perceive the link between this political order and the capitalist
economy (though she did say that a division between political and economic power
is a protection for freedom). In consequence, it is a strangely disembodied
republic that comes to view in her writings on America. William Barrett, who
writes with affection about Arendt in his recent book ''The Truants,'' believes
that she never overcame a certain European arrogance toward America. This view
is unconvincing, especially since Arendt's inability to understand the relation
between republic and bourgeoisie is shared by many American intellectuals with
no European background whatever. Her revolutionary nostalgia, not her European
roots, flawed Arendt's vision of America, as it continues to flaw the vision of
a significant portion of the American intelligentsia.

THERE is a sort of apostolic succession in this tradition of revolutionary
dreams, from Weimar to Paris to New York - and back again. It is an ambiguous
tradition and, in my opinion, a harmful one. Yet it has nobility, and Arendt
represented that nobility with honor. I will take the liberty of concluding with
a personal episode. It occurred in New York in that fateful year 1968. Several
of us were gathered in the apartment of Aron Gurwitsch, a philosopher who knew
Arendt from Paris. The main purpose of the gathering was to introduce Arendt to
Jurgen Habermas, who had recently emerged as one of the luminaries of the German
New Left and who was in America on a visiting professorship. Arendt arrived late
and was introduced to Habermas, who got up and greeted her very deferentially.
They sat down facing each other. Arendt said nothing for a moment, looked
steadily at Habermas with an expression of enormous pleasure, then exclaimed:
''Jurgen Habermas!'' The ambiguous torch had been handed on.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

''The Refused''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 27, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 387 words


To the Editor:

Reviewing my book ''The Refused'' (Feb. 21), Dick Wilson errs on several points.
He writes: ''To be sure, the fate of the Cambodians has been horrific, though it
has not been, as two Asian foreign ministers declared, another holocaust.'' Mr.
Wilson has his countries confused. The ministers, Romulo of the Philippines and
Rajaratnam of Singapore, as quoted in the book, were referring to the Vietnamese
government's expulsion of ethnic Chinese from Vietnam.

He also takes me to task for my statement that the flight of the Indochinese is
''one of the great population shifts in history,'' citing, among other examples
of ''far larger scale,'' the ''mass movements after Bangladesh was formed in
1971.'' Mr. Wilson overlooks qualitative differences that make the displacement
of the Indochinese much more significant.

The 10 million Bengalis who fled East Pakistan to neighboring India - before,
not after, the formation of Bangladesh in December 1971, incidentally -simply
returned when the war ended. They were displaced less than a year and
represented no lasting population shift at all.  By contrast, most of the
Indochinese cannot go home. As I wrote, the 1.3 million who left during the
period 1975-80 constituted ''an outflow of permanent refugees on a scale the
globe had not witnessed since World War II.'' They are continuing to leave at
the rate of 100,000 a year. Further, most of them cannot remain in their
countries of initial asylum; they have to be resettled outside Asia.  Add the
near removal of some ethnic minorities from Vietnam, Cambodia and Laos and you
have far-reaching demographic change.

Finally, Mr. Wilson writes that I am ''baffled by this sad and inconclusive
story.'' Since I devoted several chapters to the reasons for the flight of the
Indochinese, I am surprised, even baffled, that he should reach such a
conclusion.
BARRY WAIN, Bangkok, Thailand

The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include
the name, address and telephone number where the writer can be reached during
the day. Letters should be addressed to The Editor, The New York Times Book
Review, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036. We regret that because of the
large volume of mail received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return
unpublished letters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SERVICE ACADEMIES;
THE CALM WATERS OF ANNAPOLIS

SECTION: Section 10; Page 18, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 2195 words


FRANCIS X. CLINES is a correspondent in the Washington bureau of The Times.

By FRANCIS X.CLINES

T he tourist with a taste for musing quietly over detail rather than getting
caught up in panoply may be the best sort to wander the waterside campus of the
United States Naval Academy. Even with the breezes snapping in from Cheapeake
Bay, the 329-acre campus seems surprisingly pastoral for a nautical school, and
there is no grand military parade and thumping cannonades each day to let
civilian taxpayers know they are getting their Prussianistic money's worth.

Visitors to Annapolis must seek out for themselves the heavier trappings and
hoarier one-liners that are supposed to stir the ages.  My favorite is Admiral
Dewey's: ''When you're ready, you may fire, Gridley.'' The understatement fits
the campus, even as does the noteworthy ambivalence of having one of the newer
academic buildings named after Hyman Rickover, the octogenarian alumnus and
reluctant nuclear warrior, who so loves the Navy that he never hesitates to
criticize it.

The men and women of the student corps do show a touch of drum and bugle at a
noon assembly on sunny days, immediately before mess, but this is little
concerned with stride-and-polish rules and serves more as an almost casual
social device. A visitor might find this gathering an unobtrusive way to study
the immense optimism reflected in the faces of the 4,000 men and 400 women at
the academy. They seem hard-worked by their studies, and their uniforms appear
closer to some shade of academic inkiness than navy blue. The sight of them and
their potential, rather than the campus's decorative anchors and manof-war
cannon, is what makes a visitor truly curious about this institution, which has
channeled 13 decades of the nation's human treasure down to the sea.

The Naval Academy was started at a fort on the Severn River beside Annapolis in
1845 during the Polk Administration. It had 50 midshipmen and seven faculty
members, three of them civilians. The ratio of civilians prevails now, with
close to half of the 550 faculty members coming from civilian ranks. Seamanship
had been the world's ultimate on-the-job education until the invention of steam
power necessitated the nation's founding a land-based school for technology
lessons. These have grown prodigiously since, and involve a sub-critical nuclear
reactor, rocket machinery and computer control devices that share the watch on
modern helms.

The geography of even a brief visit to Annapolis is inviting, for the city lies
less than an hour's drive east of downtown Washington on U.S. 50 and serves as a
handy gateway to the delights of the ocean and bay fronts of the Maryland shore.
Annapolis can be an easy link in larger tours, offering such options as the
Assateague National Seashore to the east or the renewed Baltimore harborfront to
the north. It works as a separate day trip, too, since a single stop at the
academy also permits short strolls to the adjoining waterfront boutiques and
clam bars of Colonial Annapolis. From there, an easy walk up Main Street leads
to such historic stops as the State House, the nation's oldest still in use, and
to St. John's College, the venerable institution where the Sons of Liberty met
under a tulip poplar tree - now thought to be more than 400 years old - during
the Revolution.

So the Naval Academy thrives as part of some of the nation's most picturesque
history. In searching back toward the academy's roots, visitors interested in
architecture may find slim pickings now. The oldest surviving campus buildings
are a century-old gatehouse and police office. The campus mainly has the stony,
bulky impress of its turn-of-the-century construction, a renaissance that
nevertheless affords nostalgic echoes of Gridley, Dewey, Halsey and the others.
A sense of tradition is strong in such dominant buildings as the copper-domed,
78-year-old chapel where multidenominational services are open to the public. On
worshiper or tourist, the sunlight filters down through Tiffany windows that
offer a melange of biblical and nautical scenes, including a serene Messiah
walking on water. Nearby on campus, the big ''Captain's Row'' duplex quarters of
the Teddy Roosevelt era, when seapower was on the rise, still house the
academy's ranking officers. The buildings stand on Porter Road amid such
Southern comforts as striped window awnings and big shade trees.

Vistors can park in free lots on the grounds and either wander as they please
through approved areas and buildings, with the help of a free pamphlet, or pay
for an hourlong guided tour. These tours, offered every day from mid-March to
Thanksgiving, cost $2 for adults and $1 for children under 12. (For information
call 301-263-6933.) In the care of such guides as Priscilla Foust, the tour
seems worth the price, for her sense of the place and its history is wide
ranging enough to tolerate noncommittally, at the very crypt of John Paul Jones,
the contentions of some Philadelphians that John Barry, as much as Jones, served
as father of the Navy.

The Jones crypt is one of the few overstated wonders of the academy, a big
subterranean memorial room focusing on eight pillars and a large sarcophagus of
ancient marble that has the green sheen of sea foam to it and is decorated with
elaborate carved sea creatures.  The effect seems more Egyptian than American
and surely should satisfy the hero-worshipers in any visitor group.

Otherwise, the academy goes relatively easy on the motif of famous warriors and
alumni. Indeed, unmentioned on one tour and unnoticed amid all the passing
tradition was an alumnus of the class of '47, Jimmy Carter, who eventually made
it all the way to Commander in Chief. A later graduate, Roger Staubach, the
football player, is much more celebrated, particularly in tour guides' remarks
at the reverential trophy room devoted entirely to some lopsided history - all
the Navy victories of the football competition with West Point.  Souvenir
football shirts with Staubach's printed number 12 are featured items, for $9.95
each, at the visitors souvenir shop. Not so copies of ''Why Not the Best?''

A more memorialized imperative is Commodore Perry's ''Don't give up the ship,''
is cited alongside his battle flag from the War of 1812, on display in Bancroft
Hall. This building, honeycombed with five miles of corridors, is the sprawling
centerpiece of the academy, where all 4,400 students reside in 1,900 rooms. It
seems the ideal training mock-up for life in the Pentagon. One of these
two-student rooms is outfitted down to textbooks and bellbottom dungarees and is
open, shipshape and spacious, to visitors.

O ne regret for a tourist is that all 65,000 square feet of the midshipmen's
wardroom in Bancroft Hall, described as the largest dining area in the world,
are kept off limits to civilians. For visiting families with youngsters strung
out from miles of fast-food dining, this could have been the cynosure of modern
America, particularly at meal times when all 4,400 meals are served within three
minutes. Alas, only the clanking and ketchupy aromas of this feat were
perceptible to a recent group of touring landlubbers, but the academy's sense of
privacy was appreciated.

The academy prefers to gather visitors at the courtyard statue representing
Tecumseh, a bellicose rendering in bronze of an Indian chief copied from the
original wooden figurehead of the U.S.S.Delaware, commissioned in 1828. This
statue, the midshipmen's rallying point, is actually a likeness of Tamanend,
chief of the Delawares, but middies of the past preferred the fighting name of
Tecumseh and so it has stayed. The statue is now referred to as ''the god of
C,'' which is the academy's passing grade. During exam week midshipmen snap off
left-handed salutes at Tecumseh for luck and toss pennies toward his quiver.
Before the Army game he's done up in war paint.

Students spend many off-hours at physical exercise, as can be seen at the
two-acre Halsey Field House and the new indoor Olympic-size pool and physical
education center. Campus military trophies seem to reflect the competitions of
war and sports. The ship's bell from the aircraft carrier Enterprise rests in
the Bancroft courtyard as a reminder of forebears who served in World War II;
the bell is rung when Navy defeats Army in varsity sports. Similarly, the
400-yearold Japanese bell that Commodore Perry brought from Okinawa is rung on
that greatest of occasions, a football victory over West Point.

There are relatively few war monuments on the grounds on the order of the
Tripolitan Memorial to six naval officers killed in 1804 by Tripoli pirates.
More understated is the pew roped off and lit by a single candle in the chapel
in memory of alumni missing in Vietnam.  The academy's museum, Preble Hall,
ranges across the nation's naval history, covering wars from the Revolution to
Vietnam, and explorations from the poles of earth to outer space, where several
alumni have sailed as astronauts. The museum has more than 50,000 items on
display, including model ship collections and a detailed collection of poignant
artifacts brought back by Navy POW's who spent years in Vietnam, often secretly
writing down in tiny letters any scrap of inspiration they could remember
(''Tell me not in mournful numbers/ Life is but an empty dream. ...'').

These summaries of all the decades and battles invite silent wandering. No less
fascinating than the old-fashioned depiction of the glory of John Paul Jones, or
the fast fading relics of the war with Japan, is the museum's brief printed
summary of how the Vietnam War ended: ''The world and national political
situations dictated restraint. The outcome was the loss of the Republic of South
Vietnam and the restoration of peace.''

A visit to Annapolis, then, can be casually provocative, with no required maze
rigged with canned renditions of ''Anchors Aweigh.'' And the best touch of this
passivity may be in lingering and watching at the campus shoreline, particularly
on a weekend day when the midshipmen indulge at length one of the surviving
passions of the academy, sailing. While the academy has a motor patrol fleet
working all week for seaborne training, it is the sight, snap and slanted power
of the academy sailboats that may leave the most lasting impression. There are
competitive fleets of 26-foot knockabouts, yawls, ocean racing sloops and a
98-foot ketch, Astral. Collectively, they make Annapolis one of the more
colorful campuses of the world, and it comes to life when the students take to
the sea and leave their books behind.

Charting a landlubber's visit
Pomp and Circumstance The Naval Academy's most colorful time is commencement
week, which features special parades on May 21 and 25, stunt flying by the Blue
Angels on May 24, and other activities leading to the graduation ceremony May
26, which is restricted to ticket holders. Other events are open to the public
without charge. Lodgings There are two hotels in the immediate area. Maryland
House (301-263-2641), a handsome historic building on Main Street, charges $33
to $56 for a single, $40 to $70 for a double, $80 to $90 for suites. The
Annapolis Hilton (301-268-7555), at the downtown dock, has rates ranging from
$56 to $97 single; $82 to $123, double. The hotel has an outdoor pool. There
also is a guesthouse, Gibson's Lodgings (301-268-5555), a 200-year-old building
on Prince George Street that is furnished with antiques. Its rates, $33 for a
single and $38 for a couple, includes Continental breakfast. Dining The academy
prohibits picnics but there is a snack bar at the Visitors' Center. Far more
tempting is the array of restaurants that can be reached in a walk of a few
blocks to the waterfront Main Street of old Annapolis. Offerings include the
basics at Mom's, the French menu at Lafayette, the crepes at Cafe Normandy, a
dozen interesting taverns and cafes, and the Penthouse Wardroom atop the Hilton
(dinner for two including wine, $40) and the Treaty of Paris restaurant at
Maryland House, which is known for its fish entrees (dinner for two, $50).
Crabcakes, cold clams, fish and chips, fresh ice cream and cookies can all be
had from one of the vendors at the Marketplace at the dock. There is live jazz
in the King of France tavern on Main Street Wednesday through Sunday. F.X.C.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of midshipmen Map

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 25, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE SERVICE ACADEMIES;
THE DRILL FOR VISITORS AT WEST POINT

SECTION: Section 10; Page 19, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 1694 words


JAMES FERON is chief of the Westchester bureau of The Times.

BY JAMES FERON

O ne day recently the military museum at West Point, one of the most extensive
in the world, was fairly crowded with young parents, middle-aged couples, a trio
from the South and a large religious group moving with others through the
seemingly endless paraphernalia of war. They were slices of population, just as
the corps of cadets at the United States Military Academy cuts across the
nation. But Richard E. Kuehne, director of the museum, had his own story of a
diversity of a different kind.

He said that in mid-May the museum would present a special exhibition of ''cadet
drawings,'' tactical representations of military topography or enemy targets,
and that among the former cadets whose work would be shown were James McNeill
Whistler, who did not graduate, and Ulysses S. Grant, who did. Mr. Kuehne smiled
and spoke of the day that Whistler sketched a bridge - and included two boys
fishing from the span.

An officer glanced at the rendering, he said, and told Whistler to ''remove
those boys from the bridge,'' as irrelevant to the military exercise. The artist
submitted a new version, this time with the boys fishing from the river bank.
That still represented an intrusion, and the officer insisted again, ''Get rid
of those boys.'' Whistler's final version, in a drawing as beloved to the
military as the artist's portrait of his mother would be to the nation, showed
two small tombstones at the river's edge.

West Point may be forbidding, with its stone buildings and strict regimen, but
there is also the human element. If it can be recorded in the playful response
to an officer's command a century ago, it can also be seen in the cadets of
today, who chat and joke as they stride from class to class. And it can be
sensed in much of the great span of history that is present there.

A day at West Point can be exhausting. Cadets like to say there are no
downhills, only uphills, on this promontory, and it may seem so after climbing
to Fort Putnam or returning from the picnic tables at the edge of the Hudson
River. But it can also be exhilarating.

Many of West Point's 300,000 annual guests start at the Visitors' Center, just
inside the main gate at the edge of the village of Highland Falls. The center
offers maps and other information, as well as two 12-minute films depicting
cadet life and tourist highlights.

There is no admission fee to enter the post and no restriction on hours of entry
or exit, although sundown is a recommended time to leave if the visitor has no
nighttime activity such as a sports event or performance to attend. The center
(914-938-2638), open from 8:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M., is the starting point for
guided and selfconducted tours.

The one-hour guided bus tour, held on Saturdays only until June 28, when a
Monday-through-Saturday schedule is followed, leaves at 10 and 11:30 A.M., 1 and
2:30 P.M. and costs $1.50 for adults or $1 for children under 12 years of age.
The tours are run by two travel companies in Highland Falls, A. Bosch & Sons
(914-446-4520) and West Point Tours (914-446-4724), which also make special
arrangements for tours outside their regular schedules.

A printed self-conducted tour directs visitors to the museum first, but that
attraction can consume either a short or long visit and therefore might be more
economically used as the last stop, when a visitor's weariness and available
time are pressing factors. Instead, a tour should begin with Fort Putnam.

Standing high above the academy grounds, it offers a panorama as well as
dramatic testimony to West Point's strategic location at a bend in the river.
The fort, dating from 1778 and refurbished in 1975, has a museum with a terrain
map of the Hudson Highlands and replicas of armaments on the ramparts.

Families with children who need to clamber will be right at home at the fort.
That's the good news; the bad news is that it is a quartermile uphill hike from
the nearest of six major parking lots on the grounds. The easily wearied will
find it a challenge.

Handicapped visitors to West Point might well telephone ahead for specific
information. The Visitors' Center and new buildings like the vast Eisenhower
Hall are accessible, as are the paths bordering the main parade ground. But many
sites, such as the Cadet Chapel, have no ramps. A call to the museum
(914-938-2203) is recommended for special access procedures there.

The Cadet Chapel, built on a hillside. is a superb example of Gothic
architecture. The military theme begins over the door, with the carving of the
great two-handed sword, ''Excalibur,'' and continues inside with clerestory
windows representing 27 of the chief military figures in biblical history.

Extending from the walls along the long nave are original flags of many wars.
The chapel also contains the third largest pipe organ in the world, and the
largest in a religious edifice. The pipes range in length from a quarter-inch to
32 feet.

The parade ground, which felt the tread of Revolutionary War drilling, is still
used for drills. West Point parades are classic, and the highlight of any visit.
Here is the spring schedule: on Thursday and May 3 at 5 P.M.; May 8 at 12:40
P.M.; May 21 at 10:50 A.M.; May 22 at 11 A.M.; May 24 at 10:30 A.M. and May 25
at 2:30 P.M.

There is unlimited access to the grandstand, and to the undulating paths of
adjacent Trophy Point. There, one of the more fascinating relics of past wars
are the links of the Great Chain, which was stretched across the Hudson River at
West Point as a barrier to British ships during the Revolution.

In the amphitheater of Trophy Point, the United States Military Army Band offers
free concerts each Sunday evening at 8 from June 20 through Aug. 21, with the
exception of July 4. The final concert ends with a bang: a rendering of the 1812
Overture, complete with cannonades.

Also within easy walking distance of the Plain, or parade ground, is Fort
Clinton, the lower version of Fort Putnam, as well as a monument to General
Kosciusko and some architectural delights: gingerbread houses and the homes of
the commanding officers.

The West Point Military Museum is open every day except Christmas and New Year's
Day from 10:30 to 4:15 and it, too, is free, although a donation is requested,
and worth it. The museum's collection ranges through armaments, uniforms,
trophies, strategies and many other aspects of wars from Roman times to Vietnam.
There is a jeep, a tank and a command car; spears, guns and a mock-up of ''Fat
Man,'' the first atomic bomb. One display, entitled ''Sic Transit Gloria
Mundi,'' contains the trophies of World War II's losers, including Goering's
pistol, Yamashita's sword and Mussolini's hat.

The museum is more than a collection of relics. Its primary function is to
support the cadets' academic and military education, and so some exhibits change
to reflect new information while others remain static to represent unchanging
strategy. For example, on one display the cities on a terrain map of Southern
battlefields light up to illustrate a recorded 20-minute account of the Civil
War.

There are dioramas and full-scale models of battles and wars, a portion of a
World War I trench - including a mirror on a stick to look over the top - a
collection of military miniatures and another of military armor.

Visitors should take a picnic lunch and use the tables along the river or those
in the woods, all indicated on maps available at the Vistors' Center. One final
word of caution: Take comfortable shoes because there is plenty of walking, even
for the car-borne, and assume that West Point is going to be just a bit chillier
than where you came from.

Getting there
Car, Bus and Boat From New York City by car, cross the George Washington Bridge
and take the Palisades Interstate Parkway to its terminus at Bear Mountain; then
U.S. 9W north to State Route 2l8, following signs to West Point. The route goes
through Highland Falls to the south gate, next to the Vistors' Center. From the
Thomas E. Dewey Thruway, take Harriman exit (No. 16) and follow U.S. 6 to State
Route 293 and the post's northern entrance. Buses leave New York every day from
Gate 230 at the Port Authority Bus Terminal's north wing, at 9:15 and 11:15 A.M.
Return trips leave the south gate of the academy at 3:45 and 5:45 P.M. The
two-hour ride costs $8.70; $16.55 for the round trip. The Day Line's boat trips,
between May 29 and Sept. 12, leave Pier 81 at West 41st Street in Manhattan at
10 A.M. daily, except Monday and except Friday in June and in September after
Labor Day.  (There will be trips on the Monday holidays, Memorial Day on May 31
and July 4.) Boats arrive at West Point at 1 P.M. and leave at 4 P.M. for the
three-hour return trip. Fares: $7.50 round trip ($9 on weekends and holidays);
children (2 to 11 years), half fare.  Threehour bus tours of the academy are
available at the West Point pier for $3; children, half price. Accommodations
The Hotel Thayer (914-446-4731), on the post near the main gate, offers rooms
for from $30, single, to $49, double, and suites for up to $88. Meals at the
hotel cost from a few dollars for self-served salad or soup at lunchtime to $16
for a main course at dinner. The $8.50 Sunday brunch, served from 8:30 A.M. to
2:30 P.M., is popular.  The Visitors' Center (914-938-2638) has a list of area
hotels, motels and restaurants. Nearby attractions include the Museum of the
Hudson Highlands in Cornwall-on-Hud- son, just north of West Point. J.F.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of cadets Map

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FEWER VIETNAMESE REACH THAI COAST

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 899 words

DATELINE: SONGKHLA, Thailand, April 19


Vietnamese ''boat people'' have been arriving on the southern coast of Thailand
in markedly smaller numbers this year than in the first three months of last
year or the year before, according to a field officer here for the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.

Seventy-six boats bearing 1,977 Vietnamese arrived on the southern coast of
Thailand, between Chumphon and the Malaysian border, in the first three months
of this year. The total compares with 5,935 arrivals in the same period of 1981
and 5,672 in the first three months of 1980.

The proportion of boats that have been attacked by Thai pirates has remained the
same, according to preliminary statistics based on reports from United Nations
receiving points for refugees up and down the coast.

Last year, four out of five such boats arriving here were said to have been
attacked while at sea. Among those that were attacked, the ''average'' boat was
attacked 3.5 times. Robbings and beatings of those aboard continued unabated,
and on 44 percent of the boats that were attacked in 1981, the women were raped.


Statistics Holding Steady

''These statistics are holding for 1982,'' said the United Nations officer here
in Songkhla, the largest port in southern Thailand. The official asked not to be
named on the ground that such statistics should come from United Nations
officials in Bangkok.

The Gulf of Thailand has been virtually unpatrolled by armed Thai Government
vessels since last September when a patrol program financed by the United States
expired.

A naval patrol program similar to the one abandoned in September, but organized
this time by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, is expected to
be presented soon for the Thai Government's approval. Eight donor nations have
agreed to contribute $3.6 million for the purchase and operation for six months
of four patrol boats, four Vietnamese fishing boats for use as decoys, four Thai
trawlers, and a computer with which the Thai Government plans to keep track of
the registration numbers of fishing boats in its coastal provinces.

The High Commissioner's office first proposed late last year that it take over
the formerly American-backed program. The Thai Government, however, objected to
a provision that certain foreign diplomats in Bangkok act as monitors. It was
unclear here this week whether diplomatic monitors were still part of the United
Nations plan.

Camp's Population Down

The Songkhla camp for boat people, which held more than 6,000 people for long
periods of 1980 and 1981, had a population of 536 today. The camp is now
officially considered a transit facility, and the Thai Ministry of Interior
regularly buses its population, gathered from smaller camps along the coast, to
a larger camp north of Bangkok.

In a recent case that is said to be typical, 11 Vietnamese men in a fishing boat
landed March 28 on a Union Oil Company rig in the Gulf of Thailand about 150
miles north of here. Eleven others -four women and their babies - who had left
South Vietnam in the same boat had been abducted in an attack by pirates, they
reported.

On April 9, the Herta S, a ship privately financed in Western Europe that
assists boat people, visited the 11 men, who were being kept on a barge attached
to the oil company's rig. The ship provided them with a doctor and two days ago,
after United Nations officials had been granted permission by local Thai
authorities, the men were brought ashore.

Last year, 211 Vietnamese boat people were reportedly abducted, nearly all of
them by Thai pirates. Of those, 133 are still missing.  Some have been taken to
isolated islands. Others, according to local accounts, have ended up in the
brothels of Hat Yai, a busy tourist center a few miles west of Songkhla.

Boats Arriving Now Are Smaller

The Vietnamese boats that have been arriving since last October, when the flood
of boat people began to ebb, have been smaller than earlier boats and have
carried fewer people per boat than in 1980 and early 1981, when 300 or 400
refugees would often pack themselves into one overloaded vessel.

A Vietnamese boat that arrived here March 9, for example, was carrying 32 people
- 15 men, 10 women and 7 children. The boat is still stranded in front of the
Samila Hotel - a reminder that this long, spectacular coast of sandy beaches and
coconut palms, a haven for tourists as well as fishermen and pirates, received
737 Vietnamese refugees during March.

Nearly all the recent boat people have been ethnic Vietnamese. In 1979 and for a
time afterward many of those leaving Vietnam by boat were ethnic Chinese.

The United States is expected to be the largest contributor to the international
program designed to reinstitute Thailand's antipiracy patrols. Among the other
donor nations are Australia, Norway, Switzerland, France and West Germany.

In early June Songkhla, Thailand's main receiving point for seaborne refugees,
will be one of the sites for a major naval exercise involving the United States
Seventh Fleet. The operation, named Cobra Gold, will include a landing by United
States marines as well as joint maneuvers with the Royal Thai Navy.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON AIDE FACES OUSTER OVER DISCLOSURE

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 669 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


The Reagan Administration has begun proceedings to dismiss a Pentagon official
who is accused of unauthorized disclosure of secret information to Congressional
officials and the news media, according to Administration officials.

John C.F. Tillson, director of manpower management in the Office of the
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, has received notice of plans to
dismiss him, according to the officials. They said the notice was sent by his
immediate superior, Assistant Secretary of Defense Lawrence J. Korb.

Mr. Tillson has been charged with disclosing official information to
unauthorized persons, including five Congressional staff aides and a former
Pentagon official, and with having disclosed classified, including top secret,
information to unauthorized persons, evidently including reporters.

A spokesman for the Defense Department, Henry E. Catto Jr., declined to comment
on the case, saying that it was still under investigation. It was unclear
whether others would also be accused.

Plan to Oppose Dismissal

Mr. Tillson's attorney, James H. Heller, said in a telephone interview that his
client had denied the charges in writing and orally and planned to fight the
dismissal move.

The case dates to January when staff aides in the Pentagon told senior officials
in a highly confidential briefing that it might cost up to $750 billion more
than the $1,600 billion planned over the next five years for the armed forces to
acquire the power needed to fulfill the Reagan Administration's new military
strategy.

That strategy calls on the military services to prepare for a protracted
worldwide conflict with the Soviet Union with conventional arms under a
revitalized nuclear shield. It emphasizes the projection of military power
through expensive naval forces in particular. After the briefing, The Washington
Post published an article outlining the briefing given the senior officials. The
sources of the article were not identified.

Termed 'Wish Lists'

Pentagon officials said Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger and Deputy
Secretary Frank C. Carlucci were infuriated by the article.  Mr. Weinberger,
however, minimized the story in public, saying it was merely an accumulation of
''wish lists'' submitted by the military services for new weapons, equipment and
manpower.

Mr. Carlucci ordered an investigation that included polygraph, or lie detector,
tests of all civilian and military officials who attended or might have had
knowledge of the briefing. He led off himself and other high officials,
including the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. David C. Jones.

That led to the notice of proposed dismissal to Mr. Tillson, who served as a
captain in the Army in Vietnam and was twice decorated with silver stars for
valor, according to his attorney. Mr. Tillson is a graduate of West Point and
comes from a long line of professional soldiers.

Mr. Heller said that not only had Mr. Tillson denied the charges under oath but
that the five Congressional officials and the former Pentagon official, Robert
B. Pirie Jr., Mr. Korb's predecessor, had submitted sworn statements that they
had not received the information from Mr. Tillson.

Reporter Defends Official

In an unusual move, The Washington Post reporter who wrote the article, George
C. Wilson, wrote a letter to Mr. Weinberger stating that Mr. Tillson was not the
source and that he was prepared to swear to that, Mr. Heller said.

In most cases, newspaper reporters decline to comment on unnamed sources.  The
charges against Mr. Tillson also accuse him of giving deceptive answers in the
polygraph test when asked whether he was the direct or indirect source of the
information, Mr. Heller said. Mr. Tillson has denied that charge, he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              97 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

OPINIONS ARE MIXED IN ANTINUCLEAR DRIVE'S IMPACT

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1461 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


Representative Timothy E. Wirth, a Democrat who represents Boulder, home of the
University of Colorado, assessed as ''wonderful'' the weeklong series of
lectures, films and entertainment in his district focusing on the perils of
nuclear war.

''I haven't seen a grass-roots movement like this since the anti-Vietnam War
effort,'' he said.  Just 100 miles away, in Colorado Springs, site of key
military installations, Representative Ken Kramer, a Republican on the House
Armed Services Committee, observed, ''The nuclear freeze movement just isn't
very strong here.''

''It's one of the top three issues here,'' said Representative Ray Kogovsek, a
Democrat who represents the part of Colorado Springs not represented by Mr.
Kramer.

Wide Range of Opinions

Colorado typifies the varied opinions about the strength of the nationwide
movement to halt the nuclear arms race and the effects of last week's activities
aimed at examining the horrors of nuclear war.

For a week, Americans participated in events ranging from the academic to the
athletic, all under the loose leadership of an organization called Ground Zero,
a nonpartisan project whose name derives from the military term for the spot at
which a nuclear weapon is detonated.

While there is disagreement about whether the grass-roots movement will burgeon
or fizzle, the Reagan Administration has begun watching the antinuclear weapons
movement with heightened concern.

In 650 towns and cities, 350 colleges and more than 1,200 high schools, Ground
Zero spokesmen say, a million Americans watched films, danced and ran,
circulated petitions calling for a freeze in Soviet and American nuclear
arsenals and listened to debates about esoteric strategic topics.

Mixed Results Are Seen

''Ground Zero was an undeniable success, the largest simultaneous learning
experience about the threat of nuclear war that Americans have ever
experienced,'' said the head of Ground Zero, Roger C.  Molander, a former
National Security Council arms control specialist. Interviews with local
organizers, politicians and analysts indicate mixed results, however.

Many Ground Zero and nuclear freeze proponents agreed that most activity in the
week was on the two coasts and in upper Middle Western cities:

- In Portland, Ore., several hundred people braved hailstorms on the banks of
the Willamette River last Sunday for speeches and songs about the threat of
nuclear war.

- In California Tuesday, supporters of a nuclear freeze submitted petitions with
about 750,000 signatures, twice the number required to place the freeze proposal
on the state ballot in November.

- In Detroit, a bridegroom distributed nuclear freeze petitions at his wedding
reception to help collect 230,000 signatures needed to place the question on the
Michigan ballot next fall. Some 80,000 signatures have already been collected.

- In Memphis, college students and teachers lined a freeway at designated points
in the rush hour, carrying signs indicating the potential level of destruction
and death from a nuclear explosion at that distance from ground zero. While
protests in the South were neither large nor emotional, organizers were
encouraged by growth of the movement in a region long recognized as
conservative, intensely patriotic and military-minded.

Light Turnout in Utah

There were some empty halls and frustrated supporters. In Salt Lake City, 25
people attended a rally Thursday at the downtown Federal Building Plaza, where
last year more than 1,000 people had protested the planned deployment in Utah of
the MX missile system.

''People are burned out from the MX,'' said Louis Borgenicht, a member of a
group called Physicians for Social Responsibility.  In Concord, N.H., a ''run
for your life'' race failed to materialize, and in New York, only one of eight
scheduled runners turned out for a similar race. Last Monday, a rally on the
Common after the Boston Marathon attracted only 300 people.

''Students are apathetic,'' complained Robert Sorcher, a student who directs
Harvard-Radcliffe Students for Social Responsiblity.

Sees Gain in Supporters

Ground Zero organizers and proponents of a nuclear freeze maintain that
attendance is not a useful barometer of support for the movement opposing
nuclear weapons. Peter Stein, a physics professor at Cornell University who
heads United Campuses to Prevent Nuclear War, said that the week helped ''expand
the hard core of supporters needed to carry on in months ahead.''

The campaigners now seek a more direct involvement in the political process.
Ground Zero plans to sponsor campus forums this fall where political candidates
will be asked to discuss disarmament issues. While Ground Zero will not endorse
candidates, Mr. Stein said that his campus group would.

There are other signs that the movement is becoming more politically oriented.
The Nuclear Weapons Freeze Campaign, based in St. Louis, has hired a public
relations firm to gain support for its cause and to increase its political
impact.

On Monday, several advertisers and business people will meet in New York to
organize ''Freeze PAC,'' a political action committee whose goal is to provide
funds solely for candidates who support the freeze.

Future of Movement

Whether the movement's political efforts will bring about changes depends on
continued growth, and this, critics and supporters acknowledge, is uncertain.

The movement's goal, preventing nuclear war, ''has a certain abstractness,''
Robert Jay Lifton, a research psychiatrist at Yale University who supports a
nuclear freeze, admitted.

Analysts agree that the weapons race and the threat of nuclear disaster are not
unrelenting. Nor, they add, do the issues affect people directly like
unemployment, military drafts and American death counts in the Vietnam War.
Nuclear peril, moreover, is not tangible; it cannot be seen and touched, like
the foam from detergents in streams that helped spur the ecology movement a
decade ago.

The movement, organizers agree, appears to have scant appeal to blacks and
Hispanic Americans.  Several politicians sympathetic to the freeze said
privately that they feared being labeled ''antidefense'' by opponents next fall.
Some doubted that arms control was an issue that would sway many votes.

'Distorted Impression' on Freeze

Tully Plesser, a poll-taker who works mainly for Republicans, discounted
numerous surveys indicating that 60 to 70 percent of the nation favored a freeze
on nuclear weapons. The attention from the news media, he said, ''creates a
distorted impression of an opinion trend when, in fact, many people have no
opinion at all, or will be slow to change their minds.''

By contrast, many analysts argue that the movement is bound to grow. Mr. Lifton,
who foresees ''ebbs and flows'' for the campaign, argued that expansion was
likely both because doctors and religious leaders are leaders of the cause and
because the movement is not confined to the nation's campuses nor restricted by
party affiliation.

''This is not the Hula-Hoop of politics,'' said Patrick H.  Caddell, the Carter
Administration's poll-taker. ''This is no fad. It was not organized centrally,
but was a prairie fire that ignited simultaneously across the land. The
so-called leaders have been trying for months to catch up with the people.''

Many analysts agreed the freeze campaign had been stengthened by Administration
discussion of the possibility of fighting or winning a ''limited nuclear war''
and public comparison of the superpowers' nuclear capacities. This and the
absence of meaningful arms control negotiations, sharply rising military budgets
and what they contend is the Administration's generally confrontational approach
toward the Soviet Union have fueled the movement.

The Reagan Administration has reversed its hostile position toward the movement.
President Reagan said that he was ''heart and soul'' in sympathy with the goals
of the movement, but he added that establishing strategic parity was the only
way to accomplish those goals.

Several Administration officials said that they were confident that the
movement's concerns would be addressed when President Reagan begins negotiations
on controlling strategic arms with the Soviet Union, perhaps this summer.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of protesters

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              98 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 26, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SURTAX PLAN DRAWS BROAD CRITICISM

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1215 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 25


The proposed three-year surtax on upper-income taxpayers, which the Reagan
Administration and Congressional leaders seem willing to accept as part of a
budget compromise, is coming under fire from conservatives and liberals.

As discussed last week by the Senate, House and Administration negotiators, the
surtax would be 4 percent of Federal income taxes for 1983 above some amount,
probably $5,000. For example, a taxpayer whose normal tax bill came to $5,700
would pay an extra 4 percent of $700, or $28.

Administration and Congressional aides said that the intent was to impose the
tax only on families or individuals with $40,000 or more of gross income.

The Heritage Foundation, a conservative Washington public-policy organization,
said during the weekend that the surtax would invite ''economic disaster.'' At 4
percent, it ''is too small to reduce the budget deficit appreciably, yet large
enough to further depress economic activity, increase unemployment and delay
recovery,'' Thomas M. Humbert, the Heritage's Walker Fellow in Economics, said
in a paper.

Mr. Walker's point was supported by Congressional analysts who said that the
extra revenue would come to $4.4 billion in fiscal 1984, or about 10 percent of
the extra revenue projected as necessary by an Administration working paper.
''It's a mighty pale substitute for getting rid of the third year'' of the
three-phase tax cut enacted in 1981, commented a Democratic tax specialist in
the House.

Repeal of ''the third year,'' the 10 percent tax cut scheduled for July 1, 1983,
would produce $32 billion of extra revenue in fiscal 1984, it is estimated.

As for ''economic disaster,'' Mr. Walker contended that as a result of higher
taxes on upper-income earners, ''the incentive structure will be twisted to
encourage the rich to take a trip to Monte Carlo or buy a bauble rather than
invest in taxable activities that will earn them too small an after-tax
return.''

That estimate was rejected last week by Treasury Secretary Donald T. Regan.
Evidently anticipating such criticism, he told a business audience that the
disincentive effect would be negligible. He noted that the surtax effectively
would lift the top rate on individuals to 52 percent from 50 percent now, an
increase he portrayed as trivial.

Although he publicly signaled that the Administration could live with the
surtax, Mr. Regan was said by aides to dislike it on the grounds that it was ''a
nuisance'' that raised little revenue. The Secretary was reported to be
considering other revenue-raising ideas he might advance if the budget
negotiations collapse.

Jepsen Criticizes Surtax

The surtax also has been attacked by Senator Roger W. Jepsen, Republican of
Iowa, vice chairman of the Joint Economic Committee.  In an article he sent to
newspapers in his state, the Senator contended that the surtax was part of a
larger, mistaken strategy for trying to help the economy by tightening fiscal
policy and making credit easier. A few months ago, only Democrats were publicly
advocating such a policy mix. Of late, Administration officials have come close
to articulating the same line with their emphasis on smaller budget deficits as
a prerequisite to lower interest rates.

''History shows it just won't work,'' Senator Jepsen asserted.  ''You just
cannot trade a tight fiscal policy for loose money,'' he added, ''because you
are trading apples for oranges. Fiscal problems require fiscal solutions and
monetary problems require monetary solutions.''

As for deficits and the economy, Senator Jepsen said in a study to be released
Monday that ''the conventional wisdom is all wrong in stating that rising Reagan
Administration budget deficits will imperil economic recovery.''

The surtax also has been criticized as inequitable by two tax planners who
usually disagree, Joseph A. Pechman, of the Brookings Institution, and Senator
Bob Dole, Republican of Kansas and chairman of the Finance Committee. Both have
noted that the surtax would be avoided by high-income taxpayers who have managed
to write down their taxes to negligible sums by the use of depletion, retirement
savings, real estate and other tax shelters. ''Four percent of zero is zero,'' a
Dole aide said.

To advance his contention that the surtax would erode personal savings, Mr.
Humbert of the Heritage Foundation reviewed experience under the surtax enacted
in 1968 to help finance the Vietnam War.  Then, he said, ''the tax revenue
collected was largely offset by reductions in savings.'' That was the price, he
argued, of the 1969 budget surplus, the only one since 1960.

Applied to Corporations

The Vietnam surtax was 7.5 percent in 1968, 10 percent in 1969 and 2.5 percent
in 1970. Low-income taxpayers were exempted. It applied to corporations as well
as individuals. The budget negotiators, so far as is known, have not discussed
applying a 1983 surtax to corporations, but it would surprise no one if the
Democratic-controlled Ways and Means Committee were to adopt such a provision.

As for curtailment of savings, Mr. Humbert traced the decline in the personal
savings rate in 1968-69. In reply, James K. Galbraith, staff director of the
Joint Economic Committee, said the important thing was not the decline in
personal savings - which he agreed was likely to occur, especially among
high-income persons - but the larger change in total national savings. That
change, Mr. Galbraith said, would be on the plus side because in the national
income accounts, every dollar the deficit is reduced is an additional dollar of
national savings.

Mr. Galbraith explained it this way: If a high-income taxpayer saved 30 cents of
every dollar of extra income, then his surtax dollar would come 70 percent from
consumption and 30 percent from savings. Consequently, for every dollar the
Federal deficit were reduced, the nation's total savings would increase by 70
cents.

'More of a Symbol'

For liberal Democrats, led by House Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the surtax is
a way of trying to reverse the tax relief for upperincome taxpayers delivered in
the 1981 tax act, which the Democrats argued was tilted too much toward the
wealthy. But given the limited revenue that would be raised, $4.4 billion,
Congressional tax aides say ''the surtax would be more of a symbol than a
deficit-reducing measure.''

Said one analyst, who requested anonymity because he is supposed to be
nonpartisan: ''The Democrats are being sold a bill of goods if they accept the
surtax for substantial reductions in entitlements.  They're not getting good
value for the goods they're delivering.''

Senior Democrats such as Dan Rostenkowski, chairman of the Ways and Means
Committee, say they would much prefer to repeal the 1983 tax cut. As for
warnings from supply-side advocates that the voters would rise up in wrath, Mr.
Rostenkowski told a reporter, ''You're not really taking something from people
that they're enjoying.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 28, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EXCERPTS FROM HAIG'S SPEECH ON FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1926 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 27


Following are excerpts from an address by Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig
Jr. to the annual meeting of the United States Chamber of Commerce here today as
provided by the State Department:

Special to the New York Times

WASHINGTON, April 27 - Following are excerpts from an address by Secretary of
State Alexander M. Haig Jr. to the annual meeting of the UnitedStates Chamber of
Commerce heretoday as provided by the State Department:

The United States found it difficult to deal with the complex international
situation that has emerged over the past decade. The economic growth of Western
Europe and Japan, the Sino-Soviet conflict and the transfer of wealth to the oil
producers have softened the sharp edges of American and Soviet dominance over
the postwar world.  The global military balance, however, is still the province
of the superpowers.

Today it has become essential for the United States and its allies to deal with
the new realities. Three trends in particular raise crucial questions about the
prospects for Western security - and international peace -for the remainder of
the century.

First, lagging Western strength. The United States has gradually lost many of
the military advantages over the Soviet Union that once provided a margin of
safety for the West - in some cases by choice, in others through neglect and
error. Meanwhile, the Western alliance has suffered increasing poliical and
economic strain.

Second, the increasing interdependence of the West and the developing countries,
many of which adopt a strident public stance against Western interests and
ideals. The third world has emerged in all of its diversity with its fragile
unity already fragmented by regional conflict and global rivalry.

Third, the emergence of the Soviet Union as a global military power,
increasingly bold in the use of its might to promote violence, notably in areas
of strategic significance to the West. This trend has developed even as the
Communist bloc, once the instrument of Soviet purposes, has been shaken by the
Sino-Soviet schism and growing internal problems. Chronic economic failure has
eroded the appeal of Marxist-Leninist ideology.

Let us ask ourselves, as others are surely asking about us, whether we can
change these trends. I believe that we can.  The American people have emerged
from their recent experiences convinced anew that there is no substitute for
American leadership if we are to live in a world hospitable to our society and
our values.  In the 1980's this new American consensus for a more vigorous
defense of our interests demand a new balance in the style of our foreign
policy.

A balanced American foreign policy sustained by this consensus will enable
America to lead once again.

Ties to the Allies

First, our relationship with our allies. We cannot pretend to lead unless we
rally to our side those societies that share our values.  We must recognize,
however, that the trends of the past decade have contributed to a rising sense
of frustration between the U.S.  and its partners. U.S.-European relations, in
particular, have been distressed by the convergence of several events:

- The loss of American strategic superiority and questions about the role of
nuclear weapons in NATO strategy.

- Increasing European political and economic stakes in detente and East-West
trade despite aggressive Soviet actions in Afghanistan, Poland and elsewhere.

- The recent record of low growth and high inflation among the industrial
democracies leading to pressure for protectionist measures.

Arguments Are Second Nature

Angered by what they see as European reluctance to face the Soviet challenge,
some Americans have been tempted to argue for withdrawal of American forces.
Others, disturbed by persistent economic problems, have thought to retaliate by
erecting protectionist barriers.

Arguments over burden-sharing are second nature to any large alliance of
sovereign nations. The current trans-Atlantic exchanges, however, must be put in
historical perspective. Americans should not forget that our NATO allies
substantially increased their defense spending over the past decade while the
United States was reducing its defense effort. Nor should we ignore that the
European members of NATO supply a high percentage of the air, ground and naval
forces that constitute the conventional portion of deterrence in Europe.

In the days ahead, as we and our allies discuss outstanding issues, the U.S.
must exert not only strong but coherent leadership. The allies must know where
we are going if we expect them to go with us.

Much of our agenda will be dominated by the search for more constructive
relations with the East. This search, arms control and the military balance are
all interrelated, not independent and sometimes competing objectives. It is
essential that we carry out NATO's two track decision of 1979 to go forward with
the modernization of intermediate range nuclear systems while simultaneosly
pursuing arms control negotiations with the Soviet Union designed to limit these
systems.

For too long we have pretended that a relaxation of tensions in Europe would be
immune to Soviet attempts to change the balance of power. For too long we have
imagined that the arms control process, in and of itself, could preserve the
balance.

Finally, we should be conscious of our historic responsibilities as free
societies in a world where individual liberty is too often suppressed.

The Third World

Let me turn now to another major area where we have a great opportunity for
change: our relations with the developing nations. It is one of the ironies of
our age that as nations have become more powerful their destinies have grown
more interdependent.

Together, we and the leaders of the developing countries have an opportunity to
make sure that this interdependence is a source of mutual benefit, founded on
the solid ground of common interest. The consequences of failure to cooperate
would be disastrous for both America and the third world. But such cooperation
must be based on the diverse realities of the present, not the slogans of the
past.

The realities of diversity, conflict and great potential are bringing about a
crucial shift in the attitudes of many third world nations. Their leaders face
excruciating choices. Marxist-Leninist ideology has often been the locomotive
that brought them to power but it has not become an engine for progress.

As a consequence, many countries with direct experience of the Soviet embrace
are quietly attempting to broaden their relations, to encourage foreign
investment and to reduce dependence on a patron who has little to offer but the
tools and techniques of violence.

The Soviet Union

Finally, our country faces an historic opportunity in dealing with the Soviet
Union.  In the name of a utopian ideal, Soviet totalitarianism imposes a single
social model not only on its own people but on an expanding empire. In contrast,
the forces of democracy seek to build national and international institutions
based on diversity, individual choice and peaceful change. The competition
between these two approaches will continue.

This rivalry, however, is constrained by another central fact of our time -
nuclear weapons. Total victory by military means has become a formula for mutual
catastrophe. Even the use of conventional force risks unpredictable
consequences.

Our enduring challenge is therefore to develop and to sustain a relationship
with the Soviet Union which recognizes that the competition will proceed but
constrains the use or threat of force.  We can develop a lasting framework for
this relationship if we avoid the extremes that have distorted American foreign
policy over the post war period:

- First, that expressions of American good will and readiness to negotiate could
somehow substitute for American strength and would move U.S.-Soviet relations
from competition to cooperation.

- Second, that a posture of confrontation, a refusal to negotiate, would somehow
lead to capitulation by the other superpower.

Moscow's Global Actions

The result of America's wishful thinking and profound national introspection has
been swift and sure. Moscow has acted forcibly to expand its dominions. In
Vietnam, in Kampuchea, in Southern Africa and Ethiopia, in Afghanistan and now
in Central America we have reaped the grim harvest of self-delusion.

As we rebuild our strength and seek once more to convince the Soviet Union that
restraint is in our mutual interest, we must not allow ourselves the error of
another extreme. We cannot claim that we are too weak to negotiate and at the
same time insist that we are strong enough for a policy of all-out
confrontation.

An American approach to the Soviet Union that balances strength and negotiations
offers the best hope of significant accomplishment.  The Soviet attempt to
change the balance of power has produced a backlash of increasing international
resistance. Moscow has earned the fear and enmity of many nonaligned states
through aggression in Afghanistan and support for Vietnam's subjugation of
Kampuchea.

This backlash comes when Soviet prospects have dimmed. Moscow's allies are in
deep economic trouble and the Soviet growth rate itself is declining.
Agricultural shortfalls persist. Above all, as Poland has shown, the Soviet
model and Soviet ideology are increasingly rejected by the workers themselves.
  Messages for the Soviet Union

Over the decade of the 1980's, as the Soviet Union experiences a transition in
leadership, it is likely to face greater economic difficulties and growing
international isolation - a marked change from an era of unusual stability and
expansion.

During this sensitive and dangerous period of changing superpower relationships,
the United States must make clear to the Soviet Union that there are penalties
for aggression and incentives for restraint. We cannot conduct business as usual
in the face of Soviet adventurism in Afghanistan or Soviet-instigated repression
in Poland.

An essential part of our strategy is to continue to differentiate among
Communist countries themselves. This is a longstanding American policy that
encourages autonomy and diversity.

Finally, just as the Soviet Union gives active support to Marxist-Leninist
forces in the West and the South, we must give vigorous support to democratic
forces wherever they are located - including countries which are now Communist.
We want the competition of democracy and Communism to be conducted in peaceful
and political terms, but we will provide other means if the Soviet Union insists
upon violent methods of struggle.

Continued Competition

In sum, the facts do not support the belief that there can be an early, sudden
or dramatic reconciliation of Soviet and American interests. The competition
will continue. But we can make the Soviets more cautious by our action. And as a
new generation of Soviet leaders emerges, we can signal the benefits of greater
restraint.

Ultimately, a foreign policy is the test of a nation's character.  Today, the
test of our character is whether we care enough about the values that make life
worth living, the inner beliefs that have sustained Western civilization. Over
the centuries, a certain idea of man has taken hold in our societies. The right
of the individual, the responsibility of government to the governed and the rule
of law have distinguished our way of life. These ideals are the true source of
our strength and the true source of the weakness of our adversaries.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Alexander Haig

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              100 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 29, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

11 AWARDS GIVEN BY SOCIETY OF MAGAZINE EDITORS

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 677 words


Newsweek magazine and The Atlantic each won two of the 11 National Magazine
Awards presented yesterday by the American Society of Magazine Editors.

Newsweek captured the prizes for both a single-topic issue and for general
excellence for a magazine with a circulation over one million. The Atlantic won
awards for public service with its article ''The Education of David Stockman,''
by William Greider, and in the category of essays and criticism for its series
on dance by Holly Bruback.

The 11 winners were choosen by 16 magazine editors and journalism professors
from 673 entries submitted by 226 magazines.  The winners of the award,
established in 1965, were announced at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel. Citations to
individuals were read and the editors of winning publications received plaques
and reproductions of an Alexander Calder stabile, ''The Elephant.''

The winners: General Excellence, circulation over one million -Newsweek ''for
its consistency of high-quality reporting and editing, especially of events that
require throughness and a perspective beyond the often meager, surface coverage
generally provided to the public.'' General Excellence, circulation of 400,000
to one million - Science '81 ''for closing the gap between science and citizens
with perceptive reporting, good writing, smart design - and discreet
perception.'' General Excellence, circulation of 100,000 to 400,000 - Rocky
Mountain for ''reporting and interpreting in a quiet but authoritative voice and
with excellent graphics, a part of America that combines open spaces, a romantic
past and a way of life that, in the words of its editors, offers both joys and
complexities.'' General Excellence, circulation under 100,000 -Camera Arts, for
''a sensitive combination of what has been memorable and of the new trends in
photography, the universal language. The text, although unobtrusive, completes
with clarity what the reader wants to know about the subject matter.'' Public
Service - The Atlantic for ''The Education of David Stockman,'' by William
Greider, whose ''exclusive and highly enterprising article is recommended for
its through, fair and intelligent handling of a complex subject central to the
ultimate success or failure of the Reagan Administration.'' Fiction - The New
Yorker for ''its major role in the continuing history of American short
fiction'' and this year for ''A Correspondence Course,'' by Nadine Gordimer,
Edna O'Brien's short story, ''Sister Imelda'' and ''The City,'' by John Updike.
Reporting - The Washingtonian for ''The Saving of the President,'' by John
Pekkanen for ''an absorbing story, meticulously reported and smoothly written,
of the attempt to assassinate President Reagan. The author reveals how much
closer the President came to death than the public realized at the time.''
Essays and Criticism - The Atlantic for its series on dance by Holly Bruback. In
their citation, the judges said the the author brought ''wit, vivacity, insight
and illumination to dance criticism.'' Service to the Individual - Philadelphia
magazine for ''That Certain Smile,'' by Carol Saline, ''a carefully documented
report on an overdue reevaluation in dentistry.'' Single-Topic Issue - Newsweek
for ''What Vietnam Did to Us,'' by Peter Goldman for ''revealing and explaining
a problem we've chosen to ignore: what's happened to the survivors of a war we
lost and came to hate.'' Design - Nautical Quarterly, for its ''purity,
freshness and consistency of style that is all too rare.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              101 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 29, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
A Man of Few Words

BYLINE: By David Bird and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 166 words


In his nine years as chief spokesman for the United States Supreme Court,
Barrett McGurn, who announced his retirement last week, has earned a reputation
for reticence. It has been suggested that his favorite response to inquiries,
''I won't have anything on that,'' be inscribed on a rubber stamp.

When he does give answers, Mr. McGurn's replies have often been so elliptical
that some reporters covering the Court have considered it a journalistic coup
just to get him to give a firm ''no comment.''

The 67-year-old Mr. McGurn spent 31 years with The New York Herald Tribune
before joining the Government. As a State Department aide, he presided over the
daily briefings in Saigon that became known as ''the 5 o'clock follies.'' He
took the Court post in 1973.

Mr. McGurn is still as reticent as ever.  In an interview about his retirement
plans, he said he would be writing a book, but then refused to say what it would
be about.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              102 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               April 29, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

A Vietnam Memorial To Be Built in Albany

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Page 23, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 181 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, April 28


The site for a state memorial to victims and veterans of the Vietnam War was
announced today.  John C. Egan, State Commissioner of General Services, said
that a courtyard in the Empire State Plaza in Albany had been set aside for the
monument.

''I think that New York State will have a memorial here that's going to be an
example to the rest of the nation,'' Mr. Egan told more than 500 New York
veterans here to lobby for veterans' legislation.

The Commissioner said that a courtyard adjacent to the Justice Building had been
designated for the memorial. The building is across the street from the Capitol.

''The courtyard is an intimate, somewhat cloistered part of this vast complex,
and will offer a quiet place for reflection,'' Mr. Egan said.

He told the veterans that the monument was ''not intended to be an apology'' for
those who served during the Vietnam ''tragedy.'' ''Veterans are very proud of
what they've done,'' he said. ''It was a tremendous nobility on the part of
those who served.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              103 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 30, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

FILM: 'SOILDER GIRL' IN TODAY'S ARMY

SECTION: Section C; Page 11, Column 3; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 669 words


''Soldier Girls'' was shown as part of the 1981 New York Film Festival at Alice
Tully Hall. Following are excerpts from a review by Janet Maslin in The New York
Times of Sept. 27, 1981. The film opens today at the Agee Room of the Bleecker
Street Cinema, 144 Bleecker Street.

''SOLDIER GIRLS'' is an extraordinary look at a platoon of women undergoing
basic training at Fort Gordon, Ga. The enormous strain the women are under, the
sadism of their superiors and the element of role-playing inherent in Army life
combine to create some tremendously dramatic moments, which have been recorded
most effectively by Nicholas Broomfield and Joan Churchill. Scene after scene in
''Soldier Girls'' shows the truth to be much, much stranger than fiction.
''Private Benjamin,'' indeed.

Sometimes the drill sergeants try to be soothing. ''We never lost a war, I don't
care what you heard about Vietnam,'' one says during a lecture on military
history. Another lecture, on ''The Friendly Use of Nuclear Weapons'': ''This
morning I'm going to tell you the things you need to know to protect yourself
from nuclear and chemical weapons.''

One sergeant, trying to calm a recruit who is frightened of her gun, insists:
''That weapon is not going to hurt you. That weapon has never hurt anybody!''
Another gives a demonstration of what to do if you are alone in the woods,
hungry and without a knife, should you happen to find a chicken. In full view of
the horrified recruits, and in view of the camera, he bites the chicken's head
off. One girl prays for the chicken's soul.

The sadism is stunning, especially when demonstrated by white male sergeants
against black female recruits. The worst instance involves a small white woman
in glasses named Clara Alves, who gets into trouble when she is given a punitive
order to dig a ditch for hours and hours. After nightfall, she has had enough,
and she begins to scream. She is hauled off and browbeaten by two men and a
woman amazingly oblivious to the camera.

''You haven't functioned as a human being, I doubt, since you were about 15 -
you stopped being a member of the human race,'' one of them tells Private Alves.
And that's just for openers. She is also pronounced ''despicable.'' And one of
the sergeants asks her to ''do me a favor - don't have any children.'' Private
Alves tries very hard not to register any emotion.

A black woman named Joann Johnson, who with Private Alves is one of the women
the film pays special attention to, is told: ''You are the type that irritates
people just by your entire presence, without even opening your mouth. Haven't
you ever noticed that throughout your entire life, Johnson?''

On the lighter side, there are glimpses of the women in their barracks, where
the black recruits burst into a joyous rap-style song and dance, and where one
white woman spontaneously offers what is surely one of the most syrupy
renditions of ''The Sound of Music'' ever recorded.

Mr. Broomfield and Miss Churchill let the material speak for itself, presenting
it with an effective even-handedness - the nastiest of the sergeants makes an
unexpectedly touching speech late in the film - and without unnecessary
footnotes. The measure of their expertise is not just the skill with which their
film has been put together - although that is considerable - but also the
apparent ease with which they won their subjects' confidence and got to the
heart of the matter.

Stranger Than Fiction
SOLDIER GIRLS, directed by Nicholas Broom- field and Joan Churchill; photography
by Miss Churchill; edited by Mr. Broomfield; released by First Run Features.
WITH Joann Johnson, Jackie Hall and Clara Alves and Sergeants Abing, Bertling
and Taylor.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              104 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 1, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
U.S. and 6 Other Nations Block Vietnam Food Aid

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 155 words

DATELINE: ROME, April 30


The United States, along with Argentina, Canada, West Germany, Japan, Thailand
and Britain, have blocked a $5.3 million food-aid program for Vietnam at the
executive council meeting of the United Nations World Food Program, the agency's
officials reported today.

Nguyen Anm Vu, the Vietnamese delegate, accused the United States of using
technical ''pretexts to hide its political hostility'' toward Vietnam and to
prevent the agency from extending food aid to his country.

Roger Sorenson, the United States delegate, said Vietnam was not eligible to
receive food because it had not shown ''a strong commitment to its own
development.'' He said in an interview that the United States had detected
''massive deliberate diversions of resources to purposes that carry with them no
benefit whatsoever to Vietnamese people.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              105 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 1, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

Books of The Times;
Behind the Scenes

BYLINE: By ANATOLE BROYARD

SECTION: Section 1; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 794 words


THE PAST HAS ANOTHER PATTERN: Memoirs. By George W. Ball. Illustrated. 527
pages. W.W. Norton. $19.95.

George W. Ball was a handyman of politics, a Mister Fixit, someone who could
swallow any amount of rhetoric and spit out common sense.  He was to Presidents
and other high-level officials of the Government what a good editor is to an
author. Trained as a lawyer, he was a prosecuting attorney of ideas.

He had more uses than a Swiss army knife. He could talk to the heads of foreign
governments, pull together a vital task force overnight, step into almost any
kind of position, or draft a definitive position paper. He understood both the
architecture and the choreography of power.

So far as I can make out from reading ''The Past Has Another Pattern'' - his
memoirs of almost 50 years of public service - he wanted nothing for himself
beyond the satisfaction of being usefully employed in the service of his
country. One is tempted to say that he's the kind of American we don't produce
any more. Though he attended no church, his attitude toward his work can best be
described as religious.

He was at the secret heart of so many high-level decisions and explains so
lucidly how those decisions were arrived at - the rational and irrational forces
behind them - that I can't help feeling that the publication of this book is
almost dangerous. Anyone who reads it will know too much about us. But then I
suppose Mr. Ball could say that ''If God knows all, I fear him not.'' If our
political enemies could actually see how we function, they might even begin to
believe that we sometimes mean what we say.

With almost superhuman self-discipline, Mr. Ball resists the temptation of the
insider to dramatize his own position. Or perhaps, being the kind of man he is,
it never even occurred to him to do so.  ''I had no flair,'' he says, ''for
politics as an art form.'' He seems to have no visible ego-hunger, and one
wonders how such a lowkeyed impulse sustained him through so many years of
difficult, life-consuming service. He manages to be amused by politics without
becoming cynical about it.

''The Past Has Another Pattern'' is a capsule history of our Government's
political, diplomatic, military and economic performance from the Franklin D.
Roosevelt to the Jimmy Carter Administrations - with asides on Charles de
Gaulle, the Shah of Iran, Jean Monnet, one of France's eccentric geniuses,
various Soviet foreign ministers - in short, a cast of thousands. With his
phenomenal knack for succinctly framing issues, Mr. Ball is a blessing to the
layman.

Though he was a lifetime friend of Adlai E. Stevenson, Mr. Ball feels that,
before his first Presidential nomination, Stevenson took too much pleasure in
his dance of demureness, in the purity of his motives. Surprisingly enough,
Stevenson read few books, Mr. Ball says, and derived his ideas from the comments
and opinions of others. His speeches were works of art, but not effective as
advocacy. He was too susceptible to praise, especially because, as a divorced
man, he lacked the ''institutionalized candid friend'' (a wife).

Under John F. Kennedy, ''hubris was endemic in Washington.'' When, after talking
to de Gaulle, Mr. Ball warned President Kennedy that we would simply repeat the
French mistakes in Vietnam, the President replied, ''George, you're just crazier
than hell.'' Yet Mr. Ball's analysis of the American role in Vietnam is a small
masterpiece of detailed, nonpartisan analysis. Even after all the books, it
still reads with a tense freshness.

To a layman like myself, his description of Russia's position in the world today
is particularly interesting. It's exhausted, he says, as a fount of ideology.
It's just a later version of the old Czar, and we ought to pay more attention to
its actions and less to its largely discredited theories. It would be to our
advantage, he suggests, to strip the word Communist of its vaguely theological
overtones. Perhaps he can do something for ''capitalist'' too.

Speaking of Presidents in general, Mr. Ball says that they should never be
permitted outside the country except when accompanied by firm and experienced
keepers. When he disagreed with the Government over Vietnam, friends urged him
to dramatize his disagreement by resigning his position as Under Secretary of
State, and Mr. Ball has some sardonic things to say about the usefulness of the
romantic resignation.

In fact, he has shrewd, sardonic and useful things to say about most matters. He
has some of Samuel Johnson's talent for the satirical definition. Yet ''The Past
Has Another Pattern'' is not pessimistic. To all the doom-presagers who say that
the handwriting is on the wall, Mr. Ball answers that, in the spirit of the
times, it may be just graffiti.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of George W. Ball

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              106 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AIR AND SEA BATTLES ERUPT OFF FALKLANDS AS ARGENTINA COUNTERS ATTACKS BY
BRITISH;
BASES ARE SHELLED

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1537 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Sunday, May 2


A major air and sea battle erupted around the Falkland Islands Saturday as the
conflict between Britain and Argentina over the former British colony turned
into open warfare.

The fighting started after British bombers attacked two airfields on the
Falklands early Saturday.  Later, British destroyers and frigates bombarded
Argentine shore bases on the Falklands from close range with their 4.5-inch
naval guns, dispatches from the South Atlantic said. The British Broadcasting
Corporation reported that fighters ''cartwheeled across the sky in a fierce
dogfight'' with Argentine aircraft. With the onset of darkness in the combat
zone, news reaching here remained confused and fragmentary.

British Frigate Damaged

One British frigate was damaged, but not seriously, by an Argentine bomber
during a concerted counterattack, according to a report from Peter Archer, a
correspondent of the British Press Association.  Military officials in London
said that an Argentine Mirage III fighter had been shot down in aerial combat by
British Harrier jets and that an Argentina Canberra bomber had been hit as it
apparently tried to attack British ships. Correspondents in the combat zone said
two Mirages had been shot down.

Some reports said British helicopters were attacking Argentine troop
concentrations as the British battle fleet moved closer to the islands. Other
British choppers were searching for the downed Argentine pilots, the reports
said.

Capt. Lynn Middleton of the carrier Hermes said that no British planes had been
lost and that there were no British air casualties.

Two-Stage Attack on Airfields

The large-scale fighting broke out several hours after British bombers attacked
two airfields in the islands, damaging runways and aircraft, according to the
Defense Ministry. The two-stage bombing attack, the first British strike at the
islands since Argentina seized control of them one month ago, triggered a strong
military reaction from the Argentines.

The first strike constituted a stepping-up of the struggle for the South
Atlantic archipelago.  A Defense Ministry statement said a single delta-winged
Vulcan bomber, which flew from Ascension Island in the South Atlantic, struck in
darkness early Saturday, followed at dawn by Harrier jumpjets from the British
fleet near the Falklands. A spokesman asserted that ''both operations were
successful'' and that all British aircraft had returned safely to their bases,
with no casualties to crew members.

The spokesman said runways and parked aircraft had been hit both at Stanley,
which has a 4,000-foot strip, and at the smaller installation near Goose Green,
50 miles west of Stanley on East Falkland. The runway at Stanley, he said, was
''severely cratered.''

Argentina gave a radically different account of the first engagement over the
airstrips. In Buenos Aires, a spokesman for President Leopoldo Galtieri said two
Harriers had been shot down and others damaged by antiaircraft fire. The
Argentine Embassy in Washington said one British pilot had been killed and a
second taken prisoner. An embassy statement insisted that the Stanley airstrip
was open and undamaged. Argentina also said it had launched an aerial
counterattack on the British fleet.

Timing of Attack Surprising

The British categorically denied the Argentine claims.  A strike on the Stanley
airfield had been widely predicted, but its timing caused some surprise because
of the departure Saturday night of Foreign Secretary Francis Pym for talks in
Washington with Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. and at the United
Nations with Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar.

Still, Mr. Pym had remarked in a broadcast to the Falkland islanders on Friday,
''War or some kind of escalation of military action, however unpleasant it may
be, is, I'm afraid, quite probable.''

The Stanley airfield is about two miles outside of town. Well before the attack,
sources here said, all but 100 to 200 of the town's 1,000 residents had left the
capital for the countryside.

Japan Sides With Britain

Ranking Government officials described the raid on the airfields as another
intensification of pressure on the military junta in Buenos Aires to pull out of
the islands, which were seized by Argentine troops on April 2. On Friday the
United States announced economic and military sanctions against Argentina, and
Japan took a similar step today.

''We will cease hostilities when the Argentines withdraw,'' said a close aide to
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. Mrs. Thatcher had approved the raid at a
meeting with senior colleagues last week.

The Ministry of Defense noted that when Britain announced a total sea and air
blockade of the Falklands on Wednesday, it warned that any ship or plane
challenging the restricted zone would risk attack, that the Stanley airstrip
would be ''closed'' and that any plane remaining on the ground there would be
liable to destruction.

''Early this morning,'' a statement said Saturday, ''British aircraft took
action to enforce the total exclusion and to deny the Argentinians the use of
the airstrip.'' But there was no word from the Defense Ministry whether the
attack was a pre-emptive strike or whether an Argentine warplane had attempted
to breach the blockade.

Argentina Reports Six Wounded

Nor was there any information on enemy casualties. Sources in Buenos Aires said
six Argentine soldiers had been wounded.  Britain's aim, military analysts said,
was to make the fields unusable either by the C-130 transports that have been
ferrying men and materiel to the Falklands since the imposition of the British
sea blockade on April 12 or by Argentine fighter planes.

Recent television pictures of the Stanley strip have shown C-130's parked
alongside the runway, together with propellor-driven Pucara fighters, which were
developed for antiguerrilla warfare. Although the Pucaras are slow, they are
well suited to Stanley's primitive facilities and could be highly effective
against any British landing.

It was thought probable that the British strike force had used a combination of
conventional bombs, rockets and new JP-233 bombs. The JP-233's are designed to
dig deep craters in concrete runways, and they include antipersonnel mines to
hamper repair efforts.

Fleet Has Jamming Gear

Analysts said the British fleet lying off the Falklands had almost certainly
used its advanced electronic equipment to jam Agrentine radar and radio
communications before the attack was launched. They contended that the Argentine
forces on the island were unlikely to have mounted an effective antiaircraft
defense in these circumstances, although there have been reports that they were
equipped with British-designed Tigercat antiaircraft missile systems.

Vulcan bombers, which had been scheduled to go out of service within weeks, were
hurriedly converted last month to carry conventional rather than nuclear
weapons. Their pilots practiced lowlevel bomb runs in the Western Isles of
Scotland for a few days, before the planes and crews were sent to Ascension
Island.

Britain owns Ascension, but the airbase there is leased to the United States,
with the proviso that Britain can use it in an emergency such as this one.

Flying from the base on Ascension, about 4,000 miles northeast of the Falklands,
one of the subsonic bombers, which carry a crew of three, was refueled in midair
at least twice by a Victor tanker aircraft, also operating from Ascension. The
United States used similar long-distance bombing tactics in the Vietnam War,
employing B-52 bombers based at Anderson Air Force Base in Guam to strike at
targets in Southeast Asia.

Flew From Two Carriers

The Harriers, which can take off and land vertically and can hover like
helicopters, operated from the aircraft carriers Hermes and Invincible in the
British task force somewhere near the Falklands.  They are single-man aircraft.

Prime Minister Thatcher was given confirmation of the raids at about 9:30 A.M.
Saturday at her official country residence, Chequers, northwest of London. She
later talked with other members of her crisis cabinet.

Denis Healey, the foreign policy spokesman for the opposition Labor Party, said
Labor would support the attack providing there had been no loss of life. At a
May Day rally in Carlisle in northwest England, he said it was ''sensible'' to
try to disable the airfield.

But Tony Benn, the persistent left-wing critic of the Prime Minister's strategy,
said that Mrs. Thatcher had lost control of ''the war machine she set in
progress'' and that admirals and generals were now in charge.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Sea Harrier jump-jets landing on carrier Hermes

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              107 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ARGENTINE SAYS SECURITY OF THE WORLD IS IN DANGER

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 13, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 476 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, May 1


The British air attack on the airfields of the Falkland Islands caught Buenos
Aires on a languid, hot, May Day holiday. On the city's deserted streets, people
voiced anxiety and quiet patriotism.

In the Plaza de Mayo, a group of men sat on stone benches and listened to a
radio announcer give the news in the excited tones of a sportscaster describing
a photo finish in a horse race.

''They say two Harriers were shot down,'' said a young man holding the radio.
''Who says that?'' asked a distinguished-looking, older man with an impeccably
groomed silver mustache.  ''The Uruguayan radio,'' answered the young man.
''It's giving more news.'' Montevideo, the Uruguayan capital, is only 130 miles
away across the brown Rio de la Plata.

'It's All This Woman's Fault'

The man with the radio offered an explanation of the British willingness to
fight to regain the Falklands that is fairly widespread here.

''It's all this woman's fault,'' he said, speaking of Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher. ''She sends the fleet to its death, and then goes off to her house
-it's some kind of farm - in the countryside for the weekend. She's crazy. We
don't have anything against the English people, or the Americans.''

A police van was parked in the shade of trees near the American Embassy
compound. It has been guarding the embassy for three weeks, since just after the
Falklands crisis erupted.

Although the United States has openly sided with Britain in the dispute, there
was little visible anti-American feeling in Buenos Aires. Maj. Gen. Alfredo St.
Jean, the Interior Minister, has repeatedly urged Argentines to respect the
well-being of foreigners in their midst.

'We Didn't Shout'

One couple - the wife a lawyer, the husband a doctor - sat on a park bench and
spoke of the visit by Secretary of State Alexander M.  Haig Jr. to Buenos Aires
last month to press the junta for concessions on the Falklands.

They said they were able to watch him from their luxury apartment as he played
tennis at the United States Embassy residence below.  ''But we didn't shout
nasty things down at him,'' joked the woman.  ''We know about NATO, that Britain
is an ally of steel of the United States, and we know that we are not exactly an
ally of steel of the United States. The economic sanctions are what we expected
- but we don't expect the United States to bombard Argentina. Against the
British - well, we will fight them.''

''I don't know,'' said her husband. ''The history of the United States since
1946 is not so reassuring - Korea, Vietnam and now Reagan is going to have all
of Latin America against him.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Spaniards in Buenos Aires

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              108 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HEBREW TABERNACLE MARKING 75TH ANNIVERSARY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 50, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 390 words


The Hebrew Tabernacle of Washington Heights will celebrate its 75th anniversary
tonight at a dinner for 450 guests in the Grand Ballroom of the Plaza Hotel.

Mayor Koch is scheduled to join several other city officials in honoring the
synagogue for its long service as a center of community activity in northern
Manhattan. The liberal congregation, which has been under the direction of Rabbi
Robert L. Lehman for a quarter of a century, supports many cultural and
educational programs.

''I like to think that our work here extends beyond the religious purpose,''
Rabbi Lehman said. ''Our doors have always been open to everyone in Washington
Heights.''

The congregation was founded in Harlem in 1906, but it has been in Washington
Heights for almost 40 years. Many of its current members first came to New York
in the 1930's as refugees from central Europe.

''We have never forgotten our gratitude to this country ,'' said Rabbi Lehman,
who came to New York City from Germany in 1938. As a way of expressing thanks,
the 500 families in the congregation have sponsored a family of refugees from
Vietnam who have recently come to New York.

Eight years ago, when the congregation moved to its site at 55 Fort Washington
Avenue, at 185th Street, Rabbi Lehman introduced an adult-education program,
called ''The Open Mind,'' that has helped bring many artists and musicians to
the synagogue. In addition to scheduling outside performances, 70 regular
participants spend four hours each week studying Jewish culture and history.

After 75 years of activity, the leadership of the congregation shows no signs of
slowing down. Although its programs are devoted primarily to helping the
elderly, high rents in other areas of the city have brought a new group of
younger couples into the neighborhood recently, and the rabbi sees this as a
good sign for the future of the tabernacle.

Plans are under way for the next big project: the construction for the elderly
of a residence in Inwood that would be reserved primarily for members of the
tabernacle.

''During the 1960's, there were some slack times when we would get only 50
people at a service,'' Rabbi Lehman said, ''but now we can have as many as
250.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              109 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: ROBERT AULETTA'S 'RUNDOWN' AT HARVARD

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 66, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, Mass.


There's so much to admire about the playwright Robert Auletta that one can't
help but root for his success. Mr.  Auletta, whose work has infrequently been
seen in New York, is a daring imagist whose nonlinear plays try to burrow right
into the center of the American consciousness. He throws out plot, structure and
conventional characterization until he creates a desolate, almost lunar
theatrical landscape inhabited by phantasmagoric images and fragmented lives.

In this sense, Mr. Auletta at times resembles Sam Shepard - a fact not lost on
Harvard's American Repertory Theater. Mr. Auletta's latest full-length play,
''Rundown,'' is being performed in repertory here with Mr. Shepard's ''True
West.'' Yet ''Rundown'' too often seems like mock Shepard rather than the real
thing. Though there is plenty of talent in evidence in the writing, ''Rundown''
needs a shakedown; it is overwritten and overlong. In Mr. Shepard's plays the
abstract imagery and drama just exist; Mr. Auletta, by contrast, tends to repeat
and explain himself to the self-defeating point at which he is not so much
writing his play as commenting on it.

''Rundown'' unfolds on an eerie patch of highway, well designed and lighted by
Kate Edmunds and James F. Ingalls. Its actual setting is the mind of Frank
Payovski (Stephen Rowe), nicknamed Pay, a Vietnam veteran confronting the demons
and ashes of his past. As a teen-ager, Pay and his best friend, Spear (Tony
Shalhoub), were self-styled ''runaway boys'' who used to cruise the Long Island
Expressway, exulting in life's infinite possibilities. But as we gradually
learn, Pay and Spear later took different apocalyptic roads, both deadending in
murder. Pay killed peasants in Asia; Spear, who became a radical activist, blew
up two G.I.'s in San Francisco.

It's a provocative notion to examine a Vietnam vet and an antiwar guerrilla as
flip sides of the same burnt-out soul. And Mr.  Auletta's overall technique is
impressive: Pay's memories blur in and out of focus much like the radio music
and static that weave in and out of the action. It's as if the protagonist's
mind is being yanked apart by conflicting magnetic fields. Some individual bits
work well, too, especially those that remake the spooky melodramatics of film
noir or involve Laura (Karen MacDonald), the perplexing woman that Pay and Spear
left behind and whom they still can't quite understand.

Unfortunately, ''Rundown'' also contains explicit lines like ''History is all
about the dead'' and ''I was fighting for my soul, or what was left of my
soul.'' The elusive natures of ''order,'' ''truth'' and ''clarity'' are remarked
upon too often. When Pay picks up his old Vietnam rifle, he says: ''It's lovely
to hold, like Marilyn Monroe. It makes me feel good because it's who I am and
what America wants me to be.'' In a play whose design and ambitions are well
beyond the simplicities of agitprop, such talk - not to mention the pointed
references to Indians, Vince Lombardi and ''America's wings of death'' - sounds
cheap.

Mr. Auletta's mythic iconography, from cars to pinballs, is of less than the
first freshness, and some poetic turns of phrase are too fruity: We hear of
''hair streaked with rivulets of pain and beauty'' and of ''a lot of low-lying
life down here by the river.'' The play's humor, surreal slapstick involving a
ventriloquist's dummy and a soda jerk's hallucinatory costume changes - from
Shirley Temple to the Lone Ranger - would be funnier if more sharply performed.

The whole production could use more definition. Bill Foeller, the director,
seems inclined to add his own self-indulgence to the playwright's. The blocking
gets sloppy whenever there are more than two people on stage, and the
performances, with the exception of Miss MacDonald's, are lax. Mr. Rowe does
bring red-eyed fevers and jittery rage to Pay, but such a marathon role also
requires nuances and grace notes that elude him.

To be sure, the American Repertory Theater deserves credit for providing a forum
to Mr. Auletta, who is willing to make bold experiments that can't be attempted
in the commercial theater. But that's only the first step. A promising but still
developing play like ''Rundown'' also requires tough guidance from the
institutional theater that stages it, and it's not clear in this case that
Harvard's company has fulfilled that need.  Frank Rich

The Cast
RUNDOWN, by Robert Auletta; directed by Bill Foeller; sets by Kate Edmunds;
costumes by Nancy Thun; lighting by James F. Ingalls; sound design by Stephen
Drury; production stage manager, John Grant-Phillips. Presented by the American
Repertory Theater. At the Loeb Drama Center, 64 Brattle Street, Cambridge, Mass.
Pay ......................................Stephen Rowe Spear
...................................Tony Shalhoub Laura
.................................Karen MacDonald Trace
...................................Thomas Derrah

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              110 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Miss Ughetta Is Affianced

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 72, Column 6; Society Desk

LENGTH: 184 words


Mr. and Mrs. Henry L. Ughetta 2d of Scarsdale, N.Y., have announced the
engagement of their daughter, Nancy Elizabeth Ughetta, to Arthur Seymour Thomas
3d, son of Mrs. William Wright of Albany, Ore. and the late Dr. Arthur S. Thomas
Jr. of New London, N.H.

The wedding is planned for Aug. 21.  Miss Ughetta is a science teacher at the
Peddie School in Hightstown, N.J., where Mr. Thomas is dean of students. The
bride-to-be, an alumna of Princeton University, was presented at the Westchester
Cotillion. Her father, who is retired, was a senior partner in the New York law
firm of Wilkie, Farr & Gallagher.  She is a granddaughter of Mr. and Mrs. Casper
B. Ughetta of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Mr. and Mrs. Florian J. Andre of Montclair,
N.J.

Mr. Thomas, an alumnus of St. Paul's School and Amherst College, received a
master's degree from Pepperdine University in Santa Ana, Calif. He served in
Vietnam as a lieutenant in the Navy. His marrriage was annulled. His father was
a dentist.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              111 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

JOSEPH PAPP GOES ABSTRACT

BYLINE: By CAROL LAWSON

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2130 words


''The theater is supposed to be a living force which absorbs in some way what is
happening in the world, and in some way expresses it,'' Joseph Papp began, by
way of introduction to his current state of thinking - and considerable dismay -
about the contemporary theater. The producer and director was perched on the
edge of an armchair in his second-floor office at the Public Theater, and words
were tumbling from his mouth at a brisk clip, as usual.

''There have been times when the historical circumstances of everyday life were
closer to what was being done in the theater than they are today,'' the producer
went on. ''During the 1960's, for example, the theater here reflected the
Vietnam War and the civil rights movement. Writers were writing plays that
reflected what was happening in the world on a major scale.''

Today, he said, that is no longer happening. The plays inundating the Public
Theater at the rate of three or four dozen a week are largely what Mr. Papp
dismisses as ''story plays'' - traditionally constructed plays concerning
everyday relationships between people.  So the question for Mr. Papp is, what to
do? His solution is to take action on two fronts. Outside the theater, where the
greater part of his considerable energies seem to be focused, he is becoming
increasingly involved as the headline-making spokesman for a wide range of
causes. And inside the Public Theater, Mr. Papp is focusing on what he labels
''abstract plays'' - plays that variously suggest ''the confusion and complexity
in the world.''

The most ambitious of these is ''The Death of Von Richthofen as Witnessed From
Earth,'' which will open Mr. Papp's Central Park season on June 25. ''Von
Richthofen'' has a book, music and lyrics by Des McAnuff, who will also direct.
Mr. McAnuff staged the highly acclaimed production of ''Henry IV, Part I'' in
Central Park last summer. ''Von Richthofen'' will be, in the words of Mr. Papp,
''the most expensive musical ever done in Central Park.''

It is also the most unlikely. Barry Bostwick will star as Von Richthofen, the
German flying ace who shot down 80 planes in World War I. The musical takes
place on April 20, 1918, the last night of Von Richthofen's life, before he was
shot down in his own plane.

''The Death of Von Richthofen'' looks at a moment in history when the rise of
Nazism might have been stopped, and is dramatized with what Mr. Papp calls
''strange goings-on,'' many of them in the air.  There are flying airplanes, a
dead piano player who plays and sings at a piano 15 feet in the air, ascending
balloonists, and a dead British flyer who floats above the stage and speaks.

''The sum total of the work is abstract,'' Mr. Papp said. So, to a great degree,
is his second play for the park, ''A Midsummer Night's Dream,'' which will be
directed by James Lapine, the successful Off Broadway director (''March of the
Falsettos'') who will be staging Shakespeare for the first time.

But while work goes on at the Public Theater, Mr. Papp is, by his own admission,
''restless.'' A major figure on the New York theater scene for over 25 years, he
is disappointed with contemporary theater, for its failure to deal with the
major social and political issues of the day. In this regard, he goes so far as
to say that film and television ''give me much greater satisfaction - the
subject matter is more interesting than the subject matter on the stage.''

The phone rang. It was Mr. Papp's friend Mike Wallace, who was calling about the
trip they expect to make together to Vietnam late this month. ''Suddenly I'm
involved in more things in the world,'' Mr. Papp remarked as he got up to take
the call.

Mr. Papp's most prominent production in recent months was his street-theater
campaign to save the Helen Hayes and Morosco theaters from demolition as part of
the Portman Hotel project. In the aftermath of that losing battle, dramatically
played out for two weeks on a makeshift stage in front of the Morosco on West
45th Street, Mr. Papp has emerged with a new crusade - the designation of the
entire theater district as a historic area to ensure the preservation of other
endangered playhouses.

This afternoon Mr. Papp will again take to the streets, this time leading the
midtown march of the Greater New York Conference on Soviet Jewry. He is also an
outspoken member of Performing Artists for Nuclear Disarmament. On his trip to
Vietnam he plans to accompany a group of veterans who are searching for
information about American soldiers missing in action. The expedition will not
go unnoticed, for Mr. Papp has arranged for Mr. Wallace and a television crew to
cover it for ''60 Minutes.''

At the same time, Mr. Papp is branching out as a producer into film and
television. He has just finished his first feature film, the screen adaptation
of his hit musical ''The Pirates of Penzance.'' The movie, which was made in
London, is to be released in December. Mr.  Papp is also negotiating to buy back
from Polygram Pictures the film rights to his other musical hit, ''A Chorus
Line.'' He plans to make a film a year.

For television, Mr. Papp is making deals to present several of his Public
Theater productions on cable. One is David Henry Hwang's acclaimed ''The Dance
and the Railroad,'' which was taped for cable in January in a studio in
Nashville. Mr. Papp is also developing for ABC-Arts cable a late-night variety
show, ''The Lost Art of Conversation.'' He describes the hour-long format as no
less than ''free-floating,'' ''corny'' and ''exquisite.'' Among the entertainers
will be an Irish tenor, a Hispanic punk band, the Klezmer Music Ensemble playing
Yiddish music, and Mr. Papp himself, who is hardly shy when it comes to singing
and dancing: He once had his own cabaret act in SoHo.

Meanwhile, back at the Public Theater, the season continues - in abstract
fashion. Mr. Papp has such disinterest in story plays that he has turned down
several that eventually made it to Broadway, including Beth Henley's ''Crimes of
the Heart,'' which won the Pulitzer Prize last year and is still running, and
Jules Feiffer's ''Grownups,'' which had a short run this season but received
some excellent notices.

''I use the word 'abstract' for things not literally confined to what we call
domestic encounters,'' Mr. Papp said as he munched on cookies in his spacious
office, which has long been filled with awards and posters of his productions,
but now has a large television set and a videotape recorder perched on a tall
wooden stand. ''To me, domestic encounters, or bourgeois encounters, mean the
emphasis is placed on the minutiae of relationships and recognizable situations
we all know about. I'm interested in unrecognizable situations. I don't want to
see another coffee cup on the stage, or a refrigerator. Or someone eating an
apple. That's the worst.

''I'm not interested in a story of this, a story of that - what I call
middle-of-the-road plays, plays that have to do with relationships. It's not
that those relationships are unimportant, but what is happening in the world now
is so extraordinary that you need something more cosmic.''

One of the abstract plays currently running at the Public Theater is ''Three
Acts of Recognition'' by the contemporary German playwright Botho Strauss. There
is no recognizable story, but a sequence of disjointed scenes that take place at
the opening of a museum art exhibition titled ''Capitalist Realism.'' Mr.
Strauss's 16 characters talk of penetrating ''all the acts we put on, the glib
lies we throw at each other.''

''Three Acts of Recognition'' has been directed by Richard Foreman with his
usual trademarks - fluorescent tubing mounted above an austere modern set,
banners containing cryptic epigrams about art, electronic buzzing that reaches a
nerve-wracking roar, scene-ending blasts of gunfire. The three-and-a-half-hour
play has received mostly poor reviews, and it is not unusual for audiences -
small as they are - to walk out.

''I myself find it hard to sit through three and a half hours of anything,'' Mr.
Papp remarked, ''and there are certain things I don't like about European
writing. A lot of it is heavy-handed, with the exception of Beckett. But
compared to what I see around, and the junk that is praised because it has a
good story and some nice acting, this is a fascinating and complicated play.

''It has to do with fragmentation, rather than something that is spelled out
line by line, with everybody agreeing at the end. To have everybody on the same
side by the end of the play is the most boring thing. It's not true in life,
it's not true in relationships, and it's certainly not true in the relationships
of countries.''

Another new abstract production is ''Red and Blue,'' which is now in previews
and will open May 12. The author is Michael Hurson, a painter and sculptor; this
is his first play. The set, by John Arnone, is a cardboard-and-wood sculpture of
nine rooms, each 3 feet by 4 feet. Staged by the experimental director Joanne
Akalaitis, ''Red and Blue'' is a theater piece that has no actors. Instead,
there is an interplay of the set, lights, video projections, melodramatic organ
music, and the voices of three actors who play the characters Red (a man), Blue
(a woman) and Voice (a man).

''When you read this play, you don't know what the hell it is about,'' Mr. Papp
said. ''It is a visual concept. There are people talking, and you get a sense of
a situation. It is fragmented, like 'Three Acts of Recognition.' ''

Also playing at the Public Theater is Joseph Chaikin's staging of ''Antigone,''
which opened last week. Mr. Papp considers this Greek classic both abstract and
literal at the same time. ''It's certainly a political play,'' he said. ''A play
about the abuse of power and resistance to abuse of power. That's the literal
part. But even more important, it deals with things that have to do with fate.
It has a chorus that comments on what's right and what's wrong. So, in a certain
sense, this is an abstract play in the finest sense of the word. I feel good
about it.''

''Goose and Tomtom,'' the latest play by David Rabe, the author of ''The Basic
Training of Pavlo Hummel'' and ''Streamers,'' is also in performance. The
critics' opening has been postponed indefinitely because Mr. Rabe, one of Mr.
Papp's favorite playwrights, is doing the latest in a string of countless
rewrites. ''It's a difficult play to write,'' Mr. Papp said. ''It is a seemingly
disconnected group of feelings. The story is very superficial. David's stuff
comes out of dreams and all sorts of things. Finding the form is always a
struggle.''

''I don't go out of my way to find abstract plays,'' Mr. Papp remarked. ''I
don't plan things this way. I don't even know I'm doing abstract plays until
I've done four or five of them and see they're the same.''

He impatiently lit a cigar. ''The basic line of this theater hasn't changed, you
know. This theater has always had a social character. I give it that character
because I'm a social character.''

Despite his gloominess about contemporary theater and the state of the world,
Mr. Papp is far from morose. He seems to be delighting in his frenetic whirl of
activity, and even describes himself as being in ''a glorious period'' of his
life. ''I have more freedom than I've had in years,'' he noted, referring to the
financial security that has come to the Public Theater from ''A Chorus Line''
and ''The Pirates of Penzance.''

Mr. Papp bristles at the notion held by many people in the theater community
that he is so busy with his outside activities that he no longer has abundant
time and energy for the Public Theater. Or the interest. ''My base is always the
theater,'' he retorted, ''the live theater. I don't like dead theater.''

Nor does he like the suggestion that the level of activity at the Public Theater
is slowing down because his heart is elsewhere. ''If I had one success, people
wouldn't think we're not doing much,'' he huffed.

''It would be worse here if I didn't do some of these other things,'' Mr. Papp
quickly added. ''I have to infuse the theater with what I get from the outside.
Besides, I get antsy in a short time when there aren't enough interesting things
happening.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Joseph Papp, Des McAnuff and Barry Bostwick

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              112 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHY THE TAX CUT WORRIES BUSINESS

BYLINE: By LESLIE WAYNE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 1, Column 2; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2618 words


NOT so long ago, various economists were assuring their clients that come the
first of July, the economy would burst out of the recession like a shot from a
Roman candle. For July 1 is Tax Cut Day, the day when working Americans will
find their paychecks a little fatter thanks to a 10 percent reduction in tax
rates. Also on that day, people who receive Social Security benefits may be a
little richer with cost-of-living increases that will add $27 to the average
monthly payment scheduled to go into effect.

All told, the tax cuts and Social Security increases are expected to pump $48
billion into the economy, at an annual rate. All that money might stop the
recession if consumers spend it on automobiles, appliances and houses or even,
from a strict supply-side view, if they put much of it in stocks, bonds or
savings accounts. ''It will be an important shot in the arm to the economy,''
said Murray L.  Weidenbaum, chairman of the President's Council of Economic
Advisers.

''I can't assure you or anyone that the tax cut in and of itself is going to
have a dramatic effect on the overall economy,'' Mr. Weidenbaum said, adding
that ''It depends on what else is happening - for instance, where interest rates
are.''

After last week's stalemate over the budget for the fiscal year 1983, the
outlook looks grimmer. Indeed, as the recession grinds on, economists,
businessmen and some of the Administration's adversaries in Congress expect much
less of the cut. If taxes go down, Government revenues perforce go down and the
Federal deficit goes up. This then forces the Treasury to borrow to finance the
deficit, forcing up rates throughout the economy.

It was concern over the deficit, the Administration's insistence on another 10
percent tax cut in July 1983, and Congress's reluctance to delay the increase in
Social Security benefits, that accounted, in part, for failure of the Democrats
in Congress to reach a compromise on the budget with the White House.

In the past, tax cuts have often proved a strong elixir. The most cited example
of the benefits of tax cuts is the 20 percent reduction of 1964, which helped to
initiate years of sustained economic growth. More recently, the 10 percent tax
rebate in 1975 helped bring a recession to heel.

This time, however, the economy is wholly different. While the tax cuts and the
decline in the inflation rate are greeted by economists, they still see an
economy plagued by stubborn interest rates that will choke off a recovery either
before it begins or a few months later.

Industry isn't expecting much of the cuts. Even though they take effect in just
two months, few businessmen are making plans - building up inventories,
increasing employment or making investments in new plant and equipment - they
might normally make in expectation of a business revival. ''With high interest
rates, this is not a great time to gamble on inventory,'' said Robert A. Mooney,
manager of corporate economics for the J.C.  Penney Company.

''EVERYBODY'S from Missouri.'' said Walter C.  Dolde, senior economist with A.
Gary Shilling & Company, an economic forecasting firm. '' 'You show me increases
in orders and then I'll increase my production. You show me increases in
consumer sales and then I'll increase my retail inventory.' They want to see it
happen first. But this has a self-defeating air. If they don't call the workers
back, the economy won't grow.''

Many economists wonder whether July will bring anything more than a blip. ''We
expect a consumer-led recovery, and July 1 seems a reasonable date to get it if
we haven't seen it before then,'' said Marina v.N. Whitman, chief economist for
the General Motors Corporation. ''The real question is: Once the turnaround
begins, will the economy be allowed to have a long and strong recovery or will
it be clobbered? If the financial markets react badly and interest rates spring
up, it would be a weak and anemic recovery.''

For months now, Henry Kaufman, the Salomon Brothers economist, has been
predicting that interest rates will reach record levels later this year. ''The
tax cut and increase in Social Security will be two factors that will contribute
to an economic recovery in the second half this year. The broad issue is whether
that reccovery is sustainable or not. The tax reduction and Social Security are
contributing to a substantial budget deficit.''

In Mr. Kaufman's view, the combination of tax cuts and big deficits ''may well
result in an economy that will muddle along rather than an economy that will be
able to lift into a sustained phase of expansion.''

The Administration originally sought a 30 percent tax-cut package in which taxes
would drop by 10 percent each year, starting in January 1981. In a Congressional
compromise that led to the enactement of a new tax law last August, the
first-year cut was reduced to 5 percent and delayed until October. The
subsequent 10 percent cuts were delayed from January of the subsequent years to
July.

However, for higher wage earners, they will not see a 10 percent cut in their
withholding July 1. Single taxpayers making more than $30,000 a year or maried
persons with an income of $40,000 a year, are generally underwithheld on their
weekly paychecks because the maximum withholding rate is 37 percent, whereas the
total tax liabilities go as high as 50 percent. To compensate for this, the
withholding tables on July 1 will not give a full 10 percent reduction to high
wage earners, but will give the full cut to lower wage earners. However, when
the tax return is filed, the high wage earners will realize the full 10 percent
cut. By 1984, when all the cuts are in place, tax rates will have fallen by 23
percent from their 1980 levels.

As of last Jan. 1, the 1981 tax law also cut the maximum tax on unearned income
- dividends and interest - to 50 percent from 70 percent. For those taxpayers
whose unearned income was being taxed at the 70 percent rate, moving to 50
percent represents a 29 percent cut. The effect of all these reductions,
however, will be offset if inflation persists. As inflation pushes income
higher, the cuts may simply offset the additional tax required on higher wages.

The tax cuts are central to the Administration's economic program, based largely
on supply-side economics. The theory is that high taxes discourage work and
savings and dampen productivity. By giving businesses and individuals incentives
to invest in industry, production and employment would increase, but inflation
would not.

''WHAT we are looking at here for the first time is an income tax cut designed
to stimulate savings and investment, not consumption,'' Treasury Secretary
Donald T. Regan explained to Congress long before the recession began. It is a
view the Administration still holds, contending that a supply-side emphasis on
investment will pave the road out of the recession.

This runs counter to the economic theories, developed by the British economist
John Maynard Keynes, behind previous tax cuts.  They were designed to stimulate
demand for goods, which, in turn, would rouse industry to expand production. The
theories were rejected by the economists within the Administration who feared
that Keynesian pump-priming only set off inflation, while stimulating the supply
side would not.

But many economists say that if the July tax cut is to end the recession, more
of the dollars will have to be spent than saved.  Putting money into savings may
be good for long-term economic health since it increases the amount of funds
available to business for investment. But it does little to aid a quick escape
from a recession.

''The big question is, will consumers actually go out and spend that tax cut or
will they save it?'' said Sandra Shaber, director of consumer economics for
Chase Econometrics, a forecasting concern.  ''That is critical. ''If the savings
rate jumps, we wouldn't have the kind of rebound we're talking about.''

Mrs. Shaber predicts high spending, however, because ''consumer spending since
1979 has been so sluggish that our feeling is that there is considerable pent-up
demand, especially for durable goods.''

Some economists predict that as little as 20 percent will be saved, but others
put the figure as high as 70 percent. Some say that the tax cuts provide
generous benefits to upper-income taxpayers, who are more likely to save than
spend, and that poorer taxpayers are so debt-ridden they will use the cuts to
pay bills.

Yet even if only a small portion of the tax cut is spent, the economy is so
distressed that the spending could have a perceptible impact. The April
announcement of a first-quarter 3.9 percent drop in the gross national product
was widely seen as an encouraging sign because most of the drop was attributed
to inventory declines. When inventories reach rock bottom, as they are thought
to have now, even slight increases in consumer demand can revive production,
beginning the swing toward recovery.

''We will get a bigger push in terms of consumption and savings than what was
initially thought and this is good news for the economy, '' said Richard W.
Rahn, chief economist with the United States Chamber of Commerce. ''Real income
has increased because of the drop in inflation and consumer debt is going down
so consumers are poised to spend a whole lot more.''

But the budget deficit still hangs over such forecasts. The big revenue loss
caused by the tax cut, if not accompanied by equal-sized spending cuts, becomes
part of the growing Government deficit. And there is much concern over the size
of deficits in years ahead, with Administration estimates running as high as
$182 billion in fiscal year 1983 and $216 billion in fiscal year 1984.

If the economy picks up and businesses begin to finance their growth by issuing
debt, they could run into the wall of competition for funds created by the huge
Federal borrowings needed to finance the deficit.

''The Catch 22 of this is that if consumers really spend everything, we'll get a
burst of retail activity,'' said Donald Ratajczek, director of the economic
forecasting project at Georgia State University. ''And, the Federal Government
will be in the credit markets to borrow to hand this money to us. If interest
rates shoot up then there will be no significant recovery and all of a sudden
consumer durable spending has to peter out.''

More bluntly, Arthur B. Laffer, finance professor at the University of Southern
California business school and a leading supply-side theorist, predicts the tax
cuts will have ''no economic impact'' because the Government will ''give a
dollar back and then borrow it back right away from you.''

All this makes business reluctant to commit itself to a surge in consumer
spending. ''We think people are still concerned and they will pay off existing
debt, rather than splurge,'' said Ken Tutterow, finance vice president for Blue
Bell Inc., one of the world's largest manufacturers of work and play clothes.
Richard Marcus, chairman of Neiman Marcus department stores, said of the tax
cut, ''We're not feeling it will do nothing, but we're not bolstering inventory
in anticipation.''

ADDED Leonard F. Leganza, executive vice president for finance at Scovill Inc.,
a maker of small appliances, hardware and housing materials, ''We don't want to
build up inventories on speculation. If trends begin, getting the production is
no problem. But there's nothing you can do since it's all a speculative guess.''

Other businesses, however, see the tax cut reviving consumer demand, at least
for a few months. Mr. Mooney of J.C. Penney and Thomas E. Swanstrom, corporate
economist for Sears, Roebuck & Company, both feel that retailers will benefit
from tax-cut induced sales increases as well as from an improving economy in
general.

''Our analysis indicates if we are going to get out of the recession, it's
consumer spending that will do it,'' Mr. Mooney said. ''I don't care how many
incentives you give to the auto industry.  They won't open more auto plants with
so much idle capacity. You have to get people buying cars.''

Mr. Swanstrom anticipates a 7.5 percent increase in retail sales for the third
quarter for the retail industry, while Mr. Mooney expects an 8 percent sales
increase for the second half, when compared with the same time periods in 1981.

The tax cut will prevent a first-half sales decline at the Whirlpool
Corporation, a leading appliance manufacturer, from continuing through the year
and should bring sales even to the flat levels of the previous three years, the
company expects. ''The tax cut will pull us back to even,'' said J. B. Hoyt,
manager of forecasting and market analysis for Whirlpool. ''We need to see a
little strength in retail before we begin to react. We're beginning to see a
little bit of hope for a stabilization rather than a decline. And when you are
declining, stability is a positive step.''

The other critical consumer durable is autos. But both the Chrysler Corporation
and General Motors said that anticipating the specific impact of the tax cut is
impossible. ''By July l, interest rates and gas prices will have a more
significant impact on our sales than tax cuts,'' said Baron Bates, public
relations vice president at Chrysler. ''There are so many factors that affect
sales and it is all so volatile.''

There is another way of looking at all this. Instead of analyzing the impact of
the tax cuts on the economy, one could attempt to determine what would happen to
the economy if there were no tax cuts.

''If interest rates stay high, the tax cut will turn disaster into defeat,''
said Jay Schmeideskamp, director of Gallup Economic Surveys. ''The tax cut will
make things better. Without the tax cut and with high interest rates, you would
have disaster. This way you have defeat. Its less than a disaster, but still not
good.''

CUTS AND THEIR IMPACT

Since the landmark 1964 tax cut, there have been more than a half dozen other
tax cuts. But the exact impact of these cuts on the economy is a matter of
controversy among economists and no clear consensus has emerged.

''Determining the impact of tax cuts is all very controversial,'' said Rudolph
G. Penner, resident scholar of the American Enterprise Institute for Public
Policy Research, a conservative economic group.  ''Its an area where there are
many and differing points of view.''

Nonetheless, Mr. Penner took a stab. ''Most of them just offset inflation, so in
terms of there being true tax cuts, they were not that sizable,'' Mr. Penner
said.

Between 1968 and 1970, taxpayers were faced with a surcharge to finance the
Vietnam War. It was hoped that this surcharge might keep down inflation, but its
impact on inflation was disappointing, Mr.  Penner said. The 1969 Tax Reform
Act, the lifting of the Vietnam surcharge and the changes in business
depreciation schedules in 1971 brought taxes down.

To counter the 1974-75 recession, a 10 percent tax rebate was enacted. This was
followed by the 1976 Tax Reform Act, which, among other reforms, increased the
standard deduction by $100 to $200 depending on the filing status. In 1977,
President Carter further increased the standard deduction by up to $400 for most
taxpayers but lowered it by $200 for single filers and, in 1978, capital gains
and tax rates were generally lowered.

''Between 1969 and 1972, you had a large decrease in the average tax burden, but
from 1975 to 1978, the cuts on average just offset inflation,'' Mr. Penner said.
''The first tax cuts were favorable to the lower half, while the upper middle
and wealthy drifted into higher tax brackets. In 1978, they broke with that
tradition and 1981 is mainly for us rich folks.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Table depicting effect of tax cut on take-home pay

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              113 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THERE'S A SONG IN THEIR ART

BYLINE: By ERIC PACE

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4, Column 3; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 2025 words


KRONENBOURG Beer commercials have upbeat, waltzy music to connote g ood feeling
and Old Europe. Almay Inc.'s new television advertising u ses song and dance to
tout Colorplus cosmetics. Domino Sugar has p ut warm, nostalgic music into radio
ads meant partly to counter s ugar critics.

Increasingly, many broadcast commercials have been Saying It With Music. As
Harold Levine, chairman of Levine, Huntley, Schmidt, Plapler & Beaver
Advertising, put it, ''Advertisers' dependence on music has increased
substantially within the past five years. Young people in particular are into
music, and therefore the right kind of music can make the product sound as
though it's the right kind for them.''

Appraisals and explanations differ, but the trend is widely ascribed to
increased skill among musical commercial-makers, to television networks'
increased scrutiny of advertisers' verbal sales pitches, and to an increased
desire to appeal to customers' emotions.

On Madison Avenue, a much-quoted dictum attributed to David Ogilvy, a founder of
the Ogilvy & Mather agency, goes: ''If you don't have anything to say, sing
it,'' and the current reliance on music has spurred criticism as well as praise.

In recent years, Frazier Purdy, executive vice president and creative director
of Y.&R. New York, said last month, ''there's been a greater use -too much - of
songs or music per se, where just relying on the imagery and the excitement of
the song itself is a substitute, rather than digging a little deeper and finding
strong selling ideas.'' This phenomenon, he says, ''has been growing, and we
have a saturation of it right now. It's too easy a way; it's a function of
laziness.''

The music in recent advertising has been varied as well as copious, ranging from
more or less perky ditties to wordless but stentorian orchestral routines.

''With roughly $12 billion which will be spent by American advertisers for the
purchase alone of commercial time on television this year,'' said Michael H.
Dann, a senior adviser to ABC, ''you're talking about a multibillion-dollar
trend.''

A former senior vice president at CBS, Mr. Dann said experience has shown that
music has great power to enhance television's impact: ''When you have a weak
dramatic scene, you can punch it up with music,'' he said, ''Many a dramatic
love scene has been saved by using a Tchaikovsky concerto.''
SOME advertising music is trendy in the extreme - notably the loud, o utlandish
music in Lincoln-Mercury commercials and other products oft he newly
fashionable, somewhat surrealistic school of advertising k nown as the ''new
wave.'' And some is more or less conventional, i ncluding such modest,
product-plugging jingles as ''Peek Freans are a Very Serious Cookie.''

Modest or not, jingles have their special champions: At Michlin & Company, a
major jingle-composing house that has worked for Peek Frean as well as Domino,
the boast is: ''Our music is heard by more people, more times, than any other
kind of music.''

Some advertising folk still reminisce fondly about such classic jingle phrases
as ''Pepsi-Cola hits the spot,'' ''I'm Chiquita Banana'' and ''Use Ajax, the
foaming cleanser.'' And some jinglesmiths, notably Steve Karmen, of ''I Love New
York'' fame, have achieved near-celebrity status.

Predictably, prominent jingle-writers wax lyric about the current state of their
art. Ginny Redington, who wrote the music and collaborated on the lyrics for the
current Coca-Cola song (''Coke is it), says musically speaking, jingles ''have
gotten more complex.''

Susan Hamilton, head of H.E.A., a prolific advertising-music house, says:
''We're getting a lot more freedom to write the music that suits the client.''
And David Spangler, a composer who is head producer at the music house of
M.Z.H.&F., says that in advertisingsongs, ''there's definitely a move toward a
sort of neoromantic emotional content.''

But Walter Bottger, a partner in Bottger-Martin Productions, a new music firm,
contends that there is too much uniformity in advertising-jingle productions.
''The sameness,'' he says, ''is really counterproductive.''

Accentuating the positive in all this, Michael S. Lesser, chairman of the
Marschalk Company, an advertising agency, contended recently that the
advertising industry has learned to wed words and music more effectively. And
Mr. Levine said: ''The people who are creating radio and television commercials
are making better use of the music.''

He cited his agency's Kronenbourg commercials, with their original, evocative
music, which was designed to ease the entry of a newly imported beer.
Commercial-makers, he said, ''have learned a lot from the people who wrote
scores from the movies, so they can reinforce the particular selling point of
the commercial.''

Emphasizing some negative points, Spencer Michlin, the chairman and creative
director the company that bears his name, told Ad Forum a while ago that with
Federal officials' watchdog activities, ''Advertising is so heavily censored. It
has become harder and harder to say meaningful but good things about your
product or service.''

''Besides, the vast majority of products are at parity; you cannot say one
headache remedy is better then another,'' added Mr. Michlin, who has written
advertising music for Pepsi-Cola, Maxwell House and numerous other clients.
''But you can make 'em feel good about it.  You can surround your product with
emotional gift wrapping.''
AND ABC's Mr. Dann said the increased role of music has been spurredi n part by
that fact that network executives have become rather more s trict in approving
advertising-copy claims. ''Consumer activism has p ut considerable pressure on
the broadcasters,'' he said, ''to be e xtremely careful.''

At Peter Rogers Associates, another advertising agency, Heni Abrams, the
creative director, said: ''In hair care and cosmetics products, the ability of
the advertisers to make stronger specific claims is dramatically reduced, I
would say, due to increased scrutiny of their advertising by the networks and
the government.''

In one recent case, the Federal Trade Commission in January reached a consent
agreement with two vinyl-siding manufacturers - the Vinyl Improvement Products
Company and the Mastic Corporation, a Bethlehem Steel subsidiary - under which
the companies agreed to cease claiming that their siding conserved energy and
had better insulation value than traditional siding.

Similarly, the advertising trade journal Adweek said not long ago, ''The
increasing number of parity categories, as well as the intense legal scrutiny
that copy must undergo today, means that creative people'' in the advertising
industry ''can say less and less about a product's purported benefits. More and
more communication with consumers is taking place on a nonverbal level.''

And Y.&R.'s Mr. Purdy said that in advertising there is a greater premium now
than in the past on ''establishing emotional links'' with the prospective buyer
''as opposed to having the benefit, if you will, of clear-cut, competitive
product attributes'' being spelled out in the commercial.

This development, he said, is ''born of necessity, because product attributes in
terms of performance simply aren't that diverse or clear-cut any longer'' since
advanced technology permits competitors to catch up with rivals' new products.

Mr. Levine and some experts argue, however, that music is only truly effective
in distinguishing a product from similar rivals if it is supported by compatible
advertising-copy and graphics material.

Other advocates of advertising-music offer the longstanding argument that it can
make advertising stand out from the clutter of competing messages on the
airwaves. (In a recent, widely cited survey by Batten, Barton, Durstine &
Osborn, more than one-third of the polled consumers felt their shopping was
impeded by a surfeit of rival brands.)

Still others note that a musical jingle that has been popularized on expensive
network television commercials can be widely repeated, more economically, on
radio. But some critically inclined advertising executives argue that jingles
are ineffective in sophisticated listeners' ears.

And Don Johnston, chairman of JWT Group Inc., and current chairman of the
American Association of Advertising Agencies, warned in a speech last year that
in this decade, skepticism will be widespread among consumers. ''Less and
less,'' he said, ''will they be sold with a song and a dance.''
PEPSI'S MANY JINGLES

''Every time an advertising campaign and a song come out,'' says Joseph Block,
the Pepsi-Cola Company's vice president for consumer marketing programs, ''it's
not just words to sound nice and music to sound pretty. There's a message to the
consumer in terms of how we are marketing our product.''

In 1940, Pepsi-Cola heralded its 12-ounce, 5-cent bottle - as compared to
Coca-Cola's 6-ounce bottle at the same price - with what it says was the first
advertising jingle on radio:
Pepsi-Cola hits the spot, Twelve full ounces, that's a lot, Twice as much for a
nickel, too, Pepsi-Cola is the drink for you!  Nickel, nickel, nickel, nickel!
Trickle, trickle, trickle, trickle, Nickel, nickel, nickel, nickel!

The babies born in the years after World War II were then becoming the biggest
factor in the soft-drink market, and Pepsi set out to capture them by
emphasizing youth, as it did with this 1961 model whose rhythm was less
insistent, its melody, a bit subtler than that of the 1940 jingle:
The lively crowd today agrees Those who think young say Pepsi, please!  They
pick the right one, the modern light one.  Now it's Pepsi for those who think
young!

The market was still predominantly young in 1969, but it was the time of the
Vietnam war. Pepsi, Mr. Block said, offered a new message to young people:
''Hey, there's hope out there in the world, don't despair.'' It went:
There's a whole new way of livin' Pepsi helps supply the drive.  It's got a lot
to give To those who like to live 'Cause Pepsi helps 'em come alive.  It's the
Pepsi Generation Comin' at ya, goin' strong!

Now, the war is over and the Pepsi generation, the youth of the 60's, has
settled down. Last winter, Pepsi-Cola introduced the current model, whose music
Mr. Block calls ''driving, upbeat and contemporary.'' Norman Sylvester,
Pepsi-Cola's vice president for advertising, says that with the lyrics, ''We are
still trying to maintain our life-style imagery while focusing importantly on
product superiority.'' The words go:
Come and taste it! Pepsi's got it!  Pepsi's got your taste for life.  Come on
and taste all that life can be That Pepsi spirit in you and me!

''We've always felt,'' says Mr. Sylvester, ''that Pepsi advertising has been on
the cutting edge of socioeconomic change; we think we are in tune with the
American people.''

To which Mr., Block adds: ''with what's happening in the country today.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Harold Levine Box listing various Madison
Avenue jingles

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              114 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEO-CONSERVATIVE ANGUISH OVER REAGAN'S FOREIGN POLICY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 30, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6642 words


Norman Podhoretz is the editor of Commentary and author, most recently, of ''Why
We Were in Vietnam.'' By Norman Podhoretz The night Ronald Reagan was elected
President of the United States, I watched the returns in the company of a group
of intellectuals who were so jubilant at the news of the mounting landslide that
a passing stranger might have taken them for professional Republican Party
workers or perhaps for fervent ideological conservatives.

In fact, however, most of them were registered Democrats. Some had never before
voted for a Republican; or if they had, it would have been in a local race and
for a liberal of the species, such as Jacob Javits or John Lindsay in his
original political incarnation. Others had voted for Richard Nixon in 1972, but
only because as compared with George McGovern he seemed the lesser evil; most of
them had gone for Hubert Humphrey against Nixon in 1968. In voting for Nixon
even against McGovern they felt uneasy, not merely because they had always
disliked Nixon, but also because in deserting the Democratic Party they were
breaking with a tradition to which they had been loyal all their political
lives. On the other hand, they felt that in nominating George McGovern, who
stood for values that departed in almost every respect from that tradition, the
Democratic Party had deserted them. They would certainly have supported any of
McGovern's Democratic rivals - Humphrey, Henry Jackson, Edmund Muskie - and when
in 1976 the Democrats nominated Jimmy Carter, a candidate who seemed closer to
the central tradition of the party than to the McGovernite wing (now led by
Edward Kennedy), most of them supported him over his Republican rival, Gerald
Ford.

Why then, less than four years later, were so many of them cheering for Ronald
Reagan? And why, less than two years after that, are so many of them sinking
into a state of near political despair?

The label that has come to be attached to the people I am talking about - and I
myself am definitely one of them - is ''neoconservative.'' Like all labels,
including ''liberal,'' this one can be misleading. Consequently only a few to
whom it has been applied have happily embraced it. The most notable of these is
Irving Kristol, who edits The Public Interest, one of the two magazines usually
identified as the main centers of neo-conservative thought (the other being
Commentary, of which I am the editor). On the other hand, Daniel Bell, who
collaborated with Kristol in founding The Public Interest and is still
associated with it, indignantly denies that he is a conservative, ''neo'' or any
other kind. So too, though less indignantly, does Daniel P. Moynihan. Since
becoming a United States Senator, Moynihan has been moving away from
neo-conservatism in substance and is more and more frequently referred to
nowadays as a ''neo-liberal.''

A few other members of the group, such as the philosopher Sidney Hook and the
sociologist Seymour Martin Lipset, also bridle at being called neo-conservative.
But the rest of us - including such scholars, journalists and editors as James
Q. Wilson, Michael Novak, William Barrett and Hilton Kramer - have surrendered,
more or less peaceably, to the label after a period of fruitless struggle
against it: fruitless in the sense that no matter how much we protested against
being called neo-conservative, the label kept being affixed to our names.

A great deal of what has been written about the neo-conservatives has come from
hostile quarters and is even more misleading than the label itself. But on at
least two major points there has been little or no disagreement. The first is
that the emergence of a significant group of dissenters from the leftist
orthodoxies (nowadays usually called ''liberal'') prevalent in the leading
universities and the more sophisticated media of communication have contributed
greatly to a change in the general climate of opinion in the United States over
the past few years. In the writings of these ''neo-conservative'' dissenters,
the conventional ''liberal'' wisdom has been challenged in one area after
another and ideas which had been automatically dismissed as self-evidently wrong
or wicked have been given a new respectability in the world of argument and
hence a new legitimacy in the world of political action.

The second point on which there is little disagreement is that the influence of
the neo-conservatives contributed to the election of Ronald Reagan. This was not
a matter of numbers. As a movement of dissident intellectuals, the
neo-conservatives were (and are) a minority within a minority. Nevertheless, if
the grip of the conventional liberal wisdom and the leftist orthodoxies in the
world of ideas had not been loosened by the criticisms of the neoconservatives;
if a correlative willingness to entertain new ideas had not thereby been
created; and if these new ideas had not been plausibly articulated and
skillfully defended in the trials by intellectual combat that do so much to
shape public opinion in the United States -if not for all this, Ronald Reagan
would in all probability have been unable to win over the traditionally
Democratic constituencies (blue-collar workers, white-ethnic groups like the
Irish and the Italians and a surprisingly high percentage of Jews) whose support
swept him into the White House.

It is, then, a fact of some political consequence that so many neo-conservatives
have moved in less than two years from enthusiasm to disappointment in their
feeling about Reagan.

Since they by no means constitute a homogeneous movement, it is almost
impossible to generalize with any great precision in accounting for the
disappointment of the neo-conservatives in Reagan. That most of them are
disappointed is undoubtedly true, but this disappointment has not yet been
expressed systematically in print; it has been coming out in an occasional
article, in numerous private conversations and at gatherings like the conference
held by The Committee for the Free World - an organization made up mainly of
neo-conservatives - in Washington this past January.

Moreover, the reasons for neo-conservative disappointment in Reagan vary and are
not always consistent with one another. My own case, I think, is representative
in its general outlines and less so in particular details. In general, the high
hopes I entertained for Reagan were stimulated by his evident conviction that
the decline of American power - American military power, American economic
power, American political power -was neither inevitable nor irreversible. We
had, Reagan suggested, lost or forgotten the principles through which we had
become the most productive, the most prosperous, the strongest and the most
respected nation on earth; it was up to us to rediscover and rededicate
ourselves to them, and he proposed to lead us in this adventurous undertaking.

Carter's message, delivered for the most part subliminally or by implication but
still unmistakable, was just the opposite. American decline, he told us, was the
result of inexorable historical forces; to attempt to reverse it was to invite
economic disaster, social disruption and war; the best and safest course was to
adjust like a mature people to our diminished condition, and on this course he
offered to keep us.

Since I believed and continue to believe that the survival not only of the
United States but of free institutions everywhere in the world depends on a
resurgence of American power, I considered the attitudes embodied in the Carter
campaign a guarantee of future disaster.  Conversely, I was heartened by the
rise of a political leader who seemed to understand the nature of the great
historical crisis we were in and who, better still, seemed capable of mobilizing
popular support for a national effort to begin dealing with it.

Unlike Irving Kristol and a few other neo-conservatives, I did not attach these
high hopes to a particular set of economic policies. In short, I was not a great
believer in ''supply-side'' economics. What I did believe, in common with almost
all neo-conservatives (whatever their ideas about tax cuts, monetary policy,
deficits and other such issues), was that the lost or forgotten principle which
had to be rediscovered and reanimated in this area was to promote economic
growth through the encouragement of investment, enterprise, risk and the quest
for wealth. In a word: capitalism.

The fact that this is still a dirty word to so many liberals suggests that the
rhetorical professions of devotion to economic growth on the part of the left
are not to be taken at face value.  Indeed, in recent years most liberals have
been far more preoccupied with how to redistribute wealth than with how to
create it; with how to protect the environment against the depredations of
industrial enterprise than with how to foster technological development; with
how to make people more secure than with how to encourage them to take risks,
and liberals have denigrated the ambition for wealth as nothing more than a form
of selfishness and antisocial greed.

To the extent that the supply-side theory represented a reversal of those
attitudes, I liked it; and in asserting that the necessary incentives could best
be created by cutting the taxes of those in the upper income brackets (since
they are the only people with money to invest), the theory seemed to me
plausible. But for all I knew, there might be other and better methods of
stimulating investment and encouraging entrepreneurial venturesomeness. The main
point was the goal, not the technique.

Similarly with the budget cuts, the ''new federalism'' and the other elements of
''Reaganomics.'' I supported the effort to bring capitalism back to life in the
United States, but I was not wedded to Reagan's program for doing so. If it
seemed to be working, I would be happy; if not, I would just as happily favor
trying something else.

This is why my own disappointment in President Reagan is not centered on his
economic program. Obviously it has not been working according to plan. Instead
of growth, we have a recession; instead of an enthusiastic rush by the business
community to invest, we have a declining stock market and rising interest rates;
instead of a balanced budget, we have the biggest projected deficits in history.

On the other hand, inflation has been coming down, the rate in the growth of
Federal spending has been arrested and the effects of the tax cut on savings and
investment have yet to be felt. It is still too early to say whether the Reagan
Administration will have succeeded or failed in the great objective of reversing
the decline of American economic power.

It is not too early to say, however, that this is his strategic objective and
that he has worked very hard and very effectively on the tactics which he
believes - rightly or wrongly remains to be determined - will move the country
toward it.

I wish I could say something similar about another major goal of President
Reagan's domestic policies - to reverse the drift of the past decade or so
toward the establishment of a quota system under which individuals are judged
not in accordance with their merits as individuals but in terms of their
membership in various racial, ethnic, or sexual groupings.

This is an issue about which such neo-conservatives as Nathan Glazer of Harvard
and The Public Interest, Diane Ravitch of Columbia Teachers College and John H.
Bunzel of the Hoover Institute have been writing for a long time. The position
they have taken was echoed by Mr. Reagan and his people during the campaign and
has been reaffirmed since the election. In brief: ''affirmative action,'' in the
sense of good-faith efforts to recruit and if necessary to train members of
formerly excluded groups so that they can compete as individuals on an equal
footing, is clearly legitimate. But affirmative action defined as ''quotas or
any other numerical or statistical formulas designed to provide ... preferential
treatment based on race, sex, national origin, or religion'' is ''unsound as a
matter of law and unwise as a matter of policy.''

The words I have just quoted were spoken before a Congressional subcommittee by
William Bradford Reynolds, President Reagan's Assistant Attorney General for
Civil Rights, and they could easily have been spoken by most neo-conservatives.
Many of us would even go further in identifying the principle of equal
opportunity for individuals without regard (in the traditional formulation) to
''race, creed, color, or country of national origin'' as one of those lost or
forgotten secrets of American energy and productivity that President Reagan has
said we must rediscover if we are to reverse our national decline. Yet, in a
judgment that most of his fellow neoconservatives would surely endorse, Chester
E. Finn Jr. of Vanderbilt University writes that during the past year ''the
nation's long slide into color-coded policies and group entitlements was
somewhat slowed but hardly stopped by an Administration that seemed uncertain
whether it really wanted to apply the brakes and not altogether sure where to
find them.''

Disappointing though the record in this area is from a neoconservative
perspective, what is even more distressing is the way the President has gone
about trying to realize his other great strategic objective: to reverse the
decline of American power in the world.

To be sure, on one component of this strategy Mr. Reagan has performed in office
exactly as I had hoped he would. He has proposed a program of rearmament and he
has fought with great determination against cutting back on the necessary
expenditures. If he does nothing else as President during his term of office
than preside over the refurbishing and modernization of a badly deteriorated
military capability, he will have taken the first step toward a resurgence of
American power in the world. Rearmament is the necessary minimum, the
indispensable foundation; without it, nothing else we do will be effective. This
President Reagan obviously understands, and this he can be trusted to uphold.

But military power, although indispensable, is very far from sufficient. Unless
we rearm we will be unable to keep the peace or to win if we should have to go
to war. Arms alone, however, do not and cannot tell us what it is we are trying
to accomplish in the world; on the contrary, it is only if we know what we are
trying to do that we can know what kind of military arsenal we should build. And
it is only if we know what we are trying to do that we can decide on the
political tactics that are likely to move us toward the objective.

This would seem self-evident to the point of being tautological.  Yet judging by
the discrepancy between the stated objectives of the Reagan Administration in
foreign policy and the actions it has so far taken, I am driven to one of two
conclusions. Either this Administration does not in fact know what it wishes to
do, or what it really wishes to do does not correspond to what the President
himself has said.

Like almost everyone else in the world, I expected the Reagan Administation to
change the direction of American policy toward the Soviet Union, and like most
neo-conservatives I welcomed the prospect. I for one did not agree with the
endlessly reiterated charge that Mr. Reagan was ''simplistic'' in seeing the
Soviet Union not only as the central problem we face in the world but as
implicated in almost every other troublesome situation confronting us.

No doubt it was an exaggeration to say that the Soviet Union was behind every
crisis everywhere on earth; no doubt there were indigenous local factors that
would come into play even if the Soviet Union did not exist; no doubt Soviet
involvement in some cases was minimal. Granting all this, Mr. Reagan's
''simplistic'' view still seemed to me closer to the truth and a better general
guide to policy than the equally exaggerated ''localitis'' of so many of his
critics. Closer to the truth because the Soviets were more often than not to be
found fishing in troubled waters or trying to roil the waters up; and better
because it helped to concentrate the mind on the global reach that Soviet
imperial power has acquired in recent years through its relentless military
build-up.

Accordingly, some of us expected the Reagan Administration to move quickly and
decisively in shoring up the American position on the two fronts most vulnerable
to the new Soviet offensive: the Persian Gulf and the Caribbean. We expected
this because it followed logically from the Reagan view of the Soviet threat;
and we expected it all the more because the President himself and several of his
top people had explicitly promised to take such action.

With regard to the Persian Gulf, during the campaign, Mr. Reagan's main
spokesman on foreign policy, Richard V. Allen - later to serve for a time as
national security adviser -had said that a sea-based Rapid Deployment Force
would not be enough to secure the oilfields against either a direct or an
indirect Soviet move. In his judgment, it would be necessary to station American
ground forces somewhere in the region which would, like our troops in Europe,
act simultaneously as a deterrent and as a ''tripwire.''

This might have been dismissed as campaign rhetoric if not for the fact that the
same determination was expressed after the Administration took office - this
time by the President himself, seconded both by his Secretary of State,
Alexander M. Haig Jr., and his Secretary of Defense, Caspar Weinberger. The
Secretary of State in particular spoke of forging a new policy in the region: a
''strategic consensus'' that would unite the moderate Arab states and Israel
into a de facto alliance made possible and credible by the presence of American
troops to hold the line against the growing danger of Soviet power.

In spite of the fact that Saudi Arabia itself had been exhorting the United
States to do something about this danger, the Saudis immediately voiced their
opposition to the introduction of an American military presence into the region,
and no sooner did they do so than this new idea was dropped. In its place an old
idea came rushing back - the idea that we could rely on surrogates to protect
our vital interests in various parts of the world. The surrogate on which we had
previously relied in the Persian Gulf was Iran under the Shah; the surrogate on
which we now proposed to rely was Saudi Arabia.

Yet if Iran, which seemed a monument of strength and stability in comparison
with Saudi Arabia, had proved to be a pillar of sand, what could we expect of
Saudi Arabia? In spite of this obvious consideration, the decision was made to
supply the Saudis with advanced weaponry, including the Awacs planes, on the
theory that such weapons were necessary to defend the oilfields.

Thus, far from changing the direction of American policy in the Persian Gulf,
the Reagan Administration was continuing along the path of its immediate
predecessors. As I myself pointed out at the time in a newspaper article, in
arming the Saudis and depending upon them to police the region on our behalf,
the Reagan Administration was resurrecting the Nixon Doctrine, even though it
had already been overtaken by the fall of the Shah. More distressing still, in
giving in to Saudi demands without a quid pro quo in the form of support for
American policy - for not only did the Saudis refuse to join in the ''strategic
consensus'' we were trying to forge as a bulwark against Soviet expansion in
this vital region but they even tried to prevent other states like Oman from
cooperating with us - the Reagan Administration was falling into the same habit
of appeasing Saudi Arabia which had afflicted the Carter Administration. Indeed,
Robert W. Tucker of Johns Hopkins, writing in Commentary, went so far as to
describe the Reagan Administration's policy in the Middle East as ''Carterism
without Carter.''

For me, and for most other neo-conservatives, this policy, bad as it was on its
own terms, was all the more disturbing in its implications for the American
connection with Israel. While the general impression that all neo-conservatives
are Jewish is false, it is certainly true that all neo-conservatives are strong
supporters of Israel. This has as much - and in many cases more - to do with the
fact that Israel is a democratic state as that it is a Jewish one. For whereas
neo-conservatives may differ among themselves over the extent and nature of
American commitments abroad, they would all agree that at a minimum the United
States has a vital interest in the survival of the relatively few democratic
states already in existence. Israel, in particular, is seen by neo-conservatives
as the most exposed of the democracies - the loneliest outpost of what they
insist on calling (in deliberate defiance of the ridicule that has been heaped
on the term in recent years) the free world.

Hence, most neo-conservatives would agree with Senator Moynihan's belief that
the relentless ideological assault on Israel in the United Nations and elsewhere
is more than a matter of calling the legitimacy of Israel itself into question;
it also represents by extension a covert attack on the political culture of the
United States and of the entire democratic world. In this perspective, the
willingness to defend Israel (ideologically and politically no less than through
military aid) becomes a subtle measure of our willingness to defend ourselves.

This is why, in the opinion of many of us, the slippage of support for Israel in
Western Europe has gone hand in hand with the fading determination of the
Europeans to defend themselves against the spread of Soviet power. And it is
also why the continuing tilt in American policy toward the enemies of Israel in
the Middle East is so worrisome to neo-conservatives. Does the American reliance
on Saudi Arabia mean that we will gradually join in its demand for a Palestinian
state on the West Bank ruled by the Palestine Liberation Organization, even
though the P.L.O. is sworn to the destruction of the only democratic nation in
the region and is in addition bound by hoops of ideology and arms to the Soviet
Union? How is it that an Administration so determined to prevent the
establishment of another Cuba or Nicaragua in Central America, one of the two
vulnerable fronts of the new Soviet offensive, seems so much less determined to
prevent an analogous outcome on the other?

Or is it - some of us of the neo-conservative persuasion are beginning to wonder
- that there is as little true determination to hold the line in Central America
as there seems to be in the Persian Gulf?

During the campaign Mr. Reagan enthusiastically endorsed an article published in
Commentary by a leading neo-conservative intellectual, Jeane J. Kirkpatrick,
entitled ''Dictatorships and Double Standards,'' which sharply criticized the
Carter Administration for allowing the Soviet Union, operating through Cuba, to
establish yet another outpost in Nicaragua and warning of a similar danger ahead
in El Salvador and other Central American countries. In view of the fact that
Mr. Reagan then appointed the author of this article as his representative to
the United Nations, and given also that his new Secretary of State expressed an
equally strong concern over developments in Central America, some of us expected
decisive action to be taken. Instead, at the first stirrings of domestic protest
over Secretary Haig's stated policies, the Administration grew alarmed and drew
back. It thereby forfeited the initiative at a moment when it commanded maximum
political support, allowing the opposition both in El Salvador and in the United
States to gather much greater strength than it could muster a year before.

Of the many ironies involved here, none is more biting from a neoconservative
point of view than the contrast between what is happening in Central America and
what is happening in Eastern Europe. A democratic movement develops in Poland;
the Soviet Union, acting through local puppets, suppresses it; and despite
crocodile tears and a few rhetorical gestures, the members of the Western
alliance - some explicitly, some implicitly - acquiesce on the ground that
Poland is in the Soviet sphere of influence and that the Russians have a
''right'' (supposedly recognized by the Yalta agreements of 1945) to friendly
regimes on their borders. (The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan two years earlier
was justified in the same terms, even without benefit of a Yalta-type
agreement.) Yet some of the very same people who invoke Yalta to rationalize
Soviet intervention deny the United States the same ''right'' to friendly
regimes in its own ''sphere of influence,'' and demand that the United States
accept (and even sponsor) Communist regimes in Nicaragua and El Salvador.

Of course the Reagan Administration does not agree with this view of the world.
On the contrary, the President has even said that he welcomes the signs of an
impending breakup of the Soviet empire from within and he has looked forward to
a time when Communism itself will disappear. Yet presented with an enormous
opportunity to further that process, what has President Reagan done?
Astonishingly, he has turned the opportunity down. This is all the more
astonishing in that the risks of seizing that opportunity were and are minimal.

In 1956, when the Hungarians rose up in rebellion against their Soviet masters,
the only help the United States could have given was military, and not even the
then Secretary of State, John Foster Dulles, the great apostle of ''rollback''
and liberation, was willing to court the danger of nuclear war that a military
response would have entailed; and so the United States did nothing as Soviet
tanks rolled into Budapest. In 1968 when the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia,
hoping to create a new kind of Communism, ''Communism with a human face,'' went
further in the direction of liberalization than the Kremlin considered proper,
the United States under Lyndon Johnson again did nothing as Soviet tanks rolled
into the streets of Prague. For, again, the only significant response would have
been military and again a military response was rightly deemed to be too
dangerous.

But when, in 1981, the troops (wearing Polish uniforms but clearly acting at the
command of the Soviet Union) were called out against the people of Poland for
the crime of having challenged the Communist Party's monopoly of power, there
was a significant nonmilitary response available to the United States. As the
Committee for the Free World declared in a public statement all we had to do was
to stop helping the Soviets and their Polish quislings. This would have entailed
such measures as cutting off credits and other forms of economic aid, making an
all-out effort to halt the construction of the natural-gas pipeline from Siberia
to West Europe and possibly reinstating an embargo on grain and technology.

The purpose would not have been to force the Soviet leaders to relent, but
rather to make it harder for them to stabilize the situation in Poland in
particular and to deal with their economic problems in general. The purpose, in
other words, would have been to make them pay the full price for the
consequences of the Communist system they have imposed by domestic force and
terror upon their own people and by imperial force and terror upon the peoples
of Eastern Europe.

A policy serving such a purpose would have been fully consistent with President
Reagan's ideas about the disintegration of the Soviet empire from within, and it
would have carried with it no risk of military confrontation. Yet what did he
do? Like Dwight Eisenhower and Lyndon Johnson in the face of the Soviet
invasions of Hungary and Czechoslovakia, he protested, and like Jimmy Carter in
the face of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan, he announced a program of
sanctions. Yet unlike Eisenhower and Johnson, he had options other than verbal
denunciations, and although those options were more farreaching in their
potential effects than Carter's, he could not bring himself to go even as far as
Carter had gone. One remembers easily enough that Carter instituted a grain
embargo and a boycott of the Moscow Olympics, but one is hard-pressed even to
remember what the Reagan sanctions were.

What one does remember, however, and with never failing amazement, is that the
United States Government under Ronald Reagan paid the interest due on the Polish
debt only a short time after martial law had been declared in Poland and while
it remained fully in effect.

To say that neo-conservatives were disappointed by all this understates the case
to an incalculable degree. Walter Laqueur, of the Center for Strategic and
International Studies at Georgetown University, spoke for most neo-conservatives
when he made the mordant observation that even Lenin, who allegedly predicted
that one day we capitalist countries would out of the lust for profits compete
to sell the Communists the rope with which to hang us, could never have imagined
that we would rush to give them the money to buy the rope.  George F. Will (who
is not a neo-conservative by historical pedigree but who, like two other
columnists, William Safire and R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr., may be thought of as
neo-conservative by doctrinal affinity) put it more succinctly. This, he said,
is an Administration that loves commerce more than it loathes Communism.

This love of commerce undoubtedly accounts for a great deal of what the Reagan
Administration has done in the field of foreign policy.  Or, to make the same
point in another way, this is an Administration whose ruling passion is concern
for the domestic economy and which conducts foreign policy with that concern
chiefly in mind. For example, it was largely because the Saudis might have done
something to damage the Reagan economic program that the idea of a strategic
consensus had to be shelved when they objected to it. Similarly with the Awacs
deal, which was rationalized by a national security argument so weak that one
had to conclude it had more to do with the balance of payments than with the
balance of power.

With regard to Central America, too, the interests of the domestic economy were
given precedence over the interests of national security. Thus the reason the
White House in the early days of the Reagan Administration instructed Secretary
Haig to tone down his warnings to Nicaragua and Cuba and to stop harping on El
Salvador was its fear that attention would be distracted from the President's
economic program. And where Poland was concerned, the Administration seemed more
worried about hurting a few bankers than about hurting the Soviet empire.

But the love of commerce, while a necessary part of the explanation, is not
sufficient to account for the foreign policy of the Reagan Administration. There
is a strategy being pursued and it bears a surprisingly close resemblance to the
original strategy of detente as conceived by Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger
in 1972.

Detente in this original form was based on the idea that the Soviet Union could
be induced to behave moderately and responsibly by means of a structure of
incentives and penalties. The incentives were economic benefits; the penalties
were the withdrawal of such benefits. Implicit in the arrangement was the
willingness of the West to accept an indefinite continuation of Soviet control
over its East European empire in exchange for a tacit Soviet willingness to give
up any further imperial ambitions, at least in areas where the pursuit of those
ambitions might lead to confrontation with the United States.

Neither Nixon nor Kissinger was so naive as to expect that the Soviet leaders
would practice such restraint if they thought they could score gains without
running any risks. Therefore the successful implementation of the strategy
called not only for economic pressures but also for maintaining American
military power at levels high enough to deter Soviet adventurism. Beyond this,
it required a readiness to threaten the deployment of that power in certain
circumstances (as indeed the Nixon Administration did in response to Soviet
provocations during the Yom Kippur war of 1973).

Henry Kissinger now argues that the successful implementation of this strategy
was frustrated by the impairment of executive authority as a result of Watergate
and by the Congressional opposition both to defense spending and the use of
American power as a result of Vietnam. But even Kissinger acknowledges that
detente in practice has worked to inhibit and restrain the West much more than
it has the Soviet Union.

Certainly this has also been the view of Ronald Reagan. Indeed, it would be hard
to think of a more consistent and more forceful critic of detente than Mr.
Reagan. Yet it is equally hard to think of a term that more accurately describes
his own foreign policy. It is, to be sure, detente in the sophisticated
Nixon-Kissinger form, not the corrupted adaptation, so often indistinguishable
from appeasement, pursued by the Carter Administration. Like Nixon and unlike
Carter, President Reagan believes that military power and the nerve to use it
are an indispensable foundation of detente. Nor does he accept the notion that
the Soviet Union has given up its revolutionary ambitions and has become or is
on the way to becoming a status quo power with, as Carter's first Secretary of
State, Cyrus Vance, once put it, ''dreams and aspirations'' similar to our own
for stability and peace.

Nevertheless, what President Reagan's response to the Polish crisis reveals is
that he has in practice been following a strategy of helping the Soviet Union
stabilize its empire, rather than a strategy aimed at encouraging the breakup of
that empire from within. He has said that the disintegration of the Soviet
empire may have begun and that the world can take heart from that prospect. Yet
instead of adopting tactics that would further the process, such as sending more
and better arms to the Afghans who are resisting the Soviet colonization of
their country, or providing more political support for the Angolan guerrillas
trying to expel the Cuban troops who have helped turn their country into a
Soviet satellite -he has allowed himself to be thrown onto the defensive in
Central America.

Worse still, he has in effect been acquiescing and even cooperating in Soviet
efforts to stabilize the situation in Poland. Even the sanctions he has enforced
are to be withdrawn - and replaced by economic aid - when the rigors of martial
law in Poland are relaxed.  But since this will happen only when the Jaruzelski
regime is confident that the forces of democratization have been completely
crushed, President Reagan's policy for all practical purposes will reward the
Polish quislings for winning the war they have launched against their own
people.

Finally, he has been shaky and uncertain on the issue of controlling nuclear
weapons. On the one hand, he has responded to the upsurge of antinuclear
hysteria both in Europe and the United States by explaining why the hopes of a
''freeze'' or an immediate reduction of all nuclear arsenals are illusory and
dangerous. But on the other hand, he has also desperately sought refuge from the
political pressures generated by the antinuclear movement in his own version of
the same illusory goal. Thus to head off the immediate freeze proposed by
Senators Edward Kennedy and Mark Hatfield, he has endorsed the Henry
Jackson-John Warner idea of a freeze in the future, after the Soviet margin of
superiority has been eliminated and parity restored. Yet accommodating the
antinuclear movement in this way is less likely to defuse it than to intensify
demands for deeper cuts in his defense budget and for unilateral concessions in
arms-control negotiations that will jeopardize his effort to restore parity, let
alone the ''margin of safety'' to which he has long been committed.

Many of us, after having voted for Carter in 1976, came to despair of him and
his policies, but we did not despair of the country because in Ronald Reagan we
thought we had found a political force capable of turning things around. If
President Reagan fails, however, where will we find a more promising
alternative? For those who see the world as I and so many of my neo-conservative
friends do, there is no one else in sight.

This is why we are hoping against hope that the President is not in fact fully
aware that the tactics he has adopted serve a very different strategy from the
one he professes to believe in. And it is also why we are hoping against hope
that he will recognize the discrepancy soon and move to correct it with the same
pertinacity he has shown in fighting for his economic program.

As Mr. Reagan has discovered in the course of that fight, it is very hard to
turn this country around. The forces of inertia, the political interests, the
bureaucratic habits which together mount an enormously powerful resistance to
change of any kind have to be confronted and contended with. The objective has
to be clear, the determination to pursue it has to be unrelenting and there has
to be a willingness to pay the necessary political price. Yet while all this has
been characteristic of President Reagan in his attempt to turn the economy
around, he has yet to address himself with an equivalent seriousness and energy
to the international situation. The inevitable consequence has been a vacuum
into which have come pouring all the old ideas and policies against which Ronald
Reagan himself has stood for so many years.

Is it too late for the President to put a classically Reaganite stamp on the
foreign policy of his own Administration? I do not think it is, but I do think
that time is running out, and we neoconservatives are not the only group in the
Reagan coalition growing daily more anguished over the slipping away of a
precious political opportunity that may never come again.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Drawings

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              115 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE POLITICAL TOUR BY A LOYAL DISSENTER

BYLINE: BY DANIEL YERGIN;
Daniel Yergin is author of ''Shattered Peace,'' co-author of ''Energy Future:
Report of the Energy Project at the Harvard Business School'' and co-author of
''Global Insecurity: a Strategy for Energy and Economic Renewal,'' which will be
published next month.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1717 words


THE PAST HAS ANOTHER PATTERN Memoirs.  By George W. Ball.  527 pp. New York:
W.W. Norton & Co. $19.95.

GEORGE BALL's whole career had prepared him for a leading role in shaping
American foreign policy, not for being a dissenter. The six years he spent as
Under Secretary of State in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations were, he
recollects, ''the most rewarding years of my life.'' Yet as early as 1961,
within a year of Kennedy's election, Mr. Ball embarked on a course that would
carry him into opposition to what proved to be the most inflammatory and
divisive issue to confront the United States in a generation - Vietnam.

He recounts in ''The Past Has Another Pattern'' that he privately warned
President John F. Kennedy in November 1961 that committing American troops to
Vietnam would prove a tragic error.  ''Within five years we'll have 300,000 men
in the paddies and jungles and never find them,'' he told the President. ''That
was the French experience.'' ''George,'' Kennedy replied with some asperity,
''you're just crazier than hell. That just isn't going to happen.''

Later, President Lyndon B. Johnson was to describe Mr. Ball as the
Administration's ''devil's advocate,'' implying that he was charged with the
role of in-house critic. But these memoirs leave no doubt that his critique was
deeply felt and persistent, and it created personal problems for him. ''As
usual, I was on the periphery,'' he writes at one point. That's like saying
Merrill Lynch dabbles in stocks. On the contrary, it is clear from this book how
much at the center Mr. Ball was, and how much he enjoyed it. One of his major
themes is the strain he felt between being at the center and wanting to stay
there, and yet finding himself in an opposition that he could not avoid.

To explain the timing of these memoirs, Mr. Ball cites the response Bertrand
Russell, in his 80's, gave when he was asked to write his memoirs: ''Who can say
it's not premature? Someday I may be the President of Mexico.'' Mr. Ball says,
''I have looked out across the Rio Grande without seeing a single favorable
whiff of smoke. ...'' Nor for that matter, he might have noted, closer to home,
over Foggy Bottom. So he has instead written a first-rate memoir of American
politics and foreign policy over half a century. It is literate, lively and
amusing, and in places it clarifies basic questions about the foreign policy of
the United States. The author is a very intelligent man, and he does betray a
certain impatience with those who don't quite understand.  Indeed, the tone of
the book is like the attitude Mr. Ball approvingly attributes to Harold
Macmillan - ''friendly but slightly condescending.''

There are some revealing stories here, such as Lyndon Johnson's diagnosis of why
John Connally, despite formidable talents, would never quite make it to the top:
''John Connally doesn't even have the tiniest trace of compassion,'' Mr. Ball
quotes the President as saying. ''He can leave more dead bodies in the field
with less remorse than any politician I ever knew, and that'll keep him from the
top.'' And Mr. Ball also has a good eye for the oblique detail - the flashlights
and jars of water and reading materials that his wife stashed in their basement
during the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962.

Among the most interesting of his well-etched portraits is that of Adlai
Stevenson, an old friend in whose 1952 and 1956 Presidential campaigns Mr. Ball
played major roles. (It was during the 1956 campaign, the first in which
television spots became of widespread importance, that Mr. Ball gave a speech in
which he predicted, ''Sooner or later, Presidential campaigns would have
professional actors as candidates who could speak the lines.'') His affection
and admiration for Stevenson were great, and he clearly believes that Stevenson
would have been an outstanding President. Yet he implies a superficiality and
carelessness that hardly fit with Stevenson's public image: ''So far as I could
see, he read few books and largely shaped his opinions from the comments and
suggestions of men and women he respected.'' He suggests that some of
Stevenson's political problems - his susceptibility to flattery, his difficulty
with decision-making - may have arisen simply from the fact that Stevenson,
divorced, did not have a wife, ''the institutionalized candid friend.''

Like Stevenson, George Ball was a Midwesterner. The son of an oil company
executive, he briefly considered working for a Ph.D. in English. Instead, he
studied law, went to Washington as a New Deal lawyer, and then returned to
Chicago and private practice, an experience he rather detested but still found
quite useful. He was given court assignments each morning. ''There was no chance
for preparation,'' he writes. ''Frequently, the only instruction I received was
to see that the other side's motion - whatever it might be - was denied. ... I
did not know the names of our regular clients and, hence, could not tell for
whom I was acting until counsel for the other side had spoken. Then, wildly
improvising an argument to counter what he had said, I would make an eloquent
protest. ... I suppose I did learn how to think on my feet and invent arguments
- a talent that was to prove useful on later occasions.''

DURING World War II, he worked on the Lend Lease program and in the Foreign
Economic Administration, and after the war he helped lead the Strategic Bombing
Survey. He then became general counsel to the French Supply Mission, where he
fell under the spell of the architect of European unity Jean Monnet and became
the American disciple of Monnet's vision, a good deal more fervent than many
Europeans.

It was Mr. Ball's European experience that made him an early critic of the
Vietnam War. His work in the Strategic Bombing Survey led him to doubt the
effectiveness of aerial bombing on a country that lacked industrial
infrastructure. And his postwar work with the French convinced him of the
futility of the French effort in Vietnam. So, when the United States became
involved there, he had a certain sense of deja vu: ''Not only was the terrain of
Indochina clearly unfit for the type of warfare France's seasoned overseas
troops had been trained to fight, but the irrational unwillingness of the Viet
Minh to take staggering losses made them an unconquerable adversary.  I was to
think of this often nine years later, when America compulsively repeated all of
France's mistakes on the same hostile terrain and against essentially the same
enemy. The French disclosed the same propensity for self-deception. ... Just as
the American civilian and military leaders were later to concoct new surefire
ways to win the war, so the French periodically announced new tactical schemes -
the Navarre Plan, the Salan Plan, the Leclerc Plan and the de Lattre de Tassigny
Plan - that would magically assure victory in a short period.''

Mr. Ball concluded early on that it would be impossible to win a limited war
against an adversary that was fighting a total war. Again and again, within the
confines of the Administration, he questioned our purposes in the war and never
got a very good reply. Finally, the answer seemed to be a ''psychological domino
theory,'' an assumption that other nations would lose confidence in America's
commitments elsewhere if this country withdrew from Vietnam. But he expressed
doubts that continuing engagement in a hopeless enterprise would improve
America's credibility or prove our resolve to defend other, more vital
interests.

YET he is left with a sense of futility. ''I provided,'' he concludes, ''no more
than a marginal constraint.'' Did he even do that? Mr. Ball struggles with, but
does not answer, the question of why, despite those skills he had developed as
an advocate, he did not win this case. Were the momentum and pressures in one
direction so strong that one senior skeptic simply was not enough? He would have
needed at least one other senior ally, near the center. In Mr. Ball's account,
that figure did appear in the person of Clark Clifford, but that was rather late
in the day. The reader may detect in these pages a suppressed anger in Mr. Ball
- anger that his arguments had not been more influential, anger that men he
admired and with whom he identified should have wasted their influence and
energy in prosecution of the war, anger that he was seen at last to have become
aligned with an antiwar movement whose politics and postures he found
distasteful.

''The Past Has Another Pattern'' is of manageable length, a point much in its
favor at a time when that cannot be said of all prominent memoirs. Still, in
some ways, it is too elliptical. One would have liked to know more about the
personal relations of Mr. Ball with his colleagues during the Vietnam War, as
well as about his career over the last decade and a half as an investment banker
with Lehman Brothers.

FINALLY, there is the recurrent, though hardly developed, expression of
irritation with Israel, and in particular the repeated implication that the
Middle East impasse is the result of Israeli policies and intransigence. Mr.
Ball has written on this subject elsewhere; still, given his tendency to return
repeatedly to this question in glancing fashion, he owed it to his readers to
develop his arguments. As it is, his stance is puzzling and confusing. In this
case he is less sensitive than in other foreign policy situations to the dynamic
character of the problem.

''The Past Has Another Pattern'' is a colorful and thought provoking tour of the
recent and not-so-recent past, conducted by a skillful guide. Of all the issues
in which he was involved, Mr.  Ball cared most about the stability of
European-American relations and the quest for European unity. That quest is
sometimes dismissed now as an idealistic dream. On the contrary, it had very
practical purposes, of which the most important was the reintegration and
anchoring of Germany in the Western world. Indeed, the success was so great that
it is sometimes taken for granted. But at a time when America's connection with
Western Europe and in particular with Germany needs to be nourished, there is a
tendency among some on this side of the Atlantic to try to choke it. George
Ball's memoirs are a reminder of how unwise that would be.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              116 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE VIETNAM WAR: WINNING IT AND LOSING IT

BYLINE: By GADDIS SMITH; Gaddis Smith teaches the history of American foreign
policy. He is chairman of the History Department at Yale.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1208 words


THE ENDLESS WAR Fifty Years of Struggle in Vietnam.  By James Pinckney Harrison.
372 pp. New York: The Free Press/Macmillan. $17.95.

PLANNING A TRAGEDY The Americanization of the War in Vietnam.  By Larry Berman.
203 pp. New York: W. W. Norton & Co. $14.95.

FOURTEEN years after President Lyndon Johnson recognized he could not lead the
United States to victory in Vietnam and seven years after the last American
helicopter clattered out of Saigon, the battle over the meaning of what happened
goes on. Why did the United States intervene? Why did we fail? Were we stupid,
immoral or both?

The dominant characteristic of American debate at the time of the Vietnam war,
and of most historical retrospection since, was and is narcissistic. Hawks and
doves alike, in their adversarial search for scapegoats, have sought answers by
looking primarily within American government and society. Hawks say that we lost
because we did not use enough or the right kind of military power, or that
Presidents Johnson and Richard Nixon were betrayed by the old foreign policy
establishment that had lost its nerve, or that a radical minority succeeded in
persuading the naive and gullible of American guilt and immorality. Doves of
various feather blame the Government's decision-making machinery, or the grip of
false historical analogies, or irrational psychological needs, or capitalistic
repression.

The people who won the war in Vietnam are hardly mentioned amidst all the
shouting. James Pinckney Harrison's ''The Endless War'' points to that
remarkable omission and succeeds in redressing it.The outcome of 1975, he
argues, was the result above all of ''the incredible perseverence and resilience
of the Vietnamese Communists'' over more than 50 years. By drawing on French and
American scholarship and the pamphlets, speeches and party documents of
Vietnamese Communist leaders, he tells a heroic tale of courage, lifelong
commitment and political brilliance.

Ho Chi Minh and his colleagues founded the Vietnamese Communist party in 1930
and proceeded to develop a blend of anti-imperialism, nationalism, Confucian
insistence on moral responsibility, programs of political and economic reform,
and a mastery of organization surpassing that of all potential rivals. In the
1930's the Communists were hunted, jailed and executed by the French. But a
remnant survived to lead a popular war of liberation from 1946 to 1954. Then,
argues Mr. Harrison, who teaches history at Hunter College, the United States
intervened to deprive the Communists of a victory they had won by their own
efforts.

During the American phase of the war in the 1960's and early 1970's the
Vietnamese Communists endured horrendous casualties, but their morale never
faltered. Their Tet offensive of 1968 was a psychological victory, although by
the American military calculus of counting bodies it should have been a crushing
defeat. Then came President Nixon's policy of Vietnamization, the withdrawal of
the last American combat forces after the Paris accords of 1973, and the final
Communist victory of 1975.  Mr. Harrison quotes with approval the comment of
Italian journalist Titziano Terzani that the Vietnamese Communist leaders who
had prevailed after so long a struggle ''had an inner fire that made their lives
an extraordinarily complete experience rather than an accidental one. And yet
these same qualities, this capacity to overcome the natural and acceptable
inclinations of man, seemed to me to lead the Revolution itself to the borders
of inhumanity ... in the pit of my stomach I could not help finding all this
simultaneously extraordinary and disturbing.''

''The Endless War'' would be a better book if it had a touch more of Mr.
Terzani's ambivalence. If Mr. Harrison were more detached and less repetitious
in his outrage against the level of American bombing (an outrage this reviewer
shares), he would be better armed against the potential charge, from those who
have difficulty admitting admirable qualities in Communist enemies, that he has
written a propaganda tract. The book is romantic and gushy at times. Its
treatment and understanding of the American side are thin and given to
stereotype. But its basic message concerning the staying power and deep
indigenous roots of Vietnamese Communism is correct and needs to be made
accessible to a wide audience.

LARRY BERMAN'S ''Planning a Tragedy,'' in contrast, has little to say about the
Vietnamese, Communist or other, for it belongs to the mainstream of inward
analysis and specifically to the branch concerned with decision making. ''The
Endless War'' encompasses decades; ''Planning a Tragedy'' focuses on a single
month: July 1965. Its subject is the relationship of President Johnson to his
senior advisers during the time he decided the United States should take over
direct responsibility for the ground war in Vietnam.

Mr. Berman, a political scientist at the University of California, Davis, and no
apologist for American behavior, does acquit President Johnson of the charge
that he cowed his advisers into mindless conformity to his compulsive
determination to win at any cost. By quoting at fascinating length from recently
declassified documents in the Johnson Library at the University of Texas, he
traces a battle of memoranda waged in the air-conditioned isolation of the White
House.  The details are new, especially concerning the skepticism and hesitancy
of National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, but the overall picture is
familiar.

We see Secretary of State Dean Rusk almost theological in his reverence for
commitments against aggression; Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara seeking
hope in statistics and assuming without evidence that the enemy will obligingly
abandon guerrilla tactics and meet American firepower head-on in conventional
battle; Under Secretary of State George Ball warning prophetically of disaster
and urging tactical retreat while there is still time; President Johnson afraid
on the one hand of being seen as weak and on the other of allowing the war to
escalate into direct conflict with China or Russia; and nearly everyone unable
to define objectives or to think persistently about the consequences should the
assumptions on which escalation was based be wrong. Mr. Ball was persistent. Mr.
Bundy voiced strong momentary doubts. But the President wanted ''proof'' that
escalation would not work.

Those who planned a tragedy were not mindless optimists. They were trapped by a
self-imposed necessity of committing ever more resources to an undefined goal.
Leslie Gelb and Richard Betts in ''The Irony of Vietnam'' (1979), still the best
single book on American policy, say that the goal was not losing, nothing more.
Mr.  Berman's microscopic study provides confirmation.

Both of the two books under review have limitations. ''Planning a Tragedy''
shows how oblivious American decision makers were to the nature of Vietnamese
Communism, but its focus is so narrow in time and space that it will prove
useful principally to those who have already read widely about the Vietnam war.
''The Endless War'' is ambitious and passionate. But its almost worshipful tone
will make it unconvincing to those who most need to absorb the message.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              117 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

May 2, 1982

SECTION: Section 7; Page 4, Column 6; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 305 words


NONFICTION
THE DAUGHTERS OF KARL MARX: Family Correspondence 1866-98. Commentary and Notes
by Olga Meier.  15 THE ENDLESS WAR: Fifty Years of Struggle in Vietnam. By James
Pinckney Harrison.  3 IN A DIFFERENT VOICE. By Carol Gilligan.14 THE INVENTION
OF THE REAL. By Richard Stern.  18 IS THERE NO PLACE ON EARTH FOR ME? By Susan
Sheehan.  14 THE JOURNALS OF SYLVIA PLATH. Edited by Ted Hughes and Frances
McCullough.  1 KARL MARX - FRIEDRICH ENGELS: Selected Letters. The Personal
Correspondence, 1844-77. Edited by Fritz J. Raddatz.15 LANGUAGE OF THE
UNDERWORLD. By David W. Maurer.  9 MIGRANT FARMWORKERS: A Caste of Despair.  By
Ronald L. Goldfarb.18 THE PAST HAS ANOTHER PATTERN: Memoirs. By George Ball.  3
PLANNING A TRAGEDY: The Americanization of the War in Vietnam. By Larry Berman.
3 POETS IN THEIR YOUTH: A Memoir. By Eileen Simpson.  1 THE SECOND AMERICAN
REVOLUTION: And Other Essays, (1976-82). By Gore Vidal.  7 THE SEX CONTRACT: The
Evolution of Human Behavior.  By Helen E. Fisher.  18
FICTION
L.A. WOMAN. By Eve Babitz.  12 THE PORTAGE TO SAN CRISTOBAL OF A.H. By George
Steiner.  13 PRIZE STORIES 1982: The O. Henry Awards.  Edited by William
Abrahams.  11 THE RANDOM REVIEW 1982. Edited by Gary Fisketjon and Jonathan
Galassi.11 WATCHFIRES. By Louis Auchincloss.  12
FEATURES
TALK WITH GEORGE STEINER. By D.J.R. Bruckner.  12 WOMEN AND SCIENCE FICTION. By
Susan Schwartz.  11
DEPARTMENTS
ABOUT BOOKS AND AUTHORS. By Edwin McDowell.  38 BEST SELLERS.  36 EDITORS'
CHOICE.  36 LETTERS.  41 NONFICTION IN BRIEF. By Martha Bayles.  18 PAPERBACK
BEST SELLERS.  40 PAPERBACKS: NEW AND NOTEWORTHY.  39 PAPERBACK TALK. By Ray
Walters.39 READING AND WRITING. By Anatole Broyard.  43
Picture Credits:1. Randall Jarrell by Elliott Erwitt. Robert Lowell by Arni.
Illumination on page one by Paul Meisel.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              118 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME OF THE BEST

BYLINE:  By NOEL PERRIN;
Noel Perrin's most recent book is ''Second Person Rural."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1188 words


PRIZE STORIES 1982 The O. Henry Awards.  Edited and Introduced by William
Abrahams.  321 pp. New York: Doubleday & Co. $15.95.

THE RANDOM REVIEW 1982 Edited by Gary Fisketjon and Jonathan Galassi.  317 pp.
New York: Random House. Cloth, $14.50.  Ballantine Books. Paper, $3.95

IN one of Isak Dinesen's stories, a Danish nobleman sits thinking about roses. A
rose isn't a rose, he reflects - at least, not in art. Depending on where and
when the painter lived, it inevitably becomes a Chinese or a Dutch, a rococco or
an Empire rose - and something he personally can date within 20 years and place
within 500 miles. He then reflects how curious it is that he can do this, since
the artist had not set out to express time or place; he had just aimed to paint
a flower.

Reading the first annual ''Random Review'' and the 62nd annual ''Prize Stories:
The O. Henry Awards,'' I find a similar thought arising in my mind. The stories
and poems in these two collections are mostly about timeless things like
courtship, adolescence and parenthood - and yet how unmistakably redolent they
are of the single American year (late 1980 to late 1981) in which they were all
published. Nowhere else have I seen the beginning of the 1980's in such sharp
focus.

This is the more remarkable in that neither book attempts to offer any focus
whatsoever. Each claims only that here is the best short American writing of the
year. And each worked to earn that claim.  William Abrahams, editor of the ''O.
Henry,'' picked his 19 prize stories out of 146 publications, ranging from
Rolling Stone to The Gay Alternative to The New Yorker. And from The Black
Warrior Review to New Mexico Humanities Review to Playboy. Jonathan Galassi and
Gary Fisketjon, the editors of ''The Random Review,'' read their way through 600
magazines before selecting 10 stories, 15 poems and two essays as the best that
Americans did. No big fish could have slipped through these nets.

All sorts of patterns emerge. The most striking is the enormous streak of
passivity that runs through this work. Martin Sobel, in a story by Kenneth
Gewertz (''The O. Henry''), meets a marvelous woman just the right age and
temperament for him (great cook, too); his accomplishment in the story is not to
call or see her again. Elaine Babcock, in a story by Patricia Zelver (''The
Random Review''), is 29. She has been married for 11 years to a young executive
who helps set up new franchises for a fast-food chain. This means constant
traveling. She travels with him, and they live in motels, where she spends her
time watching television. Near the end of the story, having got interested in
local television ads (it's her way of feeling the loss of roots), she calls a
repairman she saw in such an ad and spends her liveliest day in 11 years getting
ready for him to come. When he does, they have an abortive encounter.

A poem by Richard Blessing ends with a woman feeling sad on her birthday:
I won't be rich or famous, you said.  And I don't have a baby. Now it's too
late.
What does the man answer?
I pull you close. We have missed nothing. It is our only life.

IN a story by Nora Johnson (''The O. Henry''), gorgeous Mandy Rivers, 23,
succeeds in pulling loose from the work ethic and learning to lay back. Tobias
Wolff's ''Next Door'' - one of the two stories collected in both books - ends
with a middle-aged couple deciding not to do anything about the psychopath next
door, then creeping into one of their two twin beds to comfort each other, but
not making love, and finally with the man imagining a new human race as passive
as plants - ''like white trees in a land where no one has ever been.''

When people do act in these stories, they're usually engaged in rather unhopeful
activities. They're likely to be getting a divorce or responding to a holdup or
falling in love with someone of a wildly different age. You hear of a man
marrying his daughter's roommate at Wellesley or - in a brilliant story by Alice
Adams (''The O. Henry'') - a woman in her 30's obsessed with a college freshman
named Seth.

Not all the stories fit these patterns. There's also a baseball story, a Vietnam
story, a science fiction story. (The surviving astronaut is passive in a way
that would infuriate Robert Heinlein.) There's even a boy-meets-girl story that
could have come straight from The Saturday Evening Post in 1948, except that
pretty red-haired girls didn't jog and did wear bras in 1948.

Almost all the stories in both books are at least pretty good; most are very
good. Peter Taylor's ''The Gift of the Prodigal'' - the other piece that gets
included in both collections -may be the best of all, though Alice Adams, Joseph
McElroy, Stephen Dixon all press him hard. Someone like Amy Herrick, whose story
(''The Random Review''), picked up from Kenyon Review, is her first published
work, is no mean competitor either. The American short story is clearly
thriving. Its younger practitioners do rely heavily on summary - too heavily, I
think, though this is usually a fault that arises from the virtue of their
seeing situations complexly. But there are stories here - lots of them -that
make Poe and Hawthorne look primitive, at least in technique.

THE poetry is another matter. Of the 15 poems in ''The Random Review'' - 16 if
you count Frank Bidart's hybrid poem-story called ''The War of Vaslav Nijinsky''
- not one strikes me as fully successful. Many strike me as suffering from a
curious delusion on their authors' part. The authors seem to think that merely
to name a specific time and place is to achieve meaning and poignancy.
Hemingway may have been right when he said in ''A Farewell to Arms'' that the
war had drained the meaning out of words like ''honor'' and ''glory,'' and all
that retained meaning were a few place names of battles and a few numbers of
regiments -communal memories, as it were. But that in no way implies the
corollary that just any old name or place is sure to have an aura. Charles
Wright can speak of ''the Kingsport Times-News/ In the summer of 1953,'' or Mark
Rudman can write, ''109 miles of high tension wire/ between here and Toledo,''
and accomplish practically nothing.

If these 15 or 16 poems are really the pick of a year's work, then poetry is in
a far worse state than fiction. I suspect the truth is that poetry sweeps a
greater arc. Something moderately like a poem is much easier to write (and get
published) than a semi-story, and a great poem is both harder to write and a
higher thing than a good story. Great poems are rare.

That brings up a final reflection. The annual O. Henry collection, limiting
itself to stories, gains a focus. It serves to identify our best writers of
short fiction, and it even emerges as a book one can read for pleasure. ''The
Random Review 1982,'' admirable in its intention, is too dispersed. The poems
are not much; the two essays (one on Brecht, one on metrics), perfectly
competent of their kind, seem arbitrarily chosen. The editors must have been
aware of the pun in their title: the Random (House) Review is random. Perhaps
they thought the randomness a strength. It's not.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              119 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TALK WITH GEORGE STEINER

BYLINE: By D. J. R. Bruckner;
D. J. R. Bruckner is an editor of The New York Times Book Review.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 13, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words


George Steiner teaches at the University of Geneva, Switzerland, and at
Cambridge University, England. His novel, ''The Portage to San Cristobal of A.
H.'' has been adapted by Christopher Hampton for the London stage. The following
interview was conducted by telephone with Mr. Steiner in Cambridge.

Q. Why use a novel to raise the moral issues canvassed in ''The Portage to San
Cristobal of A.H.?''

A. I believe that a work of art, like metaphors in language, can ask the most
serious, difficult questions in a way which really makes the readers answer for
themselves; that the work of art far more than an essay or a tract involves the
reader, challenges him directly and brings him into the argument.

Q. Why did you make that final speech by Hitler so provocative?

A. There are many examples in literature of exactly this kind of imaginative
challenge. I don't compare myself to two obvious examples; we wonder to this day
why Milton does not have a real answer given to Satan in ''Paradise Lost.'' We
wonder why Dostoyevsky is careful not to have a single word of answer to the
Grand Inquisitor's overwhelming speech in ''The Brothers Karamazov.''
''Provocative'' is your word. The Hitler speech is only one of a number of long,
texts in the novel. Equally massive, equally important, if not more so, is the
great litany of suffering spoken earlier in the novel by Lieber (the master
Nazi-hunter).

Q. Some critics say that you made Hitler more eloquent than he really was.

A. I would be very careful on that. My Hitler is a fantasy, an invention, a
fictive figure. The only exact point of resemblance is that the real Hitler did
say that the Jews had invented the human conscience. That, I think, is a very
brilliant and disturbing insight, which I use on a number of occasions in the
novel. The rest is, of course, an invented figure. Now, however, the eloquence
of the real Hitler was overwhelming, and most of the critics are either too
young to remember or simply very, very ignorant. The man who was a penniless,
unemployed hoodlum in 1922, who spoke on the streets of Munich in the driving
rain and sleet, was 10 years later master of Germany, 20 years later master of
Europe, and, had he for example decided to woo his Jewish atomic scientists, he
might well have been master of everything. All that he did by his incomparable
command of language, by the almost unimaginable control and power he had over
German speech.

The idea for the novel arises out of my lifelong work on language.  Central to
everything I am and believe and have written is my astonishment, naive as it
seems to people, that you can use human speech both to bless, to love, to build,
to forgive and also to torture, to hate, to destroy and to annihilate. In the
gospel we read: ''In the beginning was the word.'' And I am asking: Could there
be a word at the end? If there is a divine word, a word of creation and
forgiveness, is there by the same token a word of final destruction, a word
which un-mans man? And did Hitler come very near to knowing that word?

The book was written at a single go in 1975 and 1976 in Geneva.  This is very
difficult to explain: With many of my other books I would say I wrote them; with
this one I would say simply it wrote me. It springs out of my scholarly work,
but also out of my thinking about the horror and terror of the Holocaust. I
insist on this, because this novel is also about Cambodia and Vietnam, El
Salvador and Burundi and so on. My feeling is that one has to grapple with the
abyss if one can.

Q. Is the attention the book is getting due in part to its concern with all
those other situations, not just Hitler and the Holocaust?

A. Absolutely. I happened to see the play (adapted from the book) again recently
in London. Overwhelmingly the audience was young people, who probably know very
little about Hitler. But they responded to all the parts of the book that deal
with the jungle, with the helicopters coming in over the Amazon, with the
massacres in our time. Now, my notion is that when Hitler says that ''I'm only a
man of my time,'' that seems an argument which needs very careful thinking
about.

Q. Does this book mark a change of career?

A. No. I wrote a book called ''In Bluebeard's Castle,'' and much of this novel
is already contained in that and in an early volume of stories about the year
1941-42 called ''Anno Domini.'' I am at work now on a scholarly book on poetry
and politics, about the great myth of Antigone, Antigone as a symbol of human
freedom and protest and revolt and anarchic relationship to God. And I am going
on with my normal teaching.

This winter has been terribly public; the Italian edition comes out this week;
it has been a best seller in France; now there's the American edition; there's a
Russian underground edition. But I'm sure this will pass pretty quickly as media
events do.

Q. With the translations and the play, this book must be making some money for
you.

A. It's a very small book. The English version, as I wanted, came out as a
paperback original. Yes, I imagine that particularly in France, where it's been
taken by a big bookclub and where the excitement is tremendous, I will be
earning some money; but nothing, of course, by star standards.

Q. Is there a message of hope in the book?

A. You've asked a terribly difficult question. I'm sorry, I'm absolutely
convinced that there is at the moment no realistic prospect for very much hope
in human affairs. We are already in a position, the United States and the Soviet
Union, to kill every man, woman and child on this earth apparently 11 times over
or some such insane figure, and the escalation is now, as you know, speeding up
from day to day. So I don't see how an honest person, a layman, can speak of
hope.

Q. But if language is as important as you've been saying it is, you must think a
book like this is a weapon of some kind.

A. Yes. I hope this book is a warning. Particularly it's a book written in
nightmarish anguish over the fate of Israel, of course.  And in the bewildered
and anguished belief that, unless we rethink that situation, it too could
produce a human catastrophe which would be Hitler's terrible posthumous
vengeance.

What I want to underline is that this book is a cry towards its readers; it is
not a sermon. What is absolutely key is the name of the Indian (who falls in
with the search party as it emerges from the jungle) which is spelled T-e-k-u.
That is the Hebrew word used in the Talmud to say that there are issues here
beyond our wisdom to answer or decide. That is why the last words spoken are not
the fictive Hitler's but the forest Indian's. And the problem is who is in the
descending helicopter with which the unfinished last sentence of the book ends?
Is it you and I? Is it Brazilian gangsters who'll gun the search party down from
the air? Is it the United States coming in to snatch Hitler? Is it Lieber and an
Israeli patrol? This helicopter in a sense is the undecided. And the reader, if
the book worked for him, is on board. I can say only one more thing, after 30
years of teaching: Never underestimate the liberty, the generosity of your
student or your reader. Never presume on his freedom to reject or to accept, to
approve or to correct. Jean-Paul Sartre says, ''Between a true writer and a true
reader there must be a pact of generosity.'' And now that this book is about to
come out in the immensely complex ethnic community in the United States, this is
of course what I'm hoping for - the pact of generosity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of George Steiner

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              120 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 2, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HERO IS HONORED AFTER 16-YEAR WAIT

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 1, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1597 words


DANIELSON THE oldest, John, is 18 now. He knows about Vietnam. His father,
Armand Comire, was in and out of military hospitals while John was growing up.
Danielle, the other child in the family, is only 4 years old. When she grows up,
Mr. Comire had figured, she'll know about Vietnam only from the history books,
which he says aren't enough, and the movies, which he doesn't like, and from the
scarred story that shrapnel wrote all over him.

Mr. Comire, who is 38, thought there ought to be something more lasting to give
her when he dies (which one of his doctors said should have happened years ago).
It was for Danielle, he said, that he asked last year for the Purple Heart he
had earned in 1966 but never received. And on April 12 he got it, pinned on by a
brigadier general in the chambers of the Connecticut State Senate.

''For a day I was a celebrity,'' said Mr. Comire, ''and now I'm a nobody
again.'' He smiled.  He said he didn't feel special even on the day he enlisted
in the Army, at age 21. He does not remember being especially patriotic. He was
just bored with his job at the mill. He thought the Army would give him ''a
better idea what to do with my life.'' He thought he might try to become a
paratrooper ''because you had to be a special kind of man.'' Vietnam, he
recalled, seemed to him ''just a country with a lot of jungle.''

It was 1964.  He was practical about a lot of things. Like dying, for instance.
You go to fight a war, you just might get shot, he figured. So on the eve of his
departure for Vietnam in May 1966, after two years of training, he came home to
say so long.

His Mom cried. His Dad said to take care. One brother told him not to go.
Another brother stayed up late talking with him. None of them knew the goodbyes
Mr. Comire gave were meant forever.

''You tell them you'll be back in a year,'' he said, ''even though inside you're
not sure. I figured I would die there. There's every likelihood you'll be killed
and if you're not prepared, you may not survive.''

''I certainly didn't want to die, but my country was in a war and I was assigned
to go,'' he said. ''Not to go would be an act of cowardice.''

So he went. And he just about died.  He never did get be a paratrooper. The
Vietcong, he said, liked to put sharpened sticks in the landing fields, and the
Americans learned to quit trying. He served instead on the helicopter assault
team in the 101st Airborne Division.

He remembers how the copters hovered above the darkened jungle. The only light
came from the barrels of Vietcong rifles. Each flicker, Mr. Comire said,
reminded him of Christmas tree lights.

Mr. Comire's last attack, though, found him on the ground. For two days, his
unit had controlled a hilltop near Lak Tho, occasionally aiming artillery fire
at the Vietcong below. The third night, the Vietcong fought back.

It was June 7, 1966, at about 9:45 P.M. Mr. Comire remembers because he looked
at his watch. The watch got ruined that night.  First came the mortars. The
thing about mortars, Mr. Comire said, is the way they whistle. A soldier can
tell by the whistle how close to him a mortar will land. He heard the third
round of Vietcong mortars heading for him. He yelled, ''Mortar!'' at his two
buddies.  Then he dove for the dirt.

Before he hit, a mortar di, four feet to his left. He could not tell where he
was hit, because he hurt everywhere. He remembers wondering how it was possible
to suffer so much and still survive.

Silently, the same way he had said the forever farewells to his folks, Mr.
Comire prayed and prepared to die. He tried to remain alert, thinking, ''Dying
was going to be a new experience. You only get to try it once, and I should be
aware.''

Instead, he pretended. Vietcong soldiers had followed the sound of Mr. Comire's
moans. He held his breath as he felt one soldier brush against his right leg. He
imagined being shot to death with his own rifle. He heard the Vietcong soldier
load a 30-shot magazine into his AK-47.

The round peppered the ground, somehow missing Mr. Comire. He heard the soldier
reload and fire again, and a third time. Ninety bullets had been spent, landing
so close - the holes like a sewing pattern around his body -they kicked up rocks
that tore Mr. Comire's uniform and stung his side. But only one bullet had hit
him, simply grazing his calf.

After two hours, Mr. Comire tried to walk to the hilltop, which the Americans
again controlled. He heard air pushing into his chest.  He remembered from a
training film the sound meant there was a hole in his chest, clean to the lungs.
He fell to the ground, placing his arm across the wound. He tried to walk again,
holding the arm over the wound. He passed out.

Near daybreak, eight hours after the mortar had hit, the Americans came for Mr.
Comire. He recognized a sergeant named Morningside.  ''The look on his face was,
'What are you doing alive,' '' Mr.  Comire said. ''So I told him a joke. He
didn't laugh, but I did. I said, 'That's the last time I tell you a joke.' '' He
passed out again.

Waking in the first of many hospitals, Mr. Comire learned of his damages.
Shrapnel had blinded his left eye, lodged in his bowel, torn open his chest,
shoved part of his stomach toward his lungs and sheared off the knuckle from his
right pinkie.

An Army sergeant told Mr. Comire's parents on the telephone their son probably
wouldn't live until morning, he said. Amid a Western Union strike, the family
heard nothing else for two weeks, when they got a letter Mr. Comire had dictated
to a Red Cross aide.

More hospitals and more operations followed, and strange fevers, the amputation
of his finger, the loss of 43 pounds in one week. In the third hospital, Chelsea
Naval Hospital in Massachusetts, another patient told Mr. Comire that the
injured remnants of the 101st were getting Purple Hearts.

Mr. Comire asked the military liaison at the hospital for his.  ' ''You want a
Purple Heart? Here's a Purple Heart,' '' he remembers the officer saying as he
tossed a medal on the desk between them. ''I said, 'That's not my Purple Heart
and that's not the manner I'm supposed to receive it.' ''

A year later, in 1967, he came home to Danielson. His friends had married or
moved away. His old job at the mill was as boring as before. He lived at home
with his parents and his wife, Carole. The trappings of life reminded him of
1964. Only he was different.

He took a job as a campus policeman at the University of Connecticut at Storrs
in time to watch the antiwar protests.  ''When you saw them burn an American
flag and raise a VC flag,'' he said, ''it took a lot of self-control not to get
out of the cruiser and tear the flag out of their hands,'' he said.

It was not, he said, the time to demand a medal; he settled for knowing, inside,
that he hadn't been a coward.  Years passed. Shrapnel abscessed in Mr. Comire's
chest and he had more operations. He lost six months of work in a single year.
Finally, in 1972, he received a total disability pension.

His daughter was born. A 19-year-old neighbor said she had never heard of
Vietnam. The movies appeared -''The Deer Hunter,'' which was ''asinine'' to him;
''Apocalypse Now,'' which he thought was ''overboard.'' As for ''Coming Home,''
he didn't go to Jane Fonda movies.

Everything seemed to make Mr. Comire think about that medal.  ''When I was
younger, I shrugged it off,'' he said. ''As I got older, it was more important
to have it, to pass it along. My daughter should have something more than my
stories. If there wasn't something solid for her to look on, she'd never know
her father was in a war.''

He also wanted something for himself.  ''You know,'' he said, ''I had it coming
and I never received it. I believed in what we were fighting for. Communist
government is one of the cruelest kinds on earth. I'll always believe that. I'd
hate to think I got blown halfway to hell for nothing.''

Mr. Comire almost wrote to someone about his medal during Vietnam Veterans Week
in 1981. He thought that if it was safe to have a week for guys like him, it
must be safe to ask for a medal. Finally, toward Christmas, he took his wife's
advice and wrote to his Congressman, Representative Sam Gejdenson, Democrat of
Bozrah.

In January, Mr. Comire got a call from Mr. Gejdenson's Norwich office. He was
asked how he wanted to get his Purple Heart, in the mail or in person. Mr.
Comire said in person, although the day at the State Capitol ''turned out to be
a much bigger event than I thought.''

But it was not without its final slap. When Mr. Comire returned to Danielson, he
looked closely at the medal. Beneath the legend, ''for Military Merit,'' his
name had been spelled ''Corime.''

He said he won't bother asking the Army to fix the inscription.  ''Maybe I'll
take it to a jeweler,'' he said. ''I don't want to make a big thing out of it,
because it might take another 16 years.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Armand with wife and kids outside their home
p.16

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              121 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnamese Attack Kills 20

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 53 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 2


Twenty people were killed and more than 100 were wounded when Vietnamese forces
shelled a camp harboring Cambodian guerrillas and civilians in western Cambodia
Saturday, Thai military officials said today. They said more than 40 artillery
shells hit San Rorcha-Ngan camp.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              122 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

FALKLANDS RAID: BAPTISM OF FIRE FOR AGING BOMBER;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 2


The Royal Air Force reached back to the technology of the 1950's and an aircraft
first deployed as a nuclear bomber in 1960 to mount the single most effective
attack of Britain's Falkland Islands conflict.

Plucked out of impending retirement, a Vulcan made the 3,500-mile flight from
Ascension Island and attacked the runway at the Stanley airfield. According to
British reports, the attack effectively put the airfield out of operation by
cratering the runway. The bomber was apparently refueled in flight by a Victor
tanker.

The operation seemed to prove the usefulness of the long-range bomber in
conventional warfare. United States Air Force sources pointed out that America
had also used elderly bombers, the B-52G, first deployed in 1959, and the B-52H,
dating from 1962, effectively for conventional attacks in Vietnam in the late
1960's and early 70's.

Like the Vulcan, the B-52 was designed to drop nuclear bombs. Like the Vulcan,
it never has.No one was happier over the reappearance of the heavy bomber in the
Falklands than two of the foremost advocates of what was called ''heavy
bombardment'' in World War II.

Former Air Commanders

One was Marshal of the Royal Air Force Sir Arthur Harris, who commanded the
Royal Air Force's Bomber Command during the second half of the war. He is 90
years old. The other was Lieut. Gen. James Doolittle, a former commander of the
American Eighth Air Force, now 86.

They were in London for a reunion of the surviving aircrew of Bomber Command.
Sir Arthur was typically outspoken about the Vulcan attack.

He emphasized the importance of knocking out runways ''so that our enemy, if he
is worth calling that, cannot use them.'' The British, he added, ''have done
exactly what should be done, trying to destroy the runway that the enemy is
using. I would have done exactly that.''

Calls for Heavier Bombs

Sir Arthur, as he left a commemoration service at St. Clement Dane's Church,
added that if he had been in command he would have used heavier bombs than the
1,000-pound missiles dropped by the Vulcan. This, he said, would have resulted
in craters even bigger than those 30 feet across and 20 feet deep that were left
by the Vulcan.

The R.A.F.'s 84 Vulcans were scheduled to be phased out of service this summer.
In the future Britain's nuclear deterrent is to rest with a small fleet of
ballistic missile submarines and R.A.F.  Buccaneer and Jaguar strike aircraft.

Neither of these aircraft has the range of the Vulcans. Nor do they have other
qualities such as the ability to fly at 55,000 feet, out of range of
surface-to-air missiles, or to approach a target ''on the deck,'' thus avoiding
enemy radar. In the attack on the Stanley airfield neither of these qualities
was important. According to Ministry of Defense officials all radar on and
around the airfield had been jammed by electronic countermeasures.

When it first flew in the 60's, the Vulcan was the world's first delta-wing
bomber, with a speed of Mach 0.95, or almost the speed of sound. In its day the
Vulcan, like the B-52, was considered capable of penetrating Soviet air defenses
to hit targets in the interior.

Changes in Technology

Technology and time caught up with the Vulcan. Submarine-launched ballistic
missiles improved in accuracy. The submarines that fired them were believed less
easy to hit than bombers tied to airfields.  The development of the
surface-to-air missile linked to radar increased the difficulty of getting
through Soviet defenses.

The confrontation with Argentina over the Falklands resurrected the Vulcan. The
immediate need was for a heavy bomber based on Ascension Island that could reach
Stanley. The Vulcan was the only answer, although the Ministry of Defense
appeared far from happy about the choice.

On April 18 the ministry announced that it was modifying 10 Vulcans to carry
conventional bombs. The bomb load under those conditions is 21 1,000-pound bombs
or any combination of weapons equal to that overall payload.

''It's a long way from deciding to acquire a capability to deciding to use that
capability,'' a Ministry of Defense official said at the time.

Little Time Needed

In the event it took less than two weeks to modify the Vulcan, train the crews
and for the British Chiefs of Staff to realize that they had a weapon that could
complete the air and sea blockade of the Falklands by knocking out the airfield.

The Vulcans were sent to the coast of Scotland to train in conventional bombing.
One was chosen for the Stanley mission with a second available as a backup
aircraft.

R.A.F. sources, rejoicing in what they said was the lone Vulcan's success,
argued that one or more of the bombers could be used again in the unlikely event
that the Argentines repaired the airfield at Stanley.

But in all probability the Stanley raid was the Vulcan's first and last combat
mission.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vulcan bomber

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              123 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AT HOME, JUNTA CONTROLS USE OF PATRIOTIC SYMBOLS

BYLINE: By JAMES M. MARKHAM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 13, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 759 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, May 2


Argentine television is showing frequent footage of A-4 Skyhawks screaming into
the sky, or an Argentine frigate, rocking in rough water, firing toward a
distant target while the blue and white Argentine flag snaps in the breeze.

The footage seems intended to evoke the drama of the battle in the South
Atlantic, 1,000 miles from here, and to suggest that Argentina is probably
winning.

But a viewer who has seen the film a few times suddenly realizes that something
is wrong. The problem is the stirring backdrop music - it's the theme from
''Chariots of Fire,'' the Oscar-winning film about two determined British
athletes who triumphed in the 1924 Olympics.

Until Saturday's fighting between Argentine and British forces, ''Chariots of
Fire'' had been the most popular film on Lavalle, a pedestrian arcade of chic
boutiques, fast-food joints and movie theaters. Caught up in the excitement of
the film, some Argentines had even found themselves applauding the triumph of
the two athlete heroes.

Then the junta decided that some of the films showing in this capital might not
be the best thing for stiffening morale and patriotism. ''Coming Home,'' the
Jane Fonda and Jon Voight anti-Vietnam War film, was shut down and ''Z,'' the
Costa-Gavras denunciation of the former Greek military regime, was suspended by
the Film Classification Board ''because of the circumstances in which the
country presently finds itself.'' The last to go was ''Chariots of Fire.''

3 British Journalists Jailed

When a British attack on the Falklands appeared imminent, foreign journalists
were ordered out of southern Argentina, which bends gently eastward toward the
Falklands.

In the south, some journalists had been able to glean a sense of the war effort
by hanging around Comodoro Rivadavia and other cities with airbases; three
British journalists whose reporting aroused Argentine suspicions have been
jailed in the southernmost town of Ushuaia since April 13 on charges of
espionage.

At a seminar organized by the military for foreign journalists and television
reporters at the hotel where many of them are staying, Jose Teofilo Goyret, a
retired general, said there were many precedents for the evacuation of
correspondents from a war zone for security reasons.

On the second floor of the hotel, the Joint Chiefs of Staff have set up a press
room, where communiques are quickly distributed in Spanish and English and where
a soft-spoken navy officer, Capt.  Enrique de Leon, fields questions.

Soon after 6:30 P.M. Saturday, after the British claimed to have knocked out the
main Falklands airfield, Captain de Leon showed a video of an Argentine C-130
Hercules transport landing in sunny weather on a clearly-undamaged airstrip on
the archipelago. The officer said the footage had been shot in the island at
4:40 P.M. and transmitted to Buenos Aires.

''How do we know this was taken today?'' asked one skeptical British journalist.
''All I can say is that you have to believe me,'' answered Captain de Leon.

No Report on Name of Pilot

On Saturday, an early communique on the fighting promised to furnish the name of
a British Harrier pilot who was said to have been captured after his plane was
shot down over Stanley, or Puerto Argentino, as it has been renamed by the
junta. Today the pilot's name was still unknown.

Confusing matters further, a report from the archipelago by the state-run press
agency Telam insisted that ''neither of the two English planes shot down fell on
the land'' and that one of the pilots ejected from his plane ''and fell to the
sea, apparently dead, or gravely wounded.'' The British have denied losing any
planes.

Telam said that ''a persistent light rain'' - certainly not the weather
conditions in which the C-130 Hercules landed in the video footage - and a
barrage of thick antiaircraft fire worked against the British, and on one
strafing run ''they only managed to waste projectiles, which all fell in the
waters of the bay.''

In fact, the disclosure of weather conditions is meant to be restricted by a
series of self-censorship guidelines for the press issued by the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. Weather maps in local newspapers show blank spaces for southern Patagonia
and the Malvinas, as the Falklands are known here.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              124 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

UPSTATE TOWER CLEANUP: UNCERTAINTY AND DEBATE

BYLINE: By RICHARD D. LYONS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: BINGHAMTON, N.Y., May 2


More than a year after the explosion of an electrical transformer spread
dangerous chemicals through the 18-story State Office Building here, scientists
and politicians are still pondering how best to proceed with the cleanup.

During this time there have been charges of conspiracy and coverup, an apology
by Governor Carey for saying that he would drink a glass of chemicals, the theft
of contaminated cash, the filing of almost $1 billion in lawsuits, the shredding
of hundreds of thousands of state records - and the birth of a running account
of the goingson in a newsletter called The S.O.B. Bulletin.

One of the few points of agreement among Dr. John L. Buckley, who is overseeing
the cleanup, the public officials here and their critics is that the $4 million
appropriated by the state to pay for the initial cleanup is short by at least
$20 million, far more than the $13 million it cost to erect the building.
Indeed, the parties agree that the total cost of the cleanup may be two or three
times the building's original cost.

Public-Health Fears

''This whole mess really has become a circus,'' said Norbert Adler, the
publisher of the newsletter. Mr. Adler, a local publicrelations man, founded the
Citizens Committee on the State Office Building Contamination.

Mr. Adler and the 100 or so members of the group say they are concerned about
the potential for a public-health disaster because of the presence of the toxic
chemicals dioxin and dibenzofuran. These chemicals were formed when the
polychlorinated biphenyls, or PCB's, used as insulation in the transformer
burned at extremely high temperatures. The building has not been occupied since
the fire in February 1981.

Mr. Adler and other critics of the cleanup efforts say public health is being
jeopardized by local politicians and businessmen who want to minimize the
seriousness of the problem so as not to do more harm to the image of a city
tarnished by urban decay.

The contention that there has been an effort by civic leaders to mask the
seriousness of the contamination was denied by Dr. Buckley, the environmental
expert hired by Broome County legislators to oversee cleanup efforts.

''The contamination here is truly a unique event in that the combination of the
explosion that scattered PCB's, the fire that turned some of them toxic and
their subsequent dispersal throughout the building through the air-conditioning
ducts has never happened before anywhere,'' he said.

Dr. Buckley said the problem of contamination was especially acute in office
buildings because such structures are a series of boxes within boxes, and the
pace of cleaning just the surfaces is agonizingly slow.

Cleanup Suspended

The Syracuse contractor that is cleaning the interior surfaces has 30 workers in
protective suits and helmets on the job. However, they are not allowed to stay
in the contaminated building for more than a few hours at a time, even wearing
respirators.

About a month after the fire, when most of the surfaces in the top five floors
had been cleaned, dioxin and dibenzofuran were discovered in the building and
the cleanup was halted. It started again, but has proceeded much more slowly.

''If we tore the building down it would spread dioxin all over the city.'' Dr.
Buckley said. ''So what we have to do is clean it up, but how?''

After the surface cleaning and the removal of large amounts of furniture and
office equipment have been finished, probably by late summer, a decision must be
made about the next step.

Dr. Buckley said he believed that the interior of the building ''will have to be
taken down to the steel and concrete, which will be an enormous job.''

A state-appointed panel of experts is trying to reach agreement on long-term
cleanup plans, and its report is expected by late summer.  The next hurdle after
that will be finding the money to put the recommendations into effect. The
consensus is that the reopening of the building is several years away.

Lawsuits have been filed against the state in the names of 23 individuals and
groups. The building was not occupied during the fire, and most of the claims
have been filed by firefighters who fought the blaze. According to the lawsuits,
the $946 million being sought is intended to pay for medical problems that might
occur as much as 20 years from now.

Dioxin, which was a component of Agent Orange, a defoliant used by the United
States in Vietnam, is one of the deadliest of poisons and is considered a
carcinogen. Scientists believe that many of its effects may not manifest
themselves until years after exposure.

Those potential dangers seemed of little concern to the thieves who stole $3,500
in cash from the offices of the State Department of Motor Vehicles in the
building. However, as many as 800,000 pieces of paper, including tax records,
Workers' Compensation files, automobile registrations and various licenses have
been destroyed because they were deemed too hazardous to be kept or copied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              125 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 3, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 20, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 850 words


By Christopher Lehmann-Haupt
IN THE HEAT OF THE SUMMER. By John Katzenbach. 311 pages. Athene- um. $13.95.
THE BUTCHER'S BOY. By Thomas Perry. 313 pages. Scribner's. $13.95.

TO take his mind off his uncle's recent suicide, a young Miami Journal crime
reporter named Malcolm Anderson eagerly accepts a story assignment the day after
he returns from the funeral. A teen-age girl has been found in the rough of a
local golf course with her wrists tied together behind her and the back of her
head blown away by a gunshot.

Malcolm visits the murder site, interviews the grief-shocked mother at the
moment she learns that the victim is her daughter and writes ''a hell of a
story'' that his editors put on the front page above the fold. A day or so later
he receves a phone call from a man who proves that he is the killer by correctly
identifying the location and contents of a note the police have found in the
victim's right rear pocket. The note says, ''No. One.'' The killer confirms the
message: ''This has all just begun.''

Thus opens John Katzenbach's taut first novel, ''In the Heat of the Summer,'' a
sophisticated thriller that effectively captures the reign of terror that his
''Numbers Killer'' visits on Miami during the summer of 1975. The book has any
number of qualities to recommend it - its realism, its cleverly twisted plot,
its rich use of dramatic metaphor, its sensitive development of the dilemma
faced by a reporter in telling a news story of which he has become a part.

There are also a couple of things to quibble about. The opening phrase of ''The
Marines Hymn'' is not ''From the shores of Montezuma.'' In July of 1975, the New
York Yankees were not ''widening their lead in the East, burying Baltimore and
the Red Sox.'' Of greater moment: Mr. Katzenbach blows some of his narrative
steam when he briefly and illogically switches narrative points of view in
describing an all-too-predictable chase that occurs at midpoint of his story.
And the ending is not so satisfying as it might have been.

But what is extraordinary is the way the author draws us into believing the
killer's fantasies as he spins them out in his mesmerizing telephone calls to
Anderson. For a while, we forget that he is a psychopath and begin to take
seriously his case that he is bringing the Vietnam War ''home,'' as the
Weathermen once put it. At least we believe that the killer is a victim of war,
as Malcolm's suicidal uncle probably was. Mr. Katzenbach, who is actually a
criminal-court reporter for The Miami Herald, is a writer of subtlety and brutal
toughness. In a way, I hope they don't make a movie of ''In the Heat of the
Summer.'' It'll be powerful, but with all the violence it will also be hard to
watch.

Thomas Perry's thriller, ''The Butcher's Boy,'' is also an entertaining debut.
The particular literary coup that Mr. Perry pulls off is to make the reader root
for both the protagonist and the antagonist. The heroine is Elizabeth Waring, a
smart young analyst working for the Organized Crime Division, Department of
Justice. The other is a faceless, nameless professional hitman, known to us only
as ''the butcher's boy,'' after the man who trained him. We root for both
Elizabeth and ''him'' because, although they are enemies of each other, they
have a more powerful enemy in common. This is the mysterious individual who
hired the butcher's boy to assassinate Senator McKinley R. Claremont but is now
trying to exterminate the exterminator.

Actually, it's even more complicated than it sounds. It's such a snarl that the
plot eventually outsmarts itself and leaves some loose threads dangling. And
while I am carping, I might as well mention the uneven characterization of
Elizabeth, who sometimes sounds as if she'd stepped off the set of ''The Bionic
Woman'' (''Her trained mind shifted into its analytical mode'') and at other
times as if she were a child who is about to blubber.

But for all that, ''The Butcher's Boy'' is clever, knowledgeable, inventive and
suspenseful. I especially enjoyed the section where the butcher's boy tries to
go into hiding. He shows up at an address in Buffalo that his mentor told him to
save for whenever he might be in deep trouble. He tells the old man who answers
the door: ''I have to disappear, but I have to do some traveling first. It may
take time.'' The old man replies, ''It'll cost $20,000.'' ''What do I get for
it?'' the butcher's boy wants to know.

''A bodyguard.'' ''A bodyguard? Hell, I can't travel with a bodyguard. They'd
spot us.'' ''You can with this one. She's the best I know of.'' She turns out to
be very good indeed.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Katzenback

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              126 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 4, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnamese in Cambodia Said to Pull Back

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 109 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 3


Vietnamese forces in Cambodia have pulled back from several areas near the Thai
border that were captured in a four-month offensive against guerrillas of the
toppled Pol Pot regime, a senior military officer said today.

The officer said Vietnamese infantry and tanks, backed by artillery and
occasional air power, had failed to take the key mountain stronghold of Phnom
Malai, adjacent to Cambodia's western border with Thailand, in the dry-season
offensive that began late last year. The Vietnamese pulled back because of
unseasonal heavy rains that blocked their supply lines, the officer said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              127 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 4, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Has Sent 7,000 To Work in Soviet

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 179 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 3


The Soviet Union confirmed today that Vietnam had sent 7,000 people to work in
Soviet industries, including some in Siberia.

But the Government newspaper Izvestia said the Vietnamese, both men and women,
aged 17 to 35, were on one-year training programs to learn skills needed in
Vietman and were not being exploited, as some Western reports have suggested.

''Sending Vietnamese citizens to the U.S.S.R. for professional study and work is
one more form of Soviet aid to socialist Vietnam in the cause of preparing
highly qualified personnel,'' the report said.

Izvestia said that the workers were sent under a Soviet-Vietnamese aid agreement
signed April 2, 1981, and that they earned regular wages and received free
clothing, housing, medical care, Russian language lessons and other benefits. It
denounced newspapers in the West for conducting a ''campaign of falsifications''
including reports that ''hundreds of thousands of young people'' had been sent
to Siberia as part of a debt repayment program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              128 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 4, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
A Former Representative Takes on an Incumbent

BYLINE: By David Bird and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 208 words


''I'm not doing this,'' John C. Dow was saying yesterday, ''out of any animosity
to Samuel Stratton.''

What the 77-year-old Mr. Dow was doing was challenging the 65-yearold
Representrative for the Democratic nomination for the House from the Albany
area, which Mr. Stratton has represented since 1959.

Why would Mr. Dow, a former Representative himself, take on a seemingly
invincible incumbent?  Because, he said, of this year's ''overriding'' issue -
''the need for the United States and the Soviet Union to agree on the abolition
of nuclear weapons.''

Mr. Dow, who became one of the earliest Congressional opponents of the Vietnam
war when he represented a district south of Albany, said he had no illusions
about unseating Mr. Stratton, who is regarded as a leading proponent of a strong
military.  But he expressed confidence that the campaign would prove
illuminating.

''Perhaps,'' he said, ''no other Congressional campaign in the nation will
produce as clear and sharp a confrontation as ours will.''

Well, not right away. Mr. Stratton, noting that new disrict lines have not even
been drawn yet, declined to respond.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Samuel Dow

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              129 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 5, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE FORGOTTEN LESSONS

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 864 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 4


The sinking of the Argentine cruiser, General Belgrano, and the loss of the
British destroyer H.M.S. Sheffield are only the latest reminder of the
unexpected but inevitable result of trying to settle political disputes by force
of arms.

"However hard we have tried in the 20th century to make allowances in advance
for the unpredictable consequences of war," the British histroian, Herbert
Butterfield, said here at the American University over 20 years ago, "we have
always discovered that the most terrible of these had been omitted or only
imperfectly foreseen.

"One of the examples of the fact," he said, "is the loss of liberty in various
countries in Eastern Europe and the Balkans - the very regions whose freedom was
the primary issue for which we were supposed to have undertaken two World Wars."

The still seems to be one of the many forgotten lessons of history: it's a
cliche now that wars are easy to start but hard to stop. Once a decision is made
to fight rather than negotiate, as the Argentine generals did in their assault
on the Falkland Islands, unimagined events take over and envenom and prolong the
struggle.

The evidence is in the books. It was the calamity of Germany in the two World
Wars that it gambled everything on a strategy of force, which, if all its
meticulous calculations had been successful, would have achieved its objectives.

No provision was made in Germany for the dicey accidents of history. Everything
depended on its ability to anticipate all possible contingencles. But failing to
imagine the quirks of fate, it was overwhelmed by events and defeated.

And the Germans were not alone in presuming that they could control future
events. Japan forgot the lesson in its attack on Pearl Harbor; the U.S. in
Vietnam; Britain in its bid to retain sovereignty over the American Colonies and
in its war in Suez; and more recently, Iraq in its attack on Iran.

Argentina is somewhat different. The problem in Buenos Aires is not that the
calculations of the generals went wrong, or even that their objective to take
sovereignty over the Falklands was wrong, but that they didn't think or
calculate at all.

They didn't calculate the consequences in the modern atomic world of using
force. They misjudged the British, who didn't seem to mind dismantling an empire
but didn't want to be humiliated by having the remnant of it occupied in
defiance of the United Kingdom and the United Nations.

The generals also misjudged the United States, which tried to be evenhanded in
avoiding a war, but always made clear at least in private that if Argentina
insisted on the rule of force, Washington would defend the rule of law, and
support the British defenders against the Argentine aggressors.

Nevertheless we now have an escalating war in the South Atlantic.  There is
great sympathy here for the loss of life, but the generals in Buenos aires
should not be deceived: the Administration and Congress are agreed that the
principal of non-use of military force to settle territorial disputes will be
defended.

The Reagan Administration is withholding full economic sanctions against
Argentina and engaging in intense private negotiations in the hope of persuading
the junta to abide by the U.N. resolution that it should withdraw its forces and
discuss the question of sovereignty later. But if this offer is rejected, as it
has been by the generals so far, there is no doubt that U.S. military support
for the British and U.S. economic sanctions against Argentina will increas,
despite the growing casualties.

The reason for this is fairly clear. If the U.S. will not defend its ally
Britain against a clear cas of military agression by Argentina, what will the
other European allies think about our commitment to defend them?

The Falklands situation raises the same question elsewhere in the world. In
every continent there are now disputes between nations over territories and
boundaries: between Israel and the Arab states; among the Arab states
themselves; between the Soviet Union and China and Japan; between India and
Pakistan; and even in Ireland, which of all places is now complaining abou the
use of British force in self-defense.

Many other historical examples, of course, proclaim the success rather than the
failure of the use of force. The United States did not win its independence or
extend its domain over this vast continent by polite negotiation with Spain or
Mexico. And the Soviet Union did not create the last of the imperial empires in
Eastern Europe by friendly persuasion. But wars for ambiguous causes in an
inflammable world of atomic weapons are now a greater danger than ever before.

So the basic principle is still dominant here in Washington: disputes should not
be setteled by war; and if they are, the right of self-defense remains in the
Falklands as elsewhere. This is where the U.S. now stands, and is still hoping
to persuade Argentina that it should defend this principle in its own long-range
interests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              130 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 5, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

EFFECTS ON BUDGET VETOES ON NEW YORK PROGRAM

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: ALBANY, May 4


The budget cuts vetoed by Governor Carey focus on a variety of local aid
programs, particularly school aid. And they also affect a variety of smaller
programs added by the Legislature for specific purposes or constituencies.

Because some of the vetoes were of appropriations that are to be spent over
several years, and others were of a technical nature - money the Legislature
never expected to spend but had to put on the state's statute books for legal
reasons - they will result in actual state spending cuts this year of about $400
million. Following are some of the more important cuts and their effects:

SCHOOL AID: The vetoes would reduce state aid to school districts by about $213
million. About $82 million of this would have gone to New York City, and the
rest to the state's 700 school districts.

LOCAL AID: An $80-million program designed to assist cities other than New York
City, including Yonkers and Buffalo, is eliminated. The program also included
smaller amounts for towns and villages. Mr.  Carey also vetoed a $1.6 million
appropriation for services and expenses of the New York City Office of Rent
Control.

HIGHER EDUCATION: The Governor vetoed a $34 million increase in assistance to
the State University of New York, City University and community colleges.
Eliminated were $23 million for the state university and the City University,
and $5 million for community colleges. The Governor also eliminated $6 million
in state payments to private colleges.

MASS TRANSIT: The Governor vetoed $105 million for the Metropolitan
Transportation Authority and $20 million for the M.T.A. to create an inspector
general's office to investigate problems. He also blocked the use of about $160
million for capital projects, although the actual impact of this action on the
authority's ability to spend money this year was considerably less than the
amount involved.

CRIMINAL JUSTICE: Mr. Carey vetoed $3.5 million in support for a subway crime
prevention strike force. A $12 million program to deal with career criminals and
street crime, and nearly $3 million for services and expenses to support parole
and probation services, were also vetoed. The Governor also eliminated $1.2
million to communitybased and government-operated programs for crime victims and
witnesses.

BILINGUAL PROGRAMS: The Governor invalidated $3.8 million in grants to schools
for bilingual and adult education programs.  COMMUNITY SERVICES: Mr. Carey
rejected more than $1.5 million for community services for the elderly, mainly
centers for the elderly.  HEALTH SERVICES: Mr. Carey rejected $3 million in
increased aid for public health and family-planning services. He also vetoed
$75,000 to study methadone-maintenance programs and $1.5 million for schoolbased
prevention and education programs for drug abuse. He ruled out $4 million for
specific hospitals.

ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT: A $500,000 appropriation for State Department of Commerce
on-the-job training program for Vietnam veterans was vetoed, along with an
$850,000 on-the-job training program for the State Chamber of Commerce. The
Governor also vetoed $2 million for local tourism promotion, $1.2 for an
engineering school in Binghamton, and $500,000 to support research activities at
the Rochester Laser Laboratory.

URBAN DEVELOPMENT: About $20 million to finance neighborhood and rural
preservation and urban initiative programs was cut. Much of that amount went to
neighborhood organizations.

CONSERVATION: Language that would have allowed the payment of prior-year claims
for sewage-treatment aid was vetoed, as were $53,000 for constructing sewer
collection systems in Pulaski and a variety of other sewer-aid programs. Mr.
Carey also cut $700,000 in state aid to local environmental management councils.

CHILD WELFARE: Mr. Carey cut $1 million in increased state reimbursement for
adoption services.  TRAFFIC SAFETY: He vetoed $1.5 million for the
implementation and operation of the traffic safety law-enforcement systems.
YOUTH SERVICES: The Governor cut $1 million for special delinquency programs and
$680,000 for an employment development program.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              131 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 5, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR FREEZE: 'JUNK THOUGHT'

BYLINE: By Benjamin J. Stein

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 845 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES


I used to see a great deal of complaint a few years ago about junk food. Junk
food is food that has almost no real nutritional content, has a lot of calories
and salt to make the eater feel good, and might contain additives that are
life-threatening. I always thought the problem of junk food was overdrawn. To my
mind, the real problem in our society is not junk food but junk thought.  That
is thought that looks appetizing, makes the thinker feel good, but is either
empty or harmful. The best example of junk thought to appear in years is the
nuclear-freeze movement.

It is not that the movement is a joke or frivolous. It is deadly important and
even frightening, but it is junk thought nonetheless.  There are two basic
reasons why the concept of a nuclear freeze as prescribed by Senators Edward M.
Kennedy and Mark O. Hatfield and any number of housewives, university
professors, and students across the United States is bad for you.

First, it is deeply simple-minded and irresponsible. Second, if carried to its
logical extreme, it is terrifyingly dangerous.  Let's begin by saying that no
sane person is eager for nuclear war. On college campuses across America,
students are demonstrating to say that they have discovered that nuclear war
would be an unspeakable catastrophe. Members of Congress have joined in,
pointing out that nuclear war would end life as we know it.

But come on, people. We have known that nuclear war is horrible ever since there
have been nuclear weapons.  For the proponents of the freeze to act as if they
had discovered something new is a sign of almost staggering ignorance of the
history of the last 37 years. For all of that time, the United States' paramount
goal has been to maintain freedom and avoid a nuclear war.  To imply otherwise
is not only specious but insults the speaker as well as the the listener.

If no one is eager for nuclear war, the demonstrators and senators are doing no
more than uttering a cliche: ''We do not want nuclear war.'' The nuclear freeze
petition signers are uttering a truism that is embarrassingly hackneyed. Of
course no one wants nuclear war. Are the proponents of the freeze doing anything
more than satisfying themselves by uttering a momentarily satisfying, but empty
banality?  No. And that's what makes junk thought.

Carrying a sign endorsing a cliche is not a moral effort. It is joining the
''in-crowd.'' A moral statement might be a question of whether it is fair for
the Government to deny abortions to poor women, or whether taxpayers should
subsidize corporations that are losers in the free market. Those concerns have
real moral meat on both sides of the bone, are not platitudes, and require some
thought and agony of decision.

Saying that you do not want the world to end in a nuclear holocaust amounts to
saying that the real world of Soviet threats and the horrifying need for a
deterrent cannot be faced. The proponent of the freeze lives in an alternate
reality without those dangers and complexities. This is not a useful moral
contribution.

But the nuclear freeze is not only empty mental calories. It is dangerous as
well. To ask the United States to trust the Soviet Union to live up to a treaty
banning further increases in nuclear arms is to ask the American people to
commit suicide as a free society. At this very minute, there is proof positive
that the Soviet Union is using germ warfare in Southeast Asia in criminal
violation of its signature on at least three different treaties. The Russians
occupy all of Eastern Europe in contravention of the strictest accords at Yalta
and at Helsinki. They invaded Afghanistan in violation of the most basic
international law, agreed to by them. To believe that they would freeze
production and deployent of nuclear arms when to keep building and deploying
them would give them nuclear mastery is frighteningly ignorant.

A nuclear freeze would mean, in fact, that old devil: unilateral United States
disarmament. The freeze would mean that we were telling the Soviet Union that
from now on it would have the whip hand on planet Earth, as we inevitably
disarmed and the Soviet Union became even more dominant. I would like to suggest
to those who demonstrate for a nuclear freeze that they contemplate life and
death in Cambodia or Vietnam or the Soviet Union if they would like to see just
exactly what a Soviet-dominated world would be like.

If the nuclear freeze movement is merely restating platitudes, it is condoning
an irresponsible abnegation of our society's interest in real problems. If it
aims at, or will result in, unilateral disarmament, it is deadly. Either way, it
is junk thought.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Benjamin J. Stein is author of the forthcoming '' 'Ludes: A Ballad of the Drug
and the Dream.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              132 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 6, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

RUSSIANS DEFEND VIETNAMESE LABOR

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 966 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 5


After months of rumors about planeloads of Vietnamese being transported to
Soviet factories to work off Hanoi's debt to Moscow, the Soviet authorities have
offered an account of the program designed to silence ''slanderers in the
bourgeois press'' who made an issue of it.

Taken at face value, the account in the Government newspaper Izvestia was a
rebuff to anyone imputing other than altruistic motives to the Soviet Union. It
said 7,000 Vietnamese students, aged 17 to 35, had arrived for training in some
50 trades under a year-old agreement that provided for them to remain for a
year, earning regular Soviet wages.

Far from being assigned to northern Siberia and other inhospitable areas, as
some Western reports have suggested, Izvestia said that the Vietnamese, whose
homeland is in the tropics, were working in ''regions with the most suitable
climate for them.'' It named cities across the southern tier of the Soviet
Union, from Astrakhan on the Caspian Sea to the Altai area of south Siberia.

Contrast With Workers in West

Izvestia said the Vietnamese had ''all rights and freedoms provided by Soviet
law,'' a situation that the newspaper contrasted with ''the lack of rights and
oppression'' facing foreign workers in capitalist countries. The Vietnamese, the
paper said, get free textbooks and other study materials, ''are given
well-appointed housing'' alongside Soviet workers and have their return fare to
Vietnam paid by the Soviet authorities.

''The whole of this training of highly skilled workers is connected with and
stems from the interests of the economic advance of the Socialist Republic of
Vietnam,'' the paper said.

The piece was presented as a response to reports in the Western press. However,
the Soviet account lost some of its impact for the fact that it was long
delayed. Newspapers in the West have been carrying reports for several months
suggesting that Vietnamese were being used to help retire their Government's
debt to the Soviet Union.

Vietnam's Debt to Soviet

Izvestia said the Soviet Union had written off Vietnam's debts after the Vietnam
War, but it made no reference to debts that have accumulated since 1975 for
military and economic aid, estimated at more than $3 billion.

The article left open the possibility that retirement of the debt was part of
the arrangement under which the Vietnamese are working in the Soviet Union. One
account circulating here in recent weeks was that the Soviet authorities, while
paying the Vietnamese at Soviet wage rates, were retaining a portion of the
wages - one report said 40 percent - to offset the Vietnamese debt.

The uncertainty was not removed by a companion article distributed by Tass, the
Government's press agency, saying that the Vietnamese ''at their discretion can
remit part of their earnings to their families at home.'' While this could have
been noted as a means of underlining the solicitousness of the Soviet
authorities, it could also have been read as an indication that the Vietnamese
are not free to dispose of their entire income as they choose.

Work in Irrigation Projects

The Tass article also seemed less emphatic about the training aspect of the
program. It said only the Vietnamese were ''sent mainly for training and work,''
implying that some might be coming for work only. Tass also went beyond Izvestia
in offering examples of the projects to which the Vietnamese were assigned -
chemical, textile and machine-building plants, and irrigation and
land-reclamation projects.

The Izvestia article glossed over at least one other aspect of the program that
suggested that the work element weighed as importantly as the need for training.
The Tass article, quoting Leonid A. Kostin, a first deputy chairman of the
Government's State Committee for Labor and Social Affairs, said the program
provided for a tour of up to five years for the Vietnamese, one year in training
and the other four at work.

At its present level, the program seems unlikely to make a major impact on
either the Vietnamese debt, if that is a factor, or on the shortage of skilled
labor in Soviet industry. But Western diplomats note that, for Vietnam, the
program may constitute the only prospect at present of repaying any significant
portion of the Soviet loans.

Foreign Workers Long Used

Although 7,000 Vietnamese cannot in themselves be a major factor in the Soviet
work force of 37 million in industry and 11 million in construction, the Soviet
Union has long been seeking to allay manpower shortages by employing workers
from allied countries.  Bulgarians have been felling timber in northern European
Russia; Poles and other East Europeans have been laying oil and gas pipelines;
North Koreans have been cutting wood in the Soviet Far East.

The manpower shortage has become one of the major headaches facing Soviet
planners. With sluggish advances in productivity, the planners need more skilled
workers if they are to raise the rate of growth, which has slumped close to
stagnancy.

Last year, the State Committee for Labor said that there were two million job
vacancies in industry and that 750,000 additional workers were needed every year
to keep existing and planned enterprises operating efficiently.

The Vietnamese, with a labor surplus, are well placed to help out.  And to judge
from the assessment of Mr. Kostin, the labor official, the Vietnamese promise to
be among the more reliable workers entering Soviet industry. Tass quoted the
official as having praised the skills of Vietnamese women working as weavers in
textile mills.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              133 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 7, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

At the Movies;
How to get out of school by acting.

BYLINE: By Chris Chase

SECTION: Section C; Page 8, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 1293 words


A CRITIC who disliked ''Soup for One'' called Marcia Strassman ''the only
performer in the film with any class.'' As it happens, the kind of class he
meant is the only kind of class you'll find Miss Strassman within a mile of. She
became a performer to escape ''from school and from New Jersey.''

It happened when she was 14. ''I sang all the time, and finally, my mother
looked at me and said: 'I have a friend in New York who gives singing lessons.
If she says you can sing, you can take lessons. If you can't sing, I never want
you to open your mouth again as long as you live.'

''So she took me to this woman and, after one lesson, the woman said, 'They're
auditioning for this Off Broadway show, ''Best Foot Forward,'' ' and I went and
auditioned. I was talking to all these kids in blue jeans with rollers in their
hair, and I was asking, 'What kind of schools do you go to?' and they said: 'Oh,
we go to professional schools. We can get out whenever we want.' And I went home
and said, 'Mother, I must be in the theater.' ''

Liza Minnelli got the part in ''Best Foot Forward'' in 1963, but Miss
Strassman's mother agreed to enroll Miss Strassman in the Quintano School for
Young Professionals in Manhattan. ''And it was great. Two hours a day. Gregory
Hines was class president. We had our graduation at Luchow's, and my English
teacher said hello to my parents, and my father said, 'Well, how was Marcia?'
and the teacher said: 'How would I know? She was never there.' ''

Eventually, Miss Strassman did get the part in ''Best Foot Forward'' (after Liza
Minnelli left), and by the time she was 16, she was touring in a play with
Shelley Winters.

At 18, she traveled to Hollywood, ostensibly for the televisionpilot season and
phoned her mother from there. ''I'm never coming home again,'' she said. On the
West Coast, she made a record called ''The Flower Children,'' which was a very
big hit, but cut her rockand-roll career short because every song she was
offered thereafter ''had the word flower in it, and I said, 'I don't think so.'
''

Commercials and television roles led to a lead in the ''Welcome Back, Kotter''
series, playing Kotter's wife. ''Five women tested for it,'' she says. ''One of
them was Farrah Fawcett. She was wonderful, like Judy Holliday. But they said,
'We didn't think anybody would believe her with Gabe Kaplan.' I said: 'You
believe me with Gabe Kaplan? Thank you very much.' ''

Because she and the producer of ''Kotter,'' James Komack, didn't get on, Miss
Strassman remembers the series as four years of misery.  Except for the
Sweathogs. ''I loved working with the kids. If it wasn't for the four boys, I'd
probably be in an institution, knitting and talking to the walls.''

''Soup for One'' is her first movie, and it afforded her a surprise. ''I
discovered I like doing television better. It's fast. I don't understand why it
should take 87 takes to get something. By that time, I should imagine it would
be so contrived -''

A passionate car buff, Miss Strassman's pleasure is to get into her Porsche and
drive for hours up the Pacific Coast Highway. She says her life in Hollywood is
very quiet. ''I don't go out a lot. I did that when I was 18, 19, 20. Now it's
boring. There's nothing out there.''

Had she ever come close to getting married?  ''Yeah. But not close enough. The
man would have to be someone incredibly funny - not a comedian, but a real-life
person. And Garry Trudeau's gone.''

From Paris, by telephone, the screenwriter-director Claude Miller and the
actress Romy Schneider talked a bit about ''Garde a Vue,'' their murder mystery,
which has been playing at Gemini 2.

In France, ''Garde a Vue'' won four Cesars (the French equivalent of Oscars),
and the 40-year-old Mr. Miller is hoping that the movie will be a hit in America
as well.

''I did two features before,'' he says, ''and one was shown in America, but it
was not a big success. It was called 'The Best Way.' I remember critics liked
it, but it was a little release, you know.''

''Garde a Vue'' is based on an English novel called ''Brainwash,'' and says Mr.
Miller, ''It is quite faithful with the book. The same kind of confliction, and
dramatic building. Do you say that?''

Does Mr. Miller prefer a thriller to any other kind of story? ''It depends. I
like a story I can involve myself in. It may be thriller.  It may be love story.
It may be something else. If I can involve myself. Do you say that?''

Of the three stars - Lino Ventura, Michel Serrault, Romy Schneider -in ''Garde a
Vue,'' Mr. Serrault (known to Americans from ''La Cage aux Folles'') is the one
with the longest, toughest role, and the critics found him brilliant. But Miss
Schneider, in a brief appearance as the wife who married Mr. Serrault for his
name and his money, and who hates him, has an amazingly powerful effect on the
audience.

Miss Schneider was, in fact, scheduled to come to the United States to do
publicity for the movie, but a personal tragedy - her young son was killed in a
car accident - caused her to cancel the trip. About her work in ''Garde a Vue,''
she says: ''I wanted to play this person, even if it is a person which I would
dislike in life. It was a part for me totally new. Nobody ever offered me
something like that before. You know, Claude Miller told me when we saw the film
finished, that one can see the whole background of this woman, her parents,
everything. This was for me a big compliment.''

The award-winning documentary ''Soldier Girls,'' now in a limited run at the
Bleecker Street Cinema's Agee Room (through May 18), details the real-life
experiences of a platoon of female recruits undergoing basic training at Fort
Gordon in Georgia.

Nicholas Broomfield and Joan Churchill, who produced, directed, photographed and
edited the picture, believe that ''reality is never as simple as it's portrayed
in documentaries.'' Miss Churchill has said that the team likes to do movies
''where audiences are thrown into a situation and have to make up their own
minds.''

In ''Soldier Girls,'' for instance, a male sergeant who's been very tough on the
recruits is asked by one of them what it's like to have fought in a war. The
sergeant, a Vietnam veteran, says, ''Some part of your humanity, your soul,
whatever you want to call it, is gone, and you can't get it back.''

The audience, which has felt superior to the sergeant, is forced to look at a
man, not a stereotype, and is confused by its own prejudice.

''He was a crack sergeant,'' Miss Churchill says. ''He was trained to terrorize
troops, to weed out the weedy. But he'd also been an antiwar student who was
drafted and sent to kill 'gooks.' He still writes poetry. We got to know him and
to love him.''

Miss Churchill is American, Mr. Broomfield is British, and they have
collaborated not only on four movie projects, but also on a baby named Barnaby,
who is now 10 months old.

The pair got interested in making ''Soldier Girls'' around the time of the
Iranian crisis and phoned the Pentagon to say they would like to do a picture
about the all-volunteer army. ''Then we put on our three-piece suits,'' Miss
Churchill says, ''and went to be interviewed.''

Having won permission, they also won cooperation, not only from the brass, but
from the recruits whose weary footsteps they dogged. Miss Churchill's and Mr.
Broomfield's feet hurt, too. ''We got up at 3:45 in the morning and ran with the
rest of them,'' Miss Churchill says.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Marcia Strassman

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              134 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 7, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Books of the Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 29, Column 1; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 907 words


By Le Anne Schreiber
GANGLAND. By David Winn. 226 pages.  Knopf. $12.95.

''Gangland'' is not a conventionally well-made novel. In fact, it has so many
screws loose it threatens to fall apart (perhaps deconstruct is the word) in
your hands. Take its hero, for instance.  Dunkle is a Vietnam veteran who
returns to Southern California in 1969 with green hair and an orange face. Very
little is made of Dunkle's coloration, striking as it is. We never really learn
what caused it, and although it is mentioned now and then, in general it excites
very little attention among Dunkle's stateside friends. When noted, it is simply
accepted as ''evidence of experience beyond the pale.''

One of Dunkle's superiors in Vietnam is a colonel called ''the green man''
because his skin is the color of bread mold. His pigmentation, like Dunkle's, is
unexplained, and when he shows up in Southern California for no apparent reason,
he, too, causes little comment. Normally, such provocative, dangling details
would consternate a reader, but somehow we learn to take them in stride in
''Gangland.'' Besides, we have no choice. If we want to enjoy the pleasures of
David Winn's wacky, subtly cerebral first novel, we have to take it on its own
unstated terms.

All one can say for sure is that ''Gangland'' is about the Vietnam War, the 60's
(the version of it that went from about 1967 to 1975) and Southern California.
What it took to survive all three, Mr. Winn implies, is a high tolerance for
unreality, a kind of adaptive derangement.

In Vietnam, Dunkle's job was to test experimental, enemy-detecting electronic
devices that exchange information with a computer system called ANIMA. His best
buddy is a sniper named MCATS (why not?), whose rumored responsibility is to
follow Dunkle around and shoot him if he is ever in danger of falling into enemy
hands. Since ANIMA, whose brain seems to be directing the conduct of the war,
attracts more enemies than it detects, Dunkle's survival is something of a
miracle - but not necessarily a blessing.

Discharged and back in California, Dunkle continues to receive messages from
ANIMA through television sets and electronic banking machines. ANIMA doesn't
give Dunkle orders any more; she (as Dunkle thinks of it) tells him shaggy-dog
stories, broadcasts blue movies, recites poetry and sings snatches of old songs.
The green colonel, who starts to shadow Dunkle, suggests that ANIMA may be
trying to go AWOL. Dunkle's girlfriend suspects that he has the capacity to
project whatever he wants to see upon screens, and since Dunkle has no idea of
what he wants to see, he is always surprised.

While Dunkle is trying to sort out his relationship with ANIMA, he is also
trying to find his place among the assorted gangs that populate the Southern
California college town to which he's drifted.  He's recruited by a
university-affiliated terrorist group called Mr.  Big Time (its leader ''wanted
a name both revolutionary and rockoriented''), but known locally as the Fastfood
Marxists because it finances its activities through the sale of Bukharin
Burritos.

When Dunkle's girlfriend leaves Mr. Big Time to become a member of the
rifle-bearing Women's Defense League, Dunkle decides to accept an offer of free
housing from the lotzls. The lotzls are a commune of Jewish medical students,
whose group purpose is hazy, unless clean living and compulsive caretaking of
Dunkle can be interpreted as a purpose. Dunkle likes the lotzls because they
speak in Motel English, a rapid, disjointed unaccented patter that is supposed
to improve television reception.

There's also the Mucus Conspiracy Dairy Coop, the Math Dorm Holographers and
Stevie's White Sky (Life Is a Boutique). As the novel approaches its climax, all
the groups vie for the grant money to be awarded the winners of the fine-arts
department competition whose theme is ''Art Beyond the Reach of Grace.''

Now all of this is very funny, and if ''Gangland'' were no more than a
high-spirited, bent-headed romp through the 60's, it would still be a
considerable achievement. But I suspect that there is something very sad and
unspoken at the heart of this Dadaist novel.  There is only one conventionally
experienced moment in ''Gangland,'' and it comes approximately halfway through
the book. Dunkle is in Vietnam and sees a man bleeding to death from an
appalling wound.  ''This is what I didn't want to see, Dunkle thought. There was
no way to imagine it beforehand, no way to protect yourself, to anticipate the
way the continuity of the human body could be interrupted.''

Dunkle didn't want to see it, and neither do we. So David Winn has shown the
sight of people covering their eyes. That, at least, is the novel that I have
put together from the spare parts he's provided.  Given the same resources,
other readers might construct other books.  The author invites you to try. As
one of the competitors in the Art Beyond the Reach of Grace contest says: ''Let
me just reiterate that I'm asking nothing more than this: whenever you encounter
me or my work, be assured that you'll shoulder the burden of whatever relation
ensues. Thank you and good evening.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              135 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 7, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Economic Scene;
Military Costs Vs. Inflation

BYLINE: By Leonard Silk

SECTION: Section D; Page 2, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 793 words


IS the military buildup planned by the Reagan Administration likely to rekindle
inflation? Or, with so much slack in the economy, is there a ''window of
opportunity'' for rapid military expansion?

The Reagan budget calls for military outlays to increase from $187.5 billion in
the fiscal year 1982 to $221.1 billion in 1983 and to go on rising to $292
billion in 1985 and $364 billion in 1987.  Economic analysts estimate that those
numbers imply a real rate of increase of 9 to 10 percent in spending and an
inflation rate for military goods of 10 percent.

This week, at a conference on military spending held in New York by the Center
for Defense Information, Elmer B. Staats, former Comptroller General of the
United States, said the relevant question was not whether the United States
could afford that military buildup but whether the military program had the
right priorities and whether the nation was willing to pay for it. The problem,
he said, was more political than economic.

On that basis, Otto Eckstein, professor of economics at Harvard and president of
Data Resources, questioned the Administration's policies for accommodating the
big military buildup without imposing taxes to pay for it.

Recalling his service as a member of President Johnson's Council of Economic
Advisers during the Vietnam buildup, Mr. Eckstein said, ''We were blamed for not
raising taxes and thereby causing inflation, but the Reagan Administration
expects praise for cutting taxes by 25 to 30 percent during a military
buildup.'' He called this ''a really big mistake, the biggest mistake since 1932
or 1937.'' It would not be enough, he said, for the Administration to contain
inflation by ''rolling back civilian nondiscretionary programs all the way to
1939, as they are proposing to do.''

The Federal Reserve's efforts to hold down the rate of growth of the money
supply and thereby curb inflation in the face of big tax cuts and budget
deficits, he concluded, would lead to slower real growth and persistently high
unemployment by ''crowding out'' private investment.

But that is not an immediate problem. With manufacturing industry operating at
71 percent of capacity and unemployment at 9 percent, such Administration
spokesmen as Murray L. Weidenbaum, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers,
have stressed the contribution rising military spending will make to the
business recovery.

The pressure on resources is likely to be mitigated by the slow rate at which
spending on weapons procurement flows out. Data presented by Stanley S. Fine, a
retired rear admiral, to the military-spending conference indicated that outlays
for ships would be only 2.4 percent of the appropriation for ships, 10.4 percent
for aircraft, 14 percent for missiles and 6.3 percent for tanks.

However, with military appropriations scheduled to climb from $218.9 billion in
1982 to $291 billion in 1984 and $408.4 billion in 1987, pressures will keep
climbing through the rest of this decade.

The planned military buildup in the next four years, estimates cited by Mr.
Staats say, will absorb 30 percent of ''goods producing'' gross national
product, up from 6 percent in the fiscal year 1981.

To the arguments of advocates of a rapid military buildup that the economy is
slack, industry is operating at a low level of capacity, unemployment is high
and there have been to date no serious shortages of critical raw materials, he
responded: ''All this is, of course, true, but it fails to recognize
sufficiently the highly specialized nature of most military procurement and the
shortages of highly skilled labor and and specialized components required by
defense industry.''

And he concluded that there would be even greater increases in overall prices
for military procurement than in the past. Higher procurement costs of major
weapons systems than budgeted could force reductions in items crucial to
military readiness.

The impact of the military buildup on inflation is, however, a macroeconomic,
not a microeconomic, question, depending on how the nation chooses to pay for
the buildup. But to the extent that growing military outlays swell the projected
budget deficits, they are likely to be inflationary and call forth tight-money
policies, which are likely to curb real economic growth.

The ''window of opportunity'' for military buildup looks open right now but will
close if the economy recovers. The alternative ways of paying for the military
buildup, thereafter, would be higher taxes, slower growth or inflation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              136 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 8, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEWS FROM FLOTILLA SLOW TO REACH LONDON

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 631 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 7


British newspapers have been experiencing considerable delays in the arrival of
dispatches from their correspondents on board ships of the Falkland task force.

On Tuesday night, for example, The Times of London received a dispatch from its
reporter John Witherow on the aircraft carrier Invincible almost 12 hours after
the event it described, the Argentine attack on the destroyer Sheffield. Some
reports have been held up for as long as three days.

No photographs or television footage have been transmitted from the fleet for
almost a week. Military sources said that shipboard equipment designed to relay
the pictures via satellite had failed, but journalists here believe that the
Government is prevaricating.

Even photos that would have helped to advance Britain's cause have been
inaccessible. For example, Ian McDonald, the Defense Ministry spokesman, said
last week that photos available on task force ships proved his declaration that
the airstrip at Stanley had been heavily cratered - an assertion denied by
Argentina. But he could not produce the pictures.

No Public Complaints

There have been no public complaints from British editors, who are accustomed to
stricter rules of voluntary censorship in military matters than their American
counterparts.

Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has complained bitterly that British news
outlets are paying too much attention to Argentine communiques. Reflecting the
traditional belief here that in wartime the first duty of reporters is to the
war effort, she said in the House of Commons that many people resented the
implication that ''a dictatorship's propaganda'' should be given equal weight to
the Defense Ministry reports.

During the Vietnam War, United States officials complained equally bitterly
about dispatches from American correspondents that were critical of American
actions and skeptical about official statements. But censorship, either formal
or informal, was never imposed and seldom suggested.

---- Censorship Imposed

The Observer, London

ABOARD CANBERRA, in the Atlantic, May 7 - Censorship has been imposed on news
dispatches filed from the British task force.  The conflicting interests of
soldier and reporter are succinctly set out in the first sentence of regulations
for correspondents accompanying an operational force published in 1958 and
issued to all journalists with the task force. It says: ''The essence of
successful warfare is secrecy. The essence of successful journalism is
publicity.''

The correspondent is urged to always bear in mind that an indiscretion published
in a paper may produce military consequences out of all proportion to the
seeming importance of the disclosure.

The foreword concludes, ''A satisfactory liaison calls for complete frankness on
the one hand and loyal discretion on the other, and mutual cooperation in the
task of leading and steadying public opinion in times of national stress or
crisis.''

In practice, this has meant that no accurate reports have been allowed to leave
the Canberra that relate to the ship's position, troop movements, personnel or
equipment.

Censorship works as follows: all articles are submitted to one of the three
public relations officers - ''minders'' or ''thought people'' to the reporters -
who strike out anything that offends that rules. The article then goes to Maj.
Mike Norman, hero of the defense of Stanley, for further scrutiny. The commander
of the land forces on Canberra, Col. Tom Seccombe, also looks at borderline
cases.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              137 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

HE HAS AN EYE FOR HEAD-ON CONFLICT

BYLINE: By ELEANOR BLAU

SECTION: Section 2; Page 4, Column 6; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words


Percy Granger's ''Eminent Domain,'' which was described by Walter Kerr as ''a
fascinating experience'' with ''impeccably characterized people'' when it opened
late in March at Circle in the Square, had a long period of gestation. The play,
about a professorial couple in the midwest, took Mr. Granger six years to
complete, he says. And it evolved from two impulses, one of which nudged aside
the other.

''One impulse was to investigate privacy in this day and age of People
Magazine,'' he recalled the other day. ''I personally am offended by how much we
are compelled to find out about peoples' lives. I was brought up in a typical
WASP household where emotions were not really part of the woof and warp. Privacy
was valuable to me; the dignity of not announcing your pain. I've come to think
of that as more destructive than I realized. But at the time I began to write
the play, I did feel that one ought to approach life with a certain reserve.''

The other impulse, he said, was to explore ''a life-crisis in a couple about 60
years old, on the brink of old age -which writers tend to ignore; they write
about either young people or old, as in 'The Gin Game' and 'On Golden Pond.' ''
Much was being written at the time about teen-age runaways; Mr. Granger wanted
to write about the parents left behind.

The 36-year-old playwright found he had more to say about his couple than he did
about privacy. So the focus of ''Eminent Domain'' is upon them -Holmes Bradford
(played by Philip Bosco), a frayed professor of literature in a Middle Western
town, and his reclusive wife Katie (Betty Miller), a gifted artist who teaches
but no longer paints.

To be sure, a strong thread in ''Eminent Domain'' is Katie's insistence on
privacy. She resists the prying of a visitor, an ambitious graduate student who
wants to include details of her life in a book about the Bradfords' son - a poet
whom his parents haven't heard from since he left home at age 16. Katie, it
turns out, has had her troubles: an addiction to amphetamines and then to
alcohol, and the consequent scorn of her son, who seems to have had contempt as
well for his father.

But it is the current relationship of the couple that most interested Mr.
Granger, he said, adding that he never considered bringing the absent son into
the play. The visitor's arrival brings out into the open issues long unspoken
between husband and wife.

In dialogues with the audience, which Mr. Granger conducts sometimes after a
performance, people have chided him for a sentimental and abrupt ending, and
this dismays him. They don't understand, he said, that although Katie and Holmes
decide to stay together, neither has changed much; the professor still hopes
futilely that Katie will revert to the woman he once knew. ''But the past cannot
be retrieved,'' Mr. Granger said.

The playwright also has chafed at critics who he said view ''Eminent Domain'' as
a ''well-made play'' and then overreact to its flaws and ignore its virtues. If
the work were less-conventionally constructed, he said, this probably would not
happen. ''If you look at abstract art, you can't say 'that red is too red,' ''
he said, while you might dismiss a portrait out of hand because a nose or chin
was off the mark.

Mr. Granger's own father was a literature professor at the University of
Oklahoma, but, he said, ''Eminent Domain'' is not autobiographical. ''I have a
fine relationship with my parents.'' And he never ran away.

He started out as a child actor at the university, reveling in the atmosphere of
greasepaint and ignoring the implicit advice of a review that said he ''spoke
his lines with the conviction and emotion of a wooden Indian,'' he recalled.
Acting was not the only goal of his that eventually was supplanted.

Mr. Granger entered Harvard with ''a life-plan. I would major in government, go
to law school and then serve as liaison in some glamorous European Air Force
base. But Vietnam came along, and my consciousness was raised,'' he recounted.
He majored in English, dropped out of Air Force ROTC, and, after graduating,
lived under assumed names in Canada and elsewhere as a draft resister. ''I
finally was arrested but my case was thrown out,'' he said. A deferment,
initially refused, had been granted on appeal, he explained, ''but I was never
told about it.''

''I took the law boards during my senior year at Harvard,'' he recalled,
''scored lower than a rhesus monkey, and took that as a hint that my talents did
not in that way lie.'' He spent five summers with the Provincetown Playhouse in
Massachusetts, acting and also writing two plays for the company. He feels now
that, temperamentally, he never was suited for an acting career.

''I have a Puritanical streak in me which tells me I oughtn't to put myself in
the public on parade,'' he reflected, sipping tea in a basement room at Circle
in the Square. ''I don't have the pluck and outrageousness of spirit to be a
really compelling actor.'' He did, however, have ''this compulsion to show off.
I was very egomaniacal,'' he said.

What he regards as his first major work was ''Studs Edsel,'' performed at
Provincetown in 1972 and then at the Folger Theater in Washington. That play did
have autobiographical roots. ''It began with my arrival in Montreal and my first
night there as a warresister. Then it leapt into a joyuous fiction about a young
man who holes up in an empty apartment - he finds he's unable to go out into his
new world - but because of the force of his personality, people, life, come to
him.

For a couple of years, Mr. Granger wrote for Radio Mystery Theater, which taught
him a lot about plotting and about the need for ''everdeepening conflict.''

Mr. Granger lives with his wife Helen and their two sons, aged one and four, in
an Upper West Side apartment. There he has been writing every day from 9:30 A.M.
to 4 or 5 P.M., tending to forget about lunch, and making up for it afterward
with a scotch. Though he is a ''workaholic,'' he now takes weekends off, playing
rugby on Saturday, spending ''an elegant evening'' with his wife and devoting
Sunday to the entire family, starting with church and including a zoo or
botanical garden.

His current effort concerns Walt Whitman, a play commissioned by the Phoenix
Theater. And he has a new production in the wings, of works already performed.
On May 15, his one-acts ''Vivien,'' which played at Lincoln Center last season,
and ''Solitude Forty'' will be given a showcase performance for five weekends at
the Art Theater in SoHo under the direction of Charles Morey.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Percy Granger

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              138 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE AGE OF MISSILES GIVES ANYONE A SHOT AT GOLIATH

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1159 words

DATELINE: LONDON


The British destroyer Sheffield, once proudly known in the Royal Navy as ''the
Shiny Sheff,'' lies gutted by fire in the South Atlantic. Her loss in the trial
of strength between Britain and Argentina around the Falkland Islands emphasizes
the brutal facts of modern war and mocks grandiose claims about the
effectiveness of unassisted sea power in bringing unruly nations to heel.

The lesson should be clear to the United States and France which, like Britain,
have overseas commitments and must consider the prospect of supporting allies or
protecting dependencies in the third world. All three nations should be in the
process of learning that, armed with sophisticated weapons, David, at the
outset, is a match for Goliath. Showing the flag and gunboat diplomacy are no
longer safe nationalistic gestures. They are matters of life and death.

The first lesson from the Falklands is that a naval force, no matter how modern
its ships and professional its leaders and crews, cannot operate without
adequate air cover. The British task force entered the danger zone with 20
Harrier jets to protect the fleet and, if necessary, to support a landing on the
islands.

The Harriers were not up to the mission. They lacked the range to scout the air
space beyond the zone covered by the fleet's radars. As a result, the fleet was
spotted by an Argentine reconnaissance aircraft, which relayed the data to a
Super Etendard fighter-bomber armed with an Exocet missile. The Sheffield, a
picket ship for the main British fleet, was hit and destroyed.

Loss of the Sheffield and of the Argentine cruiser General Belgrano testify that
air cover to meet and destroy approaching enemy aircraft, or to provide
antisubmarine detection, is vital.

The Sheffield might have been saved had it been guarded by reconnaissance
aircraft capable of picking up the Super Etendard on their radar. The attacking
aircraft started its run well beyond the range of the fleet's surface radar.

Late last week, London dispatched Nimrod long-range reconnaissance planes and 20
additional Harriers to bolster the fleet's air strength, depleted by loss of
three of the original Harrier group.  More destroyers and frigates were also
sent to bolster the fleet.  Similarly, the General Belgrano might now be safe in
port if even rudimentary efforts had been made by her escorts to locate the
Conqueror, the British nuclear-powered hunter-killer submarine, that stalked and
sank the cruiser.

Britain, implying that additional attack submarines were also being deployed,
extended its blockade, announcing that Argentine warships would be prevented
from operating outside their territorial waters 12 miles from the mainland.

The victories scored by the Conqueror and by the Super Etendard-Exocet missiles
combination marked the coming of age of military technology that has been
developing since the air war in Vietnam.

The Arab-Israeli war of 1973 heralded the growing power of precision guided
munitions and since then, the accuracy and hitting power of these weapons has
doubled and redoubled. The geopolitical lesson is that any nation able to buy
them, as Argentina purchased Super Etendards and Exocets from France, becomes
the equal, in a primary exchange of blows, of a great or medium power.

Sending in the Antiques

The defense ministries of the superpowers and their allies must now accept that
a secondary power, given a sufficient supply of precision guided missiles fired
from aircraft, surface ships or ground installations, can meet an initial
onslaught. The weaker country can force a superpower to alter what was begun as
a punitive expedition, in 19th century terminology, into a major military
operation.

War, however, is never as black and white as the communiques make it appear. For
all the justified emphasis on new weapons, there also has been a revival of the
old in the South Atlantic.

A Vulcan bomber of the Royal Air Force, older than any member of its crew, flew
from Ascension Island to the Falklands and pocked the runway at Stanley, the
only major air strip on the islands. If war followed a textbook, the Vulcan
should have been intercepted and shot down by the Argentine Air Force. But this
was a case of the modern assisting the antique. British forces successfully
jammed Argentine radar and communications on East Stanley.

As a result, the elderly delta-wing bomber, a product of the technology of the
1950's, effectively employed a modern airfield attack bomb developed by
Britain's Defense Ministry and met only minor opposition from the surprised
antiaircraft units.

But the British, although satisfied with the two Vulcan attacks, understand only
too well that success was possible only because of Argentine negligence.
Destroying a Ship's 'Brain'

Another lesson that planners in Washington, Moscow and other capitals are sure
to be pondering is that unless adequate antisubmarine or antiaircraft measures
are taken, ships, old or new, will be highly vulnerable to modern weapons.

The 43-year-old General Belgrano, once the United States Navy's Phoenix, was hit
by two Tigerfish torpedoes from the Conqueror. She went down, the British
estimate, in about half an hour.

The Sheffield was a relatively modern ship, but one hit by an Exocet transformed
her into a ''roaring mass of flames,'' as her commander ruefully reported.

All the Sheffield's advanced damage control devices - a sprinkler system,
chemical foam dispensers - were useless because the Exocet homed on the
destroyer's brain, the control and command center, and with one searing
explosion destroyed the systems.

Beyond the tactical lessons lies an instruction in the strategic use of sea
power, potentially applicable for Britain in Hong Kong or Belize and for the
United States in the Persian Gulf. In the future, no navy, no matter how
powerful, will be able to project its power abroad unless its aircraft or,
preferably, its sea-launched guided missiles have neutralized those of the
enemy.

The Americans, the Russians, the British undoubtedly can project sea power over
vast distances. But to get a fleet to the theater of operations is no longer
enough. It must arrive with ships that can locate and identify hostile attackers
and with aircraft that can translate that information into victory over enemy
aircraft and missiles.

War, in the opinion of many planners, has entered a new dimension in which there
no longer are ''strong'' countries or ''weak'' countries. The new determinant
may be the number of precision guided missiles a country can afford to buy and
deploy. There is no lack of vendors.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map of the S. Atlantic war zone, listing lost ships,
planes

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              139 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Fathers, Mothers and Children

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 622 words


For Michael Harbert, Mother's Day came early this year, on a winter day in
Saigon. Mr. Harbert and three other Vietnam veterans were there to discuss
unresolved legacies of the war. They ran into some on the street. ''You can see
bomb craters and understand that people can fill them in,'' he says, ''but when
you see a 16-year-old child who looks like your brother....''

Outside his hotel, a middle-aged mother pressed a thick envelope of photos into
his hand and said, before ducking away in fright, ''These are American children.
Please help us.''

There are many of them, fathered by Americans, mostly soldiers.  Amerasians,
they are called, and only some, like the boy and girl pictured on the left, are
in Vietnam. Others, like the three on the right, are in Korea, or in other
countries. In Vietnam, the youngest are now 8. In Korea, still with 38,000
American troops, Amerasian babies are born each month.

The children in Korea are often persecuted as half-breeds. Some of those in
Vietnam, orphaned and homeless, run the streets with other bui doi, the dust of
life. Everywhere, the Amerasians are marked, by their blond pigtails, or black
skin or blue eyes. With American fathers, they should be able to lay claim to
American citizenship.  Official obstruction or insufficient proof often makes
that impossible. Unless they can soon lay claim to America's conscience, it will
be too late.

Why can't they come? The reasons differ by country. Children from Korea can be
readily adopted here, as is illustrated by the untiring work of the Rev. Alfred
Keane, a Maryknoll priest. But many are by now too old, or otherwise technically
ineligible. Those in Vietnam cannot get out; the Vietnamese Government won't let
them out, while ours has been indifferent about letting them in.

One reason is fear of numbers. There are perhaps 80,000 Amerasians - though by
no means all would come to the United States even if they could. Another is fear
of fraud. These children would have such a hard time proving citizenship,
officials have insisted, better not even tempt them.

To its warm credit, the Reagan Administration recently reversed that callous
policy. It now supports a bill to admit Amerasian children, devised by
Representative Stewart McKinney of Connecticut.  The Senate sponsor is Admiral
Jeremiah Denton of Alabama, a longtime prisoner of war. They would not increase
the total number of people admitted to the United States. Instead, they would
grant proper priority to those Amerasians with sponsors willing to support them.

This measure would help in Korea, where many mothers are determined, however
painfully, that their children escape a bleak future. Enactment would also be
the place to start trying to persuade Vietnam to relent, especially if America's
interest is clearly children, not propaganda. It is, in short, a humane and
sensible bill.

Still, for three years, it failed to move. This spring, at last, there have been
signs of interest from Romano Mazzoli of Kentucky, Chairman of the House
Immigration subcommittee. And last week Alan Simpson of Wyoming, his Senate
counterpart, promised prompt hearings and action.

It's a promise worth remembering. If relief falters now, it will take another
year to revive. That risk elicits from Father Keane an apt Mother's Day thought
for Senator Simpson, for Representative Mazzoli, for Judiciary Committee
Chairmen Thurmond and Rodino - and for all the rest of us:

''Think how long a year is,'' says Father Keane, ''in the life of a child.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of children

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              140 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE NEW ASIAN IMMIGRANTS

SECTION: Section 6; Page 22, Column 2; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 5440 words


Robert Lindsey is chief of the The New York Times's Los Angeles bureau. By
Robert Lindsey Walking along Broadway on Manhattan's Upper West Side, you glance
over at the greengrocer's where you've shopped for years and discover a Korean
behind the counter where an Italian used to stand.

The 7:56 pulls into the Hartsdale railroad station in Westchester County, and on
some mornings it seems that half of the commuters who board the train are
Japanese businessmen headed for jobs in New York City, all dressed in the same
uniform - a dark suit, and carrying a leather briefcase.

In California's Silicon Valley, hundreds of Korean and Chinese assemblers hunch
over the precision machines that make integrated circuits. A few years ago,
their employers farmed out the same kind of work to Korea and Taiwan.

And in Orange County, California's once legendary red-white-andblue homeland for
the kooky right wing, there are so many immigrants from Southeast Asia these
days that the schools have employed specialists who can speak more than a dozen
Asian languages and dialects.

These Asian immigrants are part of a population tide that is changing the face
of America. According to the 1980 Census, Asians were the fastest growing ethnic
group in the United States during the 1970's, increasing 125 percent to more
than 3.5 million. In the same way that millions of Europeans were propelled
across the Atlantic at the turn of the century by poverty and by political and
racial discrimination, the 1970's sent a torrent of people across the Pacific
-Koreans, Filipinos, Chinese, Thais, Japanese, Vietnamese, Cambodians and other
Asians who came to America, like the Europeans who preceded them, in seach of a
better life, another chance.

And, unless Congress acts on proposed legislation that would reduce it, the flow
may have only just begun. Some population researchers expect the nation's Asian
population to grow at an even faster rate during the 1980's than it did during
the 70's because of an aboveaverage birth rate in many Asian communities and
accelerating immigration - both legal and illegal.  Across Asia, America has
become the land of hope and dreams for millions. But what this influx of Asians
will mean to a country whose culture is deeply rooted in Europe can only be
guessed at now. Even with the recently growing migration, Asians make up only
about 1.6 percent of the nation's population.

Yet, their influence is already spreading rapidly, from the concert music we
listen to, to the foods we eat and how we prepare them, to the clothes we wear,
to the way we decorate our homes, to the sense of revitalization that Asians
have given to scores of urban communities across the country, to a hard-driving
entrepreneurial spirit that America hasn't seen in decades.

Asian immigrants often attempt to embrace Western styles in art and music,
leaving behind the cultural heritage of their native countries. But in subtle
ways, and perhaps unconsciously, the Asians are beginning to infuse our European
cultural legacies with a rich new flavor. The influences range from what a music
teacher at the Juilliard School in New York calls a compelling undercurrent in
the music played by the growing number of orchestras populated by Chinese and
Korean string players, to shadings in our art that could best be characterized
by the Japanese word shibui - the concept of understated, refined simplicity
devoid of extraneous detail.

In much the same way that the relatively small number of European Jews who came
to the United States during the last century had an outsized impact on American
business, science and culture, the Asians are likely to have an influence on
this country far out of proportion to their numbers.

''Some of the similarities between the Asians and the Jews are quite striking,''
says Arthur H. Rosen, president of the National Committee on United States-China
Relations. ''There are the same kind of strong family ties and the same
sacrificial drive on the part of immigrant parents who couldn't get a college
education to see that their children do.''

Partly out of fear of the latent prejudice toward Orientals that has erupted
periodically throughout American history, Asians who have been here for more
than a few years tend to be more assertive politically than many other ethnic
minorities. As a group, they are well educated and well informed on political
matters and are likely to play a growing role in the governing process. Many of
the newest arrivals tend to vote Democratic after gaining citizenship. But there
is a strong conservative bent among Asian-American entrepreneurs.  Like American
businessmen, they possess the attitudes and values that Ronald Reagan exploited
in his 1980 Presidential campaign.

The number of Asians who have succeeded and prospered in their new home was
illustrated in statistics recently published by the United States Bureau of the
Census: Asians had the highest median family income of any ethnic group in the
country: $22,075 compared with $19,908 for the nation as a whole. And 75 percent
of them were highschool graduates, compared with 69 percent of whites, 51
percent of blacks and 43 percent of Hispanics.

However, there has been a fundamental change in the migration, according to
Kevin F. McCarthy, a demographer who has evaluated the Asian immigration to
America for the Rand Corporation, a research group in Santa Monica, Calif.
Earlier emigrants from both China and Southeast Asia were skilled and ambitious
- often, in fact, educated professional people. But there is a second wave of
refugees - those who have arrived in the last few years -and they are often
unskilled and uneducated, illiterate even in their own language.

Americans confronted with this new tide of immigrants are asking themselves what
effects it will have on the economy. The United States, McCarthy points out, has
a long tradition of opening its doors to refugees fleeing political oppression.
The principal issue to be dealt with in the future, he says, is whether this
country can afford to accept millions of immigrants from underdeveloped
countries seeking not political refuge, but simply a better life.

Many of the recent refugees, McCarthy explains, appear to be fleeing economic
bad times. In some communites Asian refugees are already taxing social services,
and there are growing complaints that they are taking jobs from Americans. A
visit recently to some of the communities around the country where the majority
of Asians have settled illustrates the many differences among the immigrant
groups: The well-to-do businessman from Seoul who sells out his holdings in
Korea and flies first-class to Los Angeles with enough cash to buy a $300,000
home and a $500,000 liquor store has little in common with the Hmong tribesman
who fled a primitive mountain hamlet in Laos and, after escaping in a crowded
boat, comes to America unable to read even in his own language.

Most generalizations about the Asian immigrants are flawed. New stereotypes,
like ''hard-working'' and ''obsessed with education,'' fail just as badly as old
ones, like ''inscrutable'' and ''clannish.'' Still, as you travel around the
country meeting the new immigrants in their homes and on the job, a sense
quickly emerges that, despite the problems that bedevil them, they comprise a
powerhouse of drive and ambition that is likely to have a broad impact on the
life of the country.  During the last five years or so, Flushing, Queens, has
been transformed by the arrival of tens of thousands of immigrants from Korea,
China and the Philippines. Stores owned by Asians line the streets. Real-estate
offices have signs outside in both English and Korean; food-store proprietors
sell ethnic foods that are identified in their own language, and restaurants
post menus with Oriental characters on one side and English on the other.

''We are new in America and have to work three times harder than you do,'' says
Genghis Kim, a real-estate agent who arrived in the United States from Seoul 12
years ago and received his bachelor's degree from Rutgers University. ''We have
to help each other.''

Across the continent in Orange County, Calif., Chi Loi, a delicate, waiflike
young woman, boasts that she got out of South Vietnam ''at the very last minute
- really, the last minute'' - before the fall of Saigon in 1975. She and her
husband, Dong, worked at two jobs each for several years in order to accumulate
enough money to buy a fish market, which they opened earlier this year.

''Some Americans don't like us,'' she said as she scrubbed the shop's floor.
''They think we came with gold and diamonds. I try to explain that we're not
that kind of people. We work very hard, to save money.''

And then, with a smile, she held up her hands to show that they were calloused,
as if to rest her case.  Such opportunities have not always been available to
Asian immigrants in this country. By and large, Asians of earlier generations
who wanted to come to the United States faced harsh immigration laws. If they
managed to reach America at all, they faced serious discrimination in the
workplace, which, for many, meant relegation to menial jobs in agriculture,
restaurants and laundries.  In an effort to set up a protective barrier against
an alien culture and language, they tended to practice a kind of separatism,
isolating themselves with others from their own country.

Participants in the new Asian invasion frequently continue to live together.
Many are finding doors still closed and life in America little more than a grim
confinement to a sweatshop. But some things are changing. More and more Asians
are entering the mainstream of American life and many are achieving positions of
leadership in science, business, music, art, architecture, fashions, the theater
and other fields.

From Seiji Ozawa, the conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, who came from
Japan, to Yo-Yo Ma, the awesome Chinese cellist, to Myung Whun Chung, who grew
up in Korea, came to this country to study at Juilliard and went on to become
one of this country's most exciting young conductors and pianists, Asians have
already become a major component of the classical-music world in America.

Among the more than 1,500 Asian artists said to be working in New York City,
painters like Shusaku Arakawa and Ushio Shinohara, the sculptor Isamu Noguchi
and the video-art pioneer Nam June Paik are regarded by some critics as among
the best now working in America.

I.M. Pei and Minoru Yamasaki are the best known of many Asian architects at work
in this country.  Willa Kim, who grew up in a poor family in Los Angeles's
Koreatown, won a Tony award last year for designing the costumes for Broadway's
''Sophisticated Ladies.'' Another Korean, Cathy Hardwick (who married an
American before she began her career) is regarded as a major designer of women's
sportswear on Seventh Avenue.

The migration has produced entrepreneurs such as Dr. An Wang, the founder of
Wang Laboratories, a pioneer in computerized word processing, and Hiroaki
(Rockie) Aokie, who created the Benihana of Tokyo restauarant chain. It has also
produced executives like Ming Hsu, who came to America from China in the closing
days of World War II and began a career that has carried her to a vice
presidency of the RCA Corporation. She was recently appointed director of the
Division of International Trade for the state of New Jersey.

When Dr. Samuel C.C. Ting, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, won the
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1976 - a year in which all of the Nobels were won by
Americans - he delivered his acceptance speech in English, only after giving it
first in Chinese - ''just for fun,'' he said, but also to stress his ethnic
background. Dr. Ting is one of the more prominent of thousands of Asian
scientists and teachers working for industry and in academia in this country.

There are success stories of Asians who came to America and became well known.
But there are also countless thousands of other, less dramatic success stories,
from mom-and-pop grocery stores to flourishing electronics companies.

Le Thai Hans was transplanted seven years ago from her shattered homeland of
Vietnam to an alien culture - the American South. While living in a refugee camp
in Thailand, she met a physician from the Center for Disease Control in Atlanta
who agreed to sponsor the emigration of her family and to give her a job.

Her husband, Pruyen, a former Vietnamese intelligence officer, spoke no English,
and could not get a job immediately. Mrs. Le's salary alone was not enough to
support the family, so she began making egg rolls, which she sold during lunch
hour to friends at work. A newspaper ran an article about her egg rolls, and
business flourished; she now owns two restaurants and an Oriental food market in
Atlanta. Her success, she says, was a result of ''luck'' and of working 16 hours
or more a day.

In a comment that seems an echo of immigrant dreams of generations past, and a
credo for many of the new Asian immigrants, she says: ''I believe with hard work
you can get everything you want. You have to be willing to help yourself
first.'' When finalists for the 1982 Westinghouse Science Talent Search gathered
to be honored recently at the Plaza Hotel in New York, it seemed to surprise no
one that six of the 40 finalists were Asian, even though Asians account for only
a tiny percentage of the national population. Figures showing such
disproporionate academic success have become commonplace.

A few blocks from the Plaza, at the Juilliard School near Lincoln Center, 15
percent of the enrollment is Asian. And at the Berkeley campus of the University
of California, more than 20 percent of the undergraduates these days are Asians,
even though they make up only 5.3 percent of the state's population. At major
graduate schools of business, such as Harvard and Stanford, there has also been
a disproporionate representation of Asian students for almost a decade.

At Stuyvesant High School in New York, one of the most selective high schools in
the country, where almost 10,000 applicants competed last year for 750 seats in
the freshman class, about 25 percent of the students are Asians, according to
Gaspar R. Fabbricante, the principal. What explains the high rate of success?

''I attribute it to culture and family backing,'' he says. ''The Asians seem to
have a tradition of scholarship and respect for learning. They have tremendous
drive.''

One of the Westinghouse finalists, Richard Ke-Jen Chang, a 17-yearold Stuyvesant
senior and a Chinese-American who came to this country in 1973, describes the
Asian families he knows: ''They have a high regard for education, and the
parents are willing to sacrifice their lives for the next generation.''

Max Watrus, who heads the music and art programs at Stuyvesant, says that most
Asian students he knows had an uncommon ''gift for detail and precision'' that
makes them particularly effective in mathematics, music and art.

''They not only have a sense of self-discipline but of selfcriticism,'' he says.
''They don't follow blindly, but they're willing to accept the demands we place
on them. If I told them to memorize a chapter in a history book, they'd know it
the next day.''

A teacher at the Bronx High School of Science, another highly selective school
with a large proportion of Asian students, recounted a conversation she once had
with an Asian parent: ''He said that when he was younger, he couldn't decide
whether he should work in a restaurant or a laundry. He decided that when you
work in a restaurant, you're away too many hours. 'If I work in a laundry,' he
said, 'I can see my children and ask them: ''What did you learn today? Show me
what you learned today.'' ' He told me he'd gone to work in a laundry, and he
said: 'I got a doctor; I got a lawyer.' '' Asians have long encountered
discrimination and exploitation in this country. Indeed, many who have arrived
in America in the last 150 years probably wished that they had stayed home.

During the 19th century, thousands of poor Chinese workers were imported to this
country to provide cheap labor for construction of the Western railroads. Serfs
in all but name, they left a synonym in our language for exploited, underpaid
workers: coolie labor.  Hundreds, working for pennies a day, died trying to
build the railroads. But enough survived to create Chinese communities in San
Francisco, Los Angeles, New York and elsewhere, and some of their descendants
became merchants and bankers and helped further the trade with China that began
in the 19th century.

In later years, sizable numbers of Japanese and Koreans went to the West Coast,
mostly to work as farm laborers, although some eventually prospered in business
and other fields. In 1924, amid emotional outcries about a ''yellow peril,''
Congress passed the Alien Quota Act, which all but excluded Asians by setting
numerical quotas restricting immigration almost exclusively to Europeans.

After Pearl Harbor pushed the United States into World War II, sentiment against
Orientals intensified once again, and thousands of Japanese who lived on the
West Coast were interned in prison camps.

In 1965, as a kind of an ancillary effect of the civil-rights movement, Congress
repealed the 1924 law, and racial quotas were abolished. Would-be migrants from
Asia then faced the same restrictions as immigrants from elsewhere - a
limitation of 20,000 from each country annually, with an overall limit each year
from all countries of 270,000.

The new law opened the door to a new influx of immigrants from Japan, Korea,
Taiwan and other countries. The door opened still wider in 1975, when the
Government of South Vietnam fell, and the United States agreed to accept
hundreds of thousands of refugees from Southeast Asia.

Last year, Congress voted to give mainland China its own quota of 20,000
immigrants a year while retaining the quota for Taiwan, thus effectively giving
the Chinese a combined quota of 40,000, the most for any ethnic group.

Social workers and educators who work with the immigrants emphasize that there
are major differences between many of the latest arrivals and those who came to
America during the early to middle 1970's. Some people who work with the Asian
immigrants refer to this group as the Second Wave.

Many, if not most, of those who came shortly after the the quota law was
abolished were college-trained professionals who brought their families from
Taiwan, Korea and Hong Kong; some were well-to-do and able to invest in homes
and businesses. Many of the initial Vietnamese refugees who came here after the
fall of Saigon had also worked in the professional classes in their own country.

But the more recent immigrants, those from mainland China as well as the ''boat
people'' who fled Cambodia, Laos, rural Vietnam and other Southeast Asian
countries, are often poorly educated and unskilled and have no familiarity with
English.

Cecilia Chin, a social worker for the Chinese American Service League in
Chicago, says that many of the new refugees from mainland China, like many of
the Southeast Asian ''boat people,'' are unskilled and illiterate, even in
Chinese.

''The Chinese kids from the mainland we are getting are not the same kids as the
ones we got from Hong Kong and Taiwan,'' says a principal in an elementary
school in New York's Chinatown. ''In terms of productivity, we are finding that
the kids who lived under Communism lack motivation. It's really amazing to see
the change.  It's as if they're telling us: 'We're here now. Make us learn.' ''
Nowhere is there more evidence of the influx of Southeast Asian refugees, or the
problems and cultural conflicts that they face, than in Orange County, the
sprawling surburban megalopolis south of Los Angeles. - More than 50,000
Vietnamese, Laotians and Cambodians have settled in the county, whose population
is two million. Orange County's Asians represent more than one-tenth of the
total number of Asian immigrants in the country; some were settled there by the
Government, others came via so-called secondary migration, a tendency of
refugees who are resettled elsewhere in the country to gravitate to California -
and, to some extent, Texas - where the climate is warm and there are already
large numbers of refugees.

In Orange County, Asian immigrants have overloaded the public schools and
medical facilities - they are blamed for a sharp rise in the rate of
tuberculosis and certain other diseases. In addition, there has been growing
resentment among some lower-income whites, as well as blacks and Hispanics, who
feel that the refugees are taking jobs and housing that would otherwise go to
them; and after some refugees admitted to news reporters that they often ate
dogs and cats in their native lands, they are blamed whenever a nonrefugee
family's pet disappears.

Still, despite such problems, a large number of the refugees are succeeding,
often with the help of a large family network.  Dong Loi, who bought the fish
market with his wife, owned several stores in Vietnam before coming to this
country in 1975; his wife is the daughter of a tailor; they met in this country,
married, saved for their store and meanwhile helped arrange passage for her
brothers, Nhien and Hiep, who, says Chi Loi, ''walked across Cambodia'' to make
it. Now, the brothers work in the fish market, and they all live with other
family members, a total of 10 people in a rented two-bedroom house.

Mrs. Loi says that she worries sometimes about calls from Asian gang members
demanding protection payments, and she is concerned about the hostility she has
felt from some Americans - there was a brief petition drive last year to halt
the spread of Vietnamese-owned businesses in the Orange County town of
Westminster.

But, she says, despite the hostility and other problems, they are happy to be in
America. ''We came for freedom,'' she says.  What is the influx of Asians likely
to mean to America?  Asia, of course, has long had an influence on this country,
from stirring a fascination with Oriental religions and art a century ago to
helping to shape the architecture of Frank Lloyd Wright in the 1930's. For the
most part, though, Asia has done more importing of ideas and hardware from the
West than it has exported, and we have taken our lead from Europe.

But these days, the Asian presence is pervasive: We drive Datsun automobiles,
gather around Sony television sets and dine on Noritake china. Uncounted
thousands of us attend karate classes every week. We may even work in an office
building owned by an investor in Hong Kong or Tokyo.

When we go out for an Oriental meal, it no longer means just Cantonese-style
chop suey or chow mein. We've graduated to more sophisticated styles of Chinese,
Japanese, Korean, Thai and other Asian cuisines. In New York alone, at last
count, there were 269 Japanese restaurants. Even some of New York's best French
chefs admit that there is a subliminal Asian influence in the way they arrange
and garnish servings of nouvelle cuisine, putting emphasis on the appearance of
the food as well as the taste.

Immigrant communities are taking root from Boston to Seattle. In many of these
neighborhoods the immigrants are reviving old, deteriorated blocks, like parts
of the Lower East Side in New York and fringes of the North Beach section of San
Francisco. A stretch of Olympic Boulevard in Los Angeles has become the
sparkling center of a Korean community of almost 100,000.

On the North Side of Chicago, Japanese, Korean and Thai merchants have turned a
part of Clark Street into a lively, inviting Oriental enclave. In Linda Vista, a
section of San Diego, more than half of the residents - about 7,500 - are
refugees from Southeast Asia, and some American veterans of the Vietnam War say
that there are parts of the community that could have been transplanted in toto
from old Saigon.

In Houston, which supports four Asian-language newspapers these days, cattlemen
and oil roustabouts are sometimes startled when they approach the city from the
south and run across the Crystal Palace Mall, which has a dozen shops, a
nightclub and other facilities for Vietnamese refugees.

In these and other cities, the Asians have become significant elements of the
local economy.  In Los Angeles and New York, which both have large
concentrations of business offices staffed by representatives of Japanese and
other Asian countries, the expatriate businessmen, who are generally rotated
back to their home offices every three years or so, are credited with injecting
millions of dollars into the local economy each year.

The new Asian immigrants are important to the garment, hotel and restaurant
businesses. According to some estimates, as many as 1,500 Filipino nurses are
recruited annually by American hospitals to help alleviate the national nursing
shortage.

In the future, as more and more of the Asians who have arrived here since 1968
leave college and move upward in their careers, it is likely that the aptitudes
for science, mathematics and business with which many of them are imbued will
contribute increasingly to hightechnology industries. Ming Hsu, the New Jersey
director of International Trade, who came from China after World War II, says
that it was very difficult for members of her generation - especially women - to
rise in the business world. It should be easier in the future, she says. ''But
you don't legislate changes in social attitudes; you can't change people's
opinion overnight.''

The most recent wave of immigrants, she predicted, will probably have more
difficulty than the earlier, better-educated immigrants.  ''They lack some of
the initiative, but I think they still have the Asian work ethic. I think
they'll play a part in the urban renewal process around the country; they'll
live in a ghetto and try to turn it around.'' Is the work ethic contagious? Some
educators at schools where there are large numbers of high-achieving Asian
pupils say they have noticed that the youngsters provide a competitive prod to
other students to work harder, but we probably will not know how contagious the
Asians' industriousness is in our economy for a few more years.

And although the Asian immigrants are expected to enrich the nation's cultural
life, the specific ways in which they may do so are not yet clear. A passion for
music, particularly among Chinese and Korean young people, has led to an
explosion in the genesis of highquality string players in this country. But the
Asian community has not yet produced any top-flight classical singers nor have
the Asians advanced far in musical composition. Still, there are some people who
believe that with so many Asians entering the American musical scene, it is
inevitable that they will leave a special mark on our music.

At the moment, according to Vincent Persichetti, a distinguished composer and
teacher at the Juilliard School, most of the young Asian musicians are striving
to absorb Western musical culture and perhaps rejecting the music of their
homelands. But he suggests the possibility that there is a subliminal effect
surviving their efforts. ''I've noticed some of their string players,'' he says,
''and subconsciously I think some of them are playing an Asian turn of phrase;
they play certain phrases with a dark orange undercurrent that is quite
beautiful.''

Only a handful of the Asian artists who have emigrated to New York have found
success so far. Many have to support themselves in menial jobs or are supported
by their wives, says Katsko Suzuki, who came to to New York 16 years ago and now
owns a New York gallery that specializes in contemporary Japanese art. ''They're
not making it. I tell them, 'Why don't you go back? It's so much easier in
Japan.' But they want to be in New York, because it's the art capital of the
world; some go home, some commit suicide, some keep trying,''

American art buyers, she adds, are showing an increasing interest in the work of
some Asian artists, but they are confused by what constitutes ''Asian art.''
''What is Japanese art?'' she asks. ''Is it Ukiyo-e?'' referring to traditional
17th- and 18th-century art depicting Samurai warriors, ''or is in art done by
somebody who has a Japanese name?'' Still, in time, she predicts, more and more
Asians ''will be recognized and succeed.''

Already, some critics say, there are signs of a Japanese influence on some
contemporary American painters, such as Robert Motherwell and Franz Klein.

''There is almost universal interest in and acceptance of Asian principles of
art and design among our artists,'' says Dr. Susan Larsen, an associate
professor of art history at the University of Southern California. ''It is
subtle. It's not that they're painting bamboo or cherry blossoms; it's a
tendency toward understatement and refinement in their art that parallels the
refinement in modernism; it's the elimination of extraneous detail.'' And, like
others, she expects the infuence to grow.

However, another U.S.C. art historian, Dr. Patricia Berger, emphasizes that
there ''is a world of difference'' between the art of China, Japan, Korea and
the Phillipines, and, over time, each country may affect American artists in its
own way. So far, she notes, Japan has had by far the greatest influence in this
country, and it ranges from an impact on the design of our furniture and
handcrafts to the design of gardens and the use of Japanese-style wood-block art
in the preparation of advertisements by McDonald's, the hamburger chain. Indeed,
she adds, the Japanese influence ''is so integrated we don't even notice it
anymore. They have moved into our hearts and we don't even know it.'' March Fong
Eu, California's Chinese-American Secretary of State, is the state's highest
Asian official. She believes that Asian-Americans, as a well-educated,
well-informed minority, will probably exercise a political clout in excess of
their proportion.

''If you look back over the history of Asian presence here in America,'' she
said, ''the Government hasn't been very kind to us.'' With the increasing number
of Asians in this country, and the growing economic success of many of them, she
said, it appears that a new wave of anti-Asian feeling might be developing in
parts of the country, where Asian immigrants are being used as ''scapegoats'' by
some unemployed Americans.

But Mrs. Eu believes that Asian groups may be trying to form a political
coalition. ''There have been several meetings in California with the feeling:
'We all come from different cultures, but we must work together,' '' she says.

''I think there's a feeling that if people don't take an interest in politics,
and they recede into the background, they may be subject to same kind of
oppression they came from.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of March Fong Eu (Page 41) photo of Samuel C.C.
Ting (Page 40) photo of Chinese farmers in 1910 (Page 38) photo of a Chinese
shopping plaza in Calif. (Page 36) photos of Chinese Americans (Page 26) photo
of I.M. Pei (Page 25) photo of Cathy Hardwick (Page 25) photo of Steve Kang
(Page 24) photo of Ming Hsu (Page 23)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              141 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PRESIDENT AND THE PRESS CORPS.

BYLINE: By John Herbers; John Herbers, a national correspondent of The Times
based in Washington, covered the White House during the Nixon and Ford
Administrations.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 45, Column Z; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6044 words


As a distanced if not detached observer, Jody Powell looks at the Reagan White
House press office with a mixture of envy at the skillful way the Reagan people
handled the news media during the first year of their Administration and of
skepticism that they can continue to control how the President is portrayed to
the American public. In a display of cynicism rare for him but not uncommon in
others who have labored at the task, Jimmy Carter's press secretary notes that
''there is some tendency for the press, having just savaged the predecessor, to
get some blood off their hands before they set out on the next one.'' As he
watches David R. Gergen, President Reagan's communications director, speaking on
national television of ''journalistic fantasy'' in the coverage of Mr.  Reagan's
bungled news conferences, Powell senses that both sides have finally squared off
against each other in the time-honored fashion of press and Presidents.

Until recently, through a combination of personality, Irish good luck and
exceptional staff work, Ronald Reagan has been able to use the complexity of
communications at his command to regulate to a remarkable degree the nature of
the news emanating from the White House. But now that his ability to grasp the
myriad domestic and foreign issues on which he must make decisions is being
questioned almost daily, that capability is being seriously eroded, and Mr.
Reagan has begun to grumble in public about the news coverage he is receiving.

Most correspondents regularly assigned to the White House see their role there
as the generally accepted one of reporters elsewhere - to report the news, to
pass on the essentials and to inquire as evenhandedly as possible into
accomplishments and failures. That, however, immediately casts them as
adversaries because White House officials invariably view their own role as one
of portraying the President in a favorable light.

To further that end, the White House last month launched a broad spring
offensive against what the President and his assistants perceived to be a spate
of misleading accounts of Mr. Reagan's performance in office. The innovations
include a 10-part series of Saturday afternoon radio addresses by Mr. Reagan
-conceived to be reminiscent of President Roosevelt's fireside chats (the Reagan
variation was dismissed by a Democratic National Committee spokesman as
''bunker-side chats'') - designed to bypass the press and go directly to the
public, just in time to make the widely circulated Sunday newspapers; brief
informal Presidential news conferences, aimed at overcoming charges of
inaccessibility, in the Oval Office or White House Rose Garden, during which the
President seeks to show himself as firmly in charge and deeply concerned with
the needs of the nation; and the dispatching of Cabinet and lower-ranking
Government officials throughout the country to deliver speeches depicting Mr.
Reagan as a man of compassion, particularly toward minorities.

From the point of view of the press, reporting what goes on in the White House
in a fair and impartial way presents probably the greatest challenge to
journalism today. Congress, despite its propensity toward secret meetings, is an
open book compared to the Presidency, and state and local governments can be
penetrated with relative ease. But the White House is unique. Invariably, the
President and his associates seek to control not only the kind of information
they think the public should receive but also when that information should be
made available.

They have many means at their disposal. So important is the President's station
in the eyes of the American people that he can upstage his political opposition
almost any time just by making an announcement or delivering an opinion that may
or may not be of great import. He can demand, and generally receive, prime time
on national television to say almost anything he wishes. He can control where
and when he is photographed. He can go over the heads of both Congress and the
journalistic establishment and reach people and opinion makers across the
country, not only through television and radio but by direct contact with
politicians and other leaders whom he can punish or reward through Federal
largesse. He can hinder or help reporters, columnists and editors by supplying
or withholding information. He can also use the press as a whipping boy, blaming
it for his troubles by accusing it of incomplete coverage and of misrepresenting
his policies. And his credibility with a public inclined to distrust the press
is such that he is believed more often than not. he President can also shape
news conferences to his own ends simply by calling on reporters he knows will
ask only soft questions or who can be counted on to defuse tense moments by
providing comic relief. Until March 31 of this year, all of Mr.  Reagan's news
conferences - a forum that does not show him at his best - were scheduled for
the afternoon hours when relatively few people would be able to watch. It was
felt that prime evening time should be saved for more direct communications to
the public, since Mr. Reagan, a skilled actor, performs better when working from
a script. His first State of the Union Message, for example, was widely
acclaimed as a masterly performance.

But when Mr. Reagan's press-conference misstatements became an issue earlier
this year, his aides decided that the edited, short segments of the conferences
that were shown on evening television news programs were exaggerating the
President's most fumbled answers. So they switched the press conferences to
prime time, in the belief that Reagan in the round was better than Reagan edited
by the networks. Their strategy paid off. After extensive briefings on the
issues expected to be raised, the President performed better on March 31 than at
any recent press conference.

In a view he shares with many inside and outside the White House, David R.
Gergen thinks that press conferences have become of less than major importance
as a means of conveying the President's message. And Thomas DeFrank of Newsweek,
who has covered the White House since the Nixon days, says the conference is ''a
staged event for the benefit of TV,'' and journalists are ''so anxious to get
themselves recognized'' on the tube that they do not ask the kind of hard,
follow-up questions they should.

Gergen and the President worry most about press-conference stories, particularly
those questioning Mr. Reagan's grasp of facts. The White House contends that
such preoccuption with details pre-empts more important things and distorts the
record. The press believes that how well the President masters facts and what is
going on in his Administration is central to the performance of Government.
Everyone agrees that if such incidents are kept in the spotlight long enough,
they will weaken the President. It is a difficult problem for the White House to
deal with. To forestall additional gaffes, Mr.  Reagan's staff has begun holding
regular Monday lunches with him, at which various issues and decisions are
discussed.

Mr. Reagan, however, has made it clear that he does not expect to be held too
closely to facts, and that he wants to feel free to put his own interpretations
on history as well as on current affairs. ''I have never claimed to be a whiz
kid, a robot, a bionic adding machine or a walking encyclopedia,'' he noted in a
speech he decided not to deliver. ''I am a human being. But I value the truth.''

(At last month's White House Correspondents Association's annual dinner,
President Reagan tweaked the press corps with a number of one-liners, including:
''You must keep on seeking the truth and I'll keep on telling it, even though
you don't recognize it.'')

Having ridden to victory in the 1980 Presidential election by the skillful use
of television, the Reaganites are extremely sensitive to any telecast that puts
the President in a bad light. When CBS News on April 21 ran a documentary,
''People Like Us,'' reported by Bill Moyers, portraying three families as
victims of the Administration's budget cuts, the White House demanded equal time
to answer what it called a misleading portrayal of its economic policies. CBS
promptly refused, but did report the criticism on its regular news shows.  What
was remarkable about the incident was not that it occurred but that it so
shocked and preoccupied much of the White House staff for several days, almost
to an extent that a foreign crisis would.  In the American form of government,
all roads lead to the White House, even under a President who is trying to rid
his office of much of its authority in domestic affairs. And as the office of
the President has grown more remote, the demands of a democracy for information
about it have increased, not only on the decisions made but also on the
influences brought to bear on the decision-making process. Thus the press feels
a special responsibility to overcome the obstacles and get to the facts beyond
those the President and his assistants want to disclose.  [TEXT OMITTED FROM
SOURCE] to an extent that a foreign crisis would.  In the American form of
government, all roads lead to the White House, even under a President who is
trying to rid his office of much of its authority in domestic affairs. And as
the office of the President has grown more remote, the demands of a democracy
for information about it have increased, not only on the decisions made but also
on the influences brought to bear on the decision-making process. Thus the press
feels a special responsibility to overcome the obstacles and get to the facts
beyond those the President and his assistants want to disclose.

Because of its power and uniqueness, the White House inevitably attracts an
assortment of journalistic types, including eccentrics and power worshipers.
About 1,700 reporters of various kinds and nationalities are accredited to the
White House full time, and 4,000 others - who have been precleared by the Secret
Service - are admitted on request.

Since virtually all White House business, from Cabinet meetings to decisions on
cotton quotas, is conducted behind doors closed to the press, it is essential
for members of the press to have access to those in authority who can disclose
what has transpired. But except for his press secretary, none of the President's
closest advisers are required to deal with the media. Nor can the press easily
confront them, for the White House corridors are closely guarded, and only
authorized visitors find their way around them, and then generally only under
escort.

In the present White House, probably no more than a dozen people know most of
what is going on. In discussing the difficulty of covering the compound at 1600
Pennsylvania Avenue, Howell Raines, a White House correspondent of The New York
Times, says that the highest officials under the President frequently will
disclose information only to reporters who write stories flattering to the
President or to those who make the officials believe they have damaging
information, whether they do or not. Thus it boils down, he says, to
''sycophancy or assault,'' neither of which is acceptable to Raines and other
reporters with high ethical standards.

It becomes necessary, therefore, for members of the press to use their wit and
instinct to ferret out and analyze information wherever they can find it outside
the tightly controlled White House communications apparatus. There is also a
carefully developed network of inside sources who, respecting the integrity of
trusted correspondents, will often speak out freely on a background basis.
Frequently, the result is excellent reportage, to the dismay of the President
and his top aides, but the competent and ethical White House reporter - and
there are many who are not - is constantly haunted and frustrated by the feeling
that a great deal of information of public interest is being deliberately
concealed.

Jack Nelson, bureau chief of The Los Angeles Times, put it another way on
''Inside Story,'' a public-television program about news coverage: ''I think
they try to manage (reporters) and they're very adroit about it. ... They know
how to 'float' stories'' -that is, to put out unsourced stories that serve the
personal interest of a particular official or test a policy the President is not
yet willing to identify as his own. ''They know how to shift things around here
and there,'' he went on, ''and they hold information extremely tight.''

As everyone who has spent much time around the White House knows, a President
has the advantage over his journalistic adversaries, provided he knows how to
play his cards and is not burdened with some enormous scandal or breach of
trust. Yet Lyndon Johnson, an experienced practitioner, failed after a period of
success because he was perceived as having repeatedly having lied on television
about guns and butter during the Vietnam War. Richard Nixon, who declared war on
the press early in his first term, won hands down until the Watergate scandal
brought his darkest character traits to the surface. Gerald Ford knew how to
play his cards but his caretaker Presidency came too hard on the heels of
Watergate. Jimmy Carter's inability to demonstrate that he was forcefully in
charge, with clear goals and an agenda, worked against him with the public.

Ronald Reagan, at the mellow age of 71, has none of the personality problems
that contributed to the troubles of Johnson, Nixon and Carter. Even when he was
Governor of California, and viewed by much of the national press as dangerously
conservative, he had a way of disarming critics once they were in his presence,
and reporters invariably wound up filing much milder stories than they had
intended. And Mr. Reagan is unmatched in knowing how to flatter journalists by
dealing with them in an ''I'm O.K., You're O.K.'' first-name manner. But it is
more than that.

Politicians in both parties say people are tired of seeing Presidents fail and
want to see this one succeed. And whatever his strengths or weaknesses as a
public official, Ronald Reagan does not seem to have been overwhelmed by
elevation to the nation's highest office, as have his recent predecessors. From
all accounts he remains what he always was.  By the time Mr. Reagan was elected
to national office, there had been enough experience of Presidents who got
themselves entangled with a hostile press for someone to sit down and draft a
preventative prescription. James A. Baker 3d, the highly influential White House
chief of staff, did just that and, with a few exceptions, his formula has been
followed. Its essence is: Do whatever is necessary not to lose control of the
news agenda to a press that might prefer to keep attention focused on scandal,
disarray within the Administration or leadership performance that falls short of
public expectations. A corollary is: Don't get paranoid and draw the wagons
around the White House. It's hard to win an all-out shoot-out with the press,
whatever the provocation.

All of this had, of course, been known to previous occupants of the White House,
but no Administration in recent memory has managed to apply it quite so well -
even as the recession deepens, unemployment worsens and the President's
economic, foreign and domestic policies come under an avalanche of criticism
from friend and foe alike.

A few steps removed from the White House West Lobby are the press rooms where
regularly assigned correspondents work in a series of cubicles. Coats, cameras
and tripods clutter the few vacant spaces, and despite a recent upgrading of the
air-conditioning system, there is a slight scent of overheated bodies and stale
coffee.

For years, the briefing room had deep leather couches and chairs and tables that
gave it an informal setting. Larry Speakes, Mr.  Reagan's principal deputy press
secretary, had the furniture replaced by rows of theater seats each bearing the
name of a news organization having a full-time correspondent there. And earlier,
Ronald L. Ziegler, press secretary to Richard Nixon, had had a blue curtain hung
behind the lectern used during briefings to make any official standing there
look better on television.

In recent years, there has been an explosion of television coverage, with the
network and cable broadcasters being joined by many stations from all over the
country intent on providing their own accounts of White House activities. Larry
Speakes says the logistics of accommodating all the crews and equipment has
become almost unmanageable, and the grass on the northwest lawn suffers from
constant use by television reporters who like to broadcast their accounts
against the background of the White House's front portico.

The reporters and photographers who regularly work in the West Wing make up only
a small part of the press that writes or broadcasts about the President. A much
larger number come to the White House only occasionally - for the President's
news conferences or for interviews with various officials. And on any given day
there are hundreds of other journalists covering some aspect of the Presidency
from places other than the White House. Additionally, reporters who cover
Congress, the Cabinet and executive departments and all kinds of special
subjects, such as science or the environment, frequently come to the White House
to consult sources. To accommodate out-oftown editors, writers and broadcasters,
there is a special office, headed by Karna Small, director of the office of
media relations. And in a little noticed but important aspect of White House
reachout, editors, reporters and broadcasters representing a host of trade
publications are alerted to special events in their fields and are periodically
invited for interviews with the President and other top officials.

In some ways, the White House compound is like a little nation, with entry
limited to those with the proper passports. The people in the press quarters are
essential to the ''nation's'' continued existence, but they are not full-fledged
citizens. They make up a colony that is dependent on the citizens for its daily
sustenance - news. The citizens make the rules and regulations by which the
colonists must abide. But the colonists, particularly the representatives of the
three big television networks, can and do make demands that cannot be ignored,
because no one recognizes the virtues of being seen on the television screen
more than the Reaganites, whose adroit handling of the medium has been a
hallmark of their Administration. A constant tension exists.

The neurosis that develops on both sides frequently erupts into such
inconsequential incidents as the recent controversy over the positioning of a
copying machine. Larry Speakes, who runs the buffer zone between the press rooms
and the deeply carpeted, softly lighted offices where high-ranking White House
officials and their secretaries work, had the machine placed where copies of
speeches, schedules and pronouncements could be quickly obtained by his staff
and reporters. To make room for more desks, David Gergen, who is in charge of
the overall press operation, had the machine moved to a less convenient spot so
that it now takes longer to obtain copies of documents. The machine quickly
became a symbol of the conflicts that have been building between Speakes and
Gergen, a rivalry for authority almost programmed into White House staffs.
Reporters, who often must spend hours waiting for something to happen, whiled
away days analyzing the deeper meanings of the copy-machine caper.

Intrinsically more important is the little war over ''photo opportunities,'' a
device used by the President when he has visitors he wants to be pictured with
for posterity. These sessions are particularly valuable to Mr. Reagan because he
is so accomplished at looking relaxed and Presidential before cameras.

In the Carter Administration, the pool of reporters accompanying the
photographers were, for the first time, permitted to ask questions during these
sessions. As Speakes defined the Reagan Administration's rules for photo
opportunities, reporters are not allowed to ask questions when the President's
guest is a head of state, who might be embarrassed by a display of unseemly
American manners.

During a February photo opportunity involving Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak
and Mr. Reagan, Sam Donaldson, ABC News's aggressive White House correspondent,
asked Mr. Reagan if Cuba had once again become dangerous to the United States.
''Lights!'' yelled Speakes, giving the signal for the press to be ushered from
the room. After angrily telling Donaldson that he could cause an ''international
incident'' by such questioning, Speakes announced that reporters would no longer
be admitted to picture sessions. Donaldson, backed by his network management and
that of other press organizations, said in that case there would be no cameras.

Although the White House at first appeared to back down on the presence of
reporters, it has since notified the highly competitive networks that they could
have only one pool correspondent at each photo opportunity. This arrangement was
accepted by all the networks except ABC, which refused to send in its cameras on
this basis.  According to Donaldson, a meeting to try to resolve the impasse has
been scheduled for sometime this month.

Meanwhile, the no-question rule at photo opportunities stands, although somewhat
wobbly at times. There have been a few additional attempts at asking questions,
but each time Speakes or an assistant has put a halt to it by barking, ''Lights!
Everyone out!''

The dispute would make little difference except that President Reagan, who seems
to enjoy most of the exchanges, sometimes says surprising things when questioned
informally, and his answers don't always agree with previously stated White
House policy. As the Administration's problems have begun to escalate, there
have been fewer and fewer photo sessions.

A degree of White House control of the news is, of course, nothing new. With
some exceptions, the Reagan people seem to be doing it better and without
arousing as many antagonisms as did their predecessors. ''If I were in their
place, I would probably do the same thing,'' says Sam Donaldson, who was once
told by Mr. Reagan to stand in a corner for speaking out of turn. ''But as a
reporter, my job is to cover the President. Except for press conferences, which
aren't that often, we don't get a chance to question him. I tell them, 'You
cannot say ''no'' to my asking questions, but you can always say ''no'' to
providing answers.' ''

Considerable planning has gone into the workings of the Reagan White House press
operation and its present peculiar, two-headed structure. When James Brady, the
press secretary, was disabled during an attempt on the President's life in March
1981, Larry Speakes took over his tasks. The title of press secretary is still
being held open for Brady, although not everyone feels it is realistic to expect
him to return full-time to the highly pressured duties of the office. Two months
later, David Gergen was given broadened duties, which included sharing the daily
briefings with Speakes. During the President's recovery, it did not matter much
how the press office was run. Mr.  Reagan emerged from the attempt on his life
as a folk hero in the best tradition of a Western: John Wayne-style heroism in
making light of his bullet wound and walking - not carried - into the hospital,
and his extraordinary honeymoon with the press stretched into the second year of
his Administration.

Additionally, his victories in Congress made Mr. Reagan appear to be an
effective and strong President. He was out to make fundamental changes in the
nation, and the news organizations, along with most everyone else, wanted to
give him a chance. He was consistently seen by many people in a favorable light.
His appearances before the cameras were usually brief - long enough to show him
to be in charge, but not long enough to involve him in tedious or messy details,
which were left to his aides.

Despite Mr. Reagan's recent problems and the concern of his staff that the press
is getting too ornery, there has been little of the intense dislike that was
directed toward Mr. Carter, whose selfrighteousness irritated many reporters.
Although the questions in the daily press briefings have become acrimonious of
late as the President and his aides have stepped up their criticism of the
media, the chemistry that makes for extreme polarization and explosions just
does not seem to be there, at least not yet.

One reason may be the unusual White House staff situation. James Baker and
others who had a hand in getting a staff together took the advice first offered
by George Reedy, President Johnson's press secretary: Don't have anyone under 40
in a position of authority. So heady is the White House experience, the
reasoning goes, that the young can be too volatile, too prone to excess. The
President's top aides, of course, are well past the Reedy limit. And in the
press office, Gergen, while just 40, is a painstaking lawyer who was a
speechwriter in the Nixon White House. Speakes, a 42-year-old Mississippi
newspaperman, has been conditioned by more than a decade of working in various
governmental press offices, including the White House during the Nixon and Ford
Administrations.

Hodding Carter, who was State Department spokesman during the Carter
Administration, gives high marks for professionalism to virtually everyone on
the Reagan staff. As professionals, they try to take emotionalism out of the
continuing struggle between the White House and the press.

Jody Powell, as good as he was at defanging the press with humor, was very close
to President Carter and too emotionally involved with his success or failure.
Ronald Ziegler so echoed Richard Nixon that when he opened his mouth Mr. Nixon's
attitudes came pouring out. The unlikely team of Gergen and Speakes,
intentionally or not, offers a certain detachment. Neither is a confidant or
close adviser to the President. You cannot get to Mr. Reagan's mind through
them. As a result, reporters have learned not to expect too much from them.

Speakes has built his career on playing down his role as salesman for his
bosses. Instead he says, ''Tell me what you want, and I will try to get it.''
Because of his willingness to cooperate, Speakes has always been liked by the
press, even when he was spokesman for Mr.  Nixon's Watergate lawyer, James St.
Clair. ''I tell my staff,'' Speakes says, ''that if they get in trouble I will
stand behind them 100 percent except for one thing, and that is being
discourteous to a reporter.'' In the White House, that can be extraordinarily
difficult at times. Helen Thomas, who has covered the White House for United
Press International since John Kennedy's Presidency and who is not known to be
soft on press secretaries, says of Speakes, ''Larry is such a nice guy you can't
get mad at him.''

Speakes has decorated his office, the one occupied by a succession of press
secretaries, with primitive art from the Mississippi Delta and a table is draped
with a handmade quilt from his hometown, Merigold, population 574.

Gergen, who comes from Durham, N.C., and who holds a degree from Yale and one
from the Harvard Law School, is much more complicated.  Before joining the
Reagan staff, he was editor of Public Opinion magazine. His office, in the high
prestige area removed from the press quarters, has abstract art, soft couches
and fresh flowers.

He is somewhat more sensitive than Speakes to mounting criticism of the
President. Speaking on ABC's ''Nightline'' recently about news coverage of
Reagan misstatements, Gergen said: ''I think this whole question of whether it's
a serious issue threatening the Republic if the President may occasionally make
a blooper is pure journalistic fantasy. It's an invention.'' But in a recent
interview he says that both he and Mr. Reagan think that the President has,
overall, received a fair press. One reason, Gergen believes, is that members of
the press, like the country at large, have become more conservative in the past
decade and are less suspicious of Republicans on the right. Even the daily
briefings, Gergen notes, are less rowdy.

Not much comes out of the daily White House briefings, which tend to be long and
tedious as reporters pry for information the briefer does not want to disclose
or does not know, but they are a ritual that no one has ever had the courage to
eliminate. They are of some importance in a crisis and, on a day-to-day basis,
are useful to small news organizations, which have a hard time getting busy
White House staff members to talk to them individually.

The weekday routine is for Speakes to meet with reporters in his office at 9:15
A.M. to tell them what is on the President's schedule for the day. Until
recently, the more substantive midday briefing had been split, with Speakes
taking it three days a week and Gergen the other two. But although Gergen is a
good conceptualizer and phrase maker, his answers at the podium were too fuzzy
and guarded, and James Baker decided to have Gergen operate more behind the
scenes, where he is effective, and leave the briefings to Speakes, who is more
straightforward about saying what he cannot say.  According to Steven R. Weisman
of The New York Times, who began covering the White House during the last year
of the Carter Administration, the Reagan people have not made the mistake of
allowing themselves to be cut off from the press, as Hamilton Jordan did when he
was Jimmy Carter's chief of staff. It is part of the Baker prescription that
White House staff members do not carry grudges. While they have not been
noticeably any more successful at carrying this out than their predecessors, the
Reagan people have demonstrated more of an ability to cut their losses.

Aside from leaks that suggest scandal or incompetence, what troubles the
President's men most are the tough, institutional stories that expose the
foibles, pretensions and shortcomings of those within the White House. For
example, a story by Howell Raines of The Times detailing how the President had
become a brunt of jokes sent a shock wave through the White House staff. So did
a story in January by The Washington Post's Lou Cannon which suggested that
''the President has only a passing acquaintance with some of the most important
decisions of his Administration,'' a conclusion Mr. Reagan himself immediately
branded as ''absolutely false.''

At the same time, the White House staff must pay particular attention to the
daily flow of news and imagery, which is more easily controlled. For some years
now, White House officials have believed that television news, particularly the
evening shows, can make or break a President. Sam Donaldson of ABC News says the
White House can, and does, influence the play of news on the air through the
availability of pictures. Two weeks after the President submitted his fiscal
1983 budget, Republican leaders were back at the White House telling Mr. Reagan
that it was dead in Congress.

''The big story today is the budget,'' Larry Speakes acknowledged at that day's
briefing, ''but we don't want to talk about the budget.'' So there was no
Presidential photo opportunity. The networks used the story, anyway, but did not
give it as much prominence as the newspapers, which are less dependent on
pictures.  And there was competing news that the Administration had conveniently
leaked - advance information on the speech Mr. Reagan would make the next day on
Latin America. (Last year, when the President was winning on the budget, the
White House kept attention focused on the budget for a prolonged period of
time.)

Robert Zelnick, deputy Washington bureau chief for ABC News, says the charge
that the availability of pictures decides what goes on the air has been
overstated, and that ABC is perfectly willing to show Donaldson talking in front
of the White House when no pictures are available. Although the Reagan press
staff has been less cooperative toward the networks' special needs than the
Carter people had been, Zelnick thinks that has had a beneficial effect on
televison news.  ''This has caused the TV correspondents to do what print
journalists do,'' Zelnick says, ''go out and develop their own stories.''
Indeed, the best White House reporting has long been based not on information
garnered from the press quarters but from the multiple leaks no Administration
has been able to plug up completely - leaks from Congress, the Cabinet
departments and even from people within the White House itself who have their
own reasons for talking.

The Reagan White House has softened its plan to severely punish officials who
give the press unauthorized, sensitive information, and the ship of state sails
on despite the continuing leaks, although foreign-affairs specialists say some
officials are now less willing to talk in confidence.

With some exceptions, the Reagan White House has been successful in cutting off
stories that get in the way of the message the Administration wants to get
across. But because of disagreements within the White House staff, the story of
Richard V. Allen accepting $1,000 from a Japanese magazine was permitted to run
on until it began to dominate White House news stories. It was finally cut off -
by dismissing Allen as the President's national-security adviser - before it
became a major impediment, as the Burt Lance affair did for Mr. Carter, when his
support of his old friend kept the story on the front pages for weeks on end.

However, when The New York Times disclosed that a lesser assistant to the
President, Joseph W. Canzeri, received a low-interest house mortgage from
sources that might have business with the Government, Canzeri, in keeping with
the clearly defined White House policy, bailed out like a kamikaze pilot,
insisting he did not want to cause embarrassment for the President.

But there may be an Achilles heel in Ronald Reagan himself, whose personality
has done so much to bolster his Administration. So high are public expectations
of Presidential performance that being a nice guy may not be enough. And
recently, Mr. Reagan's job-performance ratings in public-opinion polls
plummeted, largely due to the recession, to below that of any other recent
President after little more than a year in office. But his troubles go deeper
than that.  David Gergen worries about the widespread image Mr. Reagan has of
being antiblack and antipoor, and he has spent much of his time trying to
counter it. Yet the prevailing view among the President's men is that cutting
assistance to the poor and curtailing civilrights enforcement are part of a
remaking of American Government that will, in the long run, benefit everyone.

Many outside the Administration, however, tend to link the President directly to
the cutbacks that have fallen disproportionately on low-income groups. That view
was reinforced when the White House, trying to explain why the Administration
moved to restore tax exemptions to schools practicing discrimination, displayed
a surprising insensitivity to the matter. Some White House officials later
confessed they had no idea it was such a sensitive subject. And neither Gergen
nor the President has yet found an effective way to deal with the issue.  Many
students of the modern Presidency believe that people are less influenced by
what the press has to say about the President than by their own perceptions of
his performance. James Baker's prescription for flexibility, if adhered to
despite increasing pressures, can only help in that process.

Jody Powell, in a long symposium with David Gergen in Public Opinion magazine,
said, ''I would like to see an Administration stand or fall based on what they
do or don't do for the country rather than some forces not relevant to their
performance.'' So far at least, it is the Reagan policies, not behavior at the
White House, that have aroused much of the country against yet another modern
President, and a lot of journalists are increasingly willing to let the Reagan
Presidency stand or fall on ''what they do or don't do for the country.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan at a press conference (Page
46) 4photos of President Reagan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              142 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE ROOTS OF WESTERN DISUNITY

SECTION: Section 6; Page 48, Column 5; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4059 words


James O. Goldsborough, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for
International Peace, was a European correspondent for The International Herald
Tribune and Newsweek from 1965 to 1979. By James O. Goldsborough It does not
surprise many people that the United States and Western Europe have had
differing views lately on everything from interest rates and Siberian gas
pipelines to Poland and Central American revolutions. Over the last few years,
trans-Atlantic differences on foreign policy have become so frequent that most
of us regard them as the normal state of affairs. That is why the accord of
December 1979 - to deploy new American missiles on European soil unless limits
on European-based nuclear weapons can be negotiated with the Russians - sent
such a thrill through Western chancelleries. Not that the agreement was perfect,
but at least the alliance had demonstrated political cohesion on something.

One accord, however, does not reverse the basic trend.  International problems,
whatever and wherever they are, eventually become Atlantic problems as well, and
the December 1979 decision has proved to be no exception. Already European
public opinion is rebelling against the idea of new nuclear deployments, and
more than one European government may turn against the agreement under the
rising pressure.

Faced with these signs of disunity, the Reagan Administration, like the Carter
Administration before it, suffers from divided counsel.  Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr., a former commander of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, defends alliance interests; Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger promotes ''unilaterist'' concerns around the world. If the Government
follows its own instincts without consulting Europe, it ends up with a problem
in the alliance. If it consults, it risks having to do things it does not want
to do.

The situation, in fact, has reached a point where we must question a long-held
assumption: that the United States and Western Europe are united by a common
destiny, and differences over foreign policy are aberrations that could have
been avoided through better consultation. It is beginning to appear as though
our growing disagreements, far from being the cause of tension within the
alliance, are only a symptom. It may be time to conclude that our foreign-policy
differences have other roots, traceable to a more fundamental divergence in our
societies - to an ethical deviation.

For Americans, Europe is increasingly depicted as a continent of pusillanimous,
pacifist merchants, unwilling to sacrifice living standards for defense budgets;
unwilling, as the French commentator Raymond Aron has written, ''to defend
itself despite its wealth.'' According to a recent Gallup poll for Newsweek, a
sizable number of Europeans - from 12 percent in Great Britain to 19 percent in
West Germany - would accept Soviet domination rather than fight, compared with 6
percent in the United States.

For many Europeans, on the other hand, America has become paranoid, as paranoid
as the Russians, a country whose foreign policy is summed up as ''the Russians
are coming.'' The Reagan Administration's military buildup and anti-Soviet
crusade, coming at a time when most Europeans believe that detente is still
working on their continent and that their principal problems are economic, have
led them to take their distance from us.

Mutual recrimination becomes political action. Both sides of the Atlantic,
writes Joseph Joffe, an editor of the influential Hamburg weekly Die Zeit, are
''losing interest in each other.'' Europe nods toward Mr. Haig and does things
its own way. Americans want their allies to toe the line or be left to their
fate, which is characterized as one of ''Finlandization.'' New pressures arise
in Washington to bring American troops home from Europe. The Reagan
Administration complains that more Germans demonstrate about El Salvador than
about Poland. In France, Afghanistan cannot be mentioned without Nicaragua.

The estrangement has not come naturally. The communality of heritage and beliefs
between the United States and Europe is old and powerful and has withstood
frequent vicissitudes. However, an accumulation of events and developments has
built up enough discord to threaten the most solid of foundations.

''Americans see danger, revolution and terrorism everywhere,'' writes the West
German weekly Der Spiegel, ''and behind it all are the Russians.'' For
Europeans, the problem is more complex.  Accustomed historically to ''seeing
evil everywhere,'' writes the French sociologist Michel Crozier, the Europeans
see nothing special about Communists, Soviet or any other kind. Indeed, as the
West German political scientist Uwe Nerlich says, the problem might be more
American than Russian: ''The new American preoccupation with military
superiority, alien to American political traditions, has been a major factor in
the decline of American values and institutions over the last two decades, a
process that has served the purposes of Soviet diplomacy well.''

In European eyes, if not yet in our own, much of the explanation for the
estrangement lies not just in different views on foreign affairs but in a
rupture in the common ethos, defined by Webster's Third New International
Dictionary as the ''guiding beliefs, standards or ideals that characterize or
pervade a group, a community, a people or an ideology.'' It is not just that we
see the Russians in a different way, but that we see so much else in a different
way.

At a time when the prevailing view in America is that the best government is the
least government, Europe (with the possible exception of Great Britain, but
perhaps even there) is coming to the view that strong, centralized and perhaps
even socialist government is more necessary than ever to deal with today's
issues of unemployment, falling growth rates, diminishing resources and aging
industries. This trend seems to reflect a deeper European belief in the rights
of the collectivity relative to individual rights, or of the public sector
relative to the private.

Some statistical evidence of this is found in a study reported several years ago
by Donald J. Devine in his book ''The Political Culture of the United States.''
The following statement was put to Europeans and Americans: ''The individual
owes his first duty to the state and only secondarily to his personal welfare.''
In the United States, 68 percent of those polled disagreed with that notion;
only 25 percent agreed. The division was closer in the United Kingdom (55
percent disagreed, 38 percent agreed) and closer still in West Germany (45
percent, no; 41 percent, yes). But in Italy, 48 percent agreed with that
proposition, while 32 percent disagreed. (It might be noted in passing that in
Mexico 92 percent agreed and only 5 percent disagreed.)

The difference of approach toward collectivism shows up in foreign affairs as
well. The Europeans show no discomfort in dealing with Marxist or leftist
governments. They have made it clear, for instance, that they do not share
official American views on Central America. The French President, Francois
Mitterrand, told President Reagan during his one-day visit to the White House in
March that poverty -not Russians or Cubans - was the ''father of revolution.''
By the same token, the Europeans' moderate line on Poland stems directly from
the belief that hard-nosed anti-Communism would do the Poles no good.
''East-West cooperation in Europe is the only way to promote change in the
East,'' wrote Die Zeit's editor, Theo Sommer, in February. ''A policy of naked
pressure would make change impossible.''

The origins of the European-American estrangement go back to the 1960's and
Vietnam. Until then, despite its postwar economic recovery, Europe remained
culturally and spiritually devastated, all too ready to absorb American tastes,
products, values, habits and fads, along with American dollars. During this
time, Europe looked on itself as morally and culturally degenerate. The feeling
of German degeneracy was best described in the writing of Heinrich Boll, but the
mood evoked by his novels pervaded Europe.

Germany had its Hitlerian past to assimilate, but France, Italy, Britain and the
Low Countries had other memories - war, defeat, occupation, collaboration,
social chaos, fall from power, loss of empire. After 1958, President Charles de
Gaulle attempted to personify a collective European expiation, but the task was
too much, even for him. Until Vietnam, Europe's dreadful 20th-century past
burdened it with collective guilt, and with an inferiority complex toward the
United States. Rather than invader, occupier and destroyer, America had been
savior, liberator and rebuilder - the land of John J. Pershing, Dwight D.
Eisenhower and George C.  Marshall, not Adolf Hitler, Benito Mussolini and Josef
Stalin.

With the Vietnam War, Europe felt itself freed of guilt vis-a-vis the United
States. The My Lai massacre was compared to Oradour-sur-Glane and Lidice;
Sweden's Prime Minister Olof Palme compared American bombings to those carried
out by the Nazis. This view of America as morally exhausted was summed up by
Walter Lippmann when he wrote in 1967: ''There is a belief that (Lyndon)
Johnson's America no longer is the historic America. ... It is a feeling that
the American promise has been betrayed and abandoned.''

Vietnam's burning villages and defoliated jungles engendered protest across
Europe. When the war ended, the anger and violence remained. Protest was turned
against the things America stood for and had exported into Europe - our culture,
our dollars, our missiles, NATO itself. More than that, Vietnam inspired the
terrorist movements in West Germany and Italy, the two former Fascist states
attempting to graft American values onto ideologically ravaged roots.

Europe during the 1960's began searching for its own way. An American in Paris,
William Pfaff, wrote: ''American political and social institutions fascinated
Europeans in the 1940's and 1950's because they seemed innovative and
successful, while European institutions had failed. This no longer is so. It is
the European institutions that seem in better health today.''

The Europeans' inferiority complex was linked with a feeling in the 1950's and
early 1960's that they would never again occupy a prominent place on the world
scene. Those were the years of unlimited American power, when the French
journalist Jean-Jacques Servan-Schreiber could write in his book ''The American
Challenge'': ''It seems clear that we Europeans cannot hope to participate fully
in the world of the future. This does not mean that we will be poor; probably we
will grow even richer. But we will be overtaken and dominated, for the first
time in our history, by a more advanced civilization.''

His analysis, which seemed right at the time, has been overwhelmed by change.
The dollar's collapse and its subsequent devaluations freed Europe in the 1970's
from the economic bondage of the 1944 Bretton Woods agreement, under which the
Europeans had to support the dollar as the price of protecting their foreign
trade. In 1974, the oil crisis hit and the industrial world plunged into
recession, which hurt the United States at least as much as Europe.

By the mid-1970's, Europe was estranged from America morally, economically and
politically. President Carter, who had promised during his campaign to ''treat
friends as friends and adversaries as adversaries,'' discovered that for Europe
things were not that simple. For our allies, the Soviet-bloc nations were not,
as The Times of London put it, ''distant adversaries defined by the number of
their missiles but a complex group of partly European states with which the
Continent has to be shared.''

Detachment from the Americans showed up in events elsewhere. Europe watched with
a sense of deja vu as the pro-American Shah of Iran was overthrown and events in
Teheran moved toward their terrible denouement. The whole thing was too
reminiscent of Vietnam. Was America always on the losing side?

Not only did Europe's relations with its friend deteriorate, but they improved
with its adversary. The political consequence of detente, culminating in the
signing of the Helsinki agreements of 1975, was to open up the Eastern European
economies and societies to trade and exchange with Western Europe. For West
Germans, Helsinki meant even more - reconciliation with East Germany and Poland
and tranquility in Berlin. The Europeans declined to follow President Carter
toward confrontation with Moscow over the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
''Detente is divisible,'' wrote Rudolf Augstein, publisher of Der Spiegel.
''Detente is not something we can give up for anybody.''

By the end of the Carter years, little was right in the alliance.  Despite this,
President Reagan came into office believing that the quarrels with Europe were
essentially Jimmy Carter's fault and could be patched up with a strong measure
of leadership and more military spending. Alas, the belief was misplaced. The
problem was not that there were holes in the American nuclear umbrella but that
Europe no longer felt the rain. Atlantic military and strategic harmony, which
had kept political differences from exploding during the cold war, was
weakening. With America's rejection of the SALT II treaty, the Europeans
recoiled.

The disjunction between detente in Europe and a new Soviet-American cold war was
the genesis of the European peace movement. In West Germany, talk broke out of
Europe's becoming a ''broker'' between the superpowers (as suggested by former
Chancellor Willy Brandt), or an ''interpreter'' for them (as Chancellor Helmut
Schmidt put it). The crackdown in Poland last December did nothing to change the
situation. The Europeans denounced Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski, the Polish leader,
but made it clear they understood the difference between Polish martial law and
a Russian invasion. ''Warsaw 1981,'' wrote Willy Brandt, ''is not like Prague
1968.'' To understand our foreign-policy differences, we must look more closely
at the dominant social and political trends in Europe and America, particularly
as they accelerate in the 1980's. Of course, dissenting minorities are to be
found in both places. Nevertheless, the trends are strong, and they are pulling
in opposite directions.

Europe, in general, does not share the prevailing American view that capitalism
can thrive only if left unfettered by government.  Although the philosophical
precursor of ''supply-side economics'' is the 19th-century French economist Jean
Baptiste Say, the American concept remains untranslated into European languages
because the notion itself is regarded as obsolete. Say's law that supply creates
its own demand is about as relevant to European economics today as Malthus and
''social Darwinism'' are to Europe's welfare states. With the exception of
Margaret Thatcher's Government (which has been paying for it in recent
by-elections), all European governments accept the need for economic
interventionism.

In a world of increased competition for markets and for scarce raw materials,
Europeans tend to the view that governments will have a greater role to play in
assuring economic growth and an equitable distribution of resources. The West
German view of the United States as ''heartless and socially retrograde,'' as
reported by John Vinocur of The New York Times from Bonn last January, stems
from what the Europeans see as evidence that the United States is becoming a
rich man's country; that in the absence of strong governmental intervention, the
''magic of the marketplace,'' to borrow President Reagan's phrase, can lead only
to the survival of the economically fittest.

Europe and America have had opposite reactions to the current recession. With
Britain excepted, recession and penury in Europe led to new governmental
attempts to minimize unemployment, reduce interest rates, speed job retraining,
aid industry -particularly export industries - and ease the transformation of
old industry to new. In America, the prevailing philosophy now blames government
itself for much of the trouble and sees the solution in returning power to Adam
Smith's ''invisible hand.''

The political effects of this difference are considerable. We see Europe trying
to insulate itself from American economics, to preserve its trade by turning to
new markets, and to protect itself against high American interest rates by
organizing a separate monetary policy under the European Monetary System. The
effect is felt in Europe's defense policies, too. Mr. Schmidt told Mr. Reagan at
the 1981 Ottawa summit meeting that the high American interest rates, by keeping
German interest rates high, would force Bonn to cut back on its planned
increases in military spending.

The differences go even further. The United States and Western Europe both used
to preach the virtues of the ''free world'' model for the developing countries;
now the European argument is more sophisticated. Two of the more influential
books published in Europe last year, Michel Crozier's ''The American Malaise''
and Peter Bender's ''The End of the Ideological Age,'' maintain that Europe now
needs to distinguish itself from the United States in the third world.

The American political model, it is argued, no longer works even for the United
States. Thus, Michael Crozier holds that, in America, the rise of
special-interest groups and unassimilable minorities has resulted in a ''pot
that wouldn't melt.'' He believes that, without recognizing it, the United
States is going through a social and institutional crisis; that rising crime and
unemployment and falling standards of productivity, education and culture are
symptoms of a chronic, if not endemic, failure. ''The United States,'' he says,
''is being called on to evolve and adapt, to learn to learn. But to do this, you
must have the courage to admit that you are wrong. And that, purely and simply,
is inconsistent with the myth of the New World.''

It follows that if the American model is not working in the United States as it
once did, it will not work anywhere else - that it is no longer ''exportable''
to the third world. Andre Fontaine, in his new work, ''One Bed for Two Dreams,''
argues that there is both an American malaise and a Soviet one, and that an
excess of political liberty can be as damaging as a shortage of it. The
conclusion of each of these Europeans, stated in a different form, is that the
developing nations should not be faced with a Hobson's choice between Washington
and Moscow; that Europe and its ''third way'' - somewhere between pure
capitalism and Communism - has become a viable alternative. Peter Bender gives
the main rationale for the intense European interest today in the third world:
''With our emancipation from the former (Atlantic) community of beliefs, a new
phase has begun for the Old World: The awareness of a new European civilization
has awakened and is spreading. ... The East-West age is over.'' Where do these
changes in the ''community of beliefs'' leave the Western alliance? Can it
continue unchanged, or will the differences in situation and interest between
Europe and the United States - as illustrated by our differing reactions to the
Falkland Islands crisis - doom the alliance? Europeans, at least, have been
searching for ways to adapt to the new circumstances. They have launched a
series of proposals that would radically alter Atlantic ties. The United States,
however, clings to old myths, seeking to confine the relationship to structures
that no longer fit, threatening to tear up the whole arrangement if Europe
suggests it wants something larger.Yet the reality of change is present.
''Nothing disposes me to postulate the necessity of the Atlantic alliance,''
wrote Francois Mitterrand in 1980, a year before his election, ''and I would be
satisfied with a situation that would make it defunct.''

The question is how to keep it from becoming defunct before its time. The danger
in simply declaring an end to the alliance, as Peter Bender seems to want, or
unilaterally pulling American troops out of Europe, as some American
isolationists seem to want, is that either move would have consequences that
most Americans and Europeans do not want; recent polls on both continents show
as much. Something, however, must be done if NATO is not to go the way of SEATO
and CENTO, those Asian and Middle Eastern cold-war alliances that died quiet
deaths with hardly anybody caring.

The solution for NATO is to make a historical retreat. Those Americans who would
abandon Europe because Europe does not view the world through the same prism as
the Reagan Administration are forgetting that the alliance, at the beginning,
was not a military pact. The late American diplomat Charles Bohlen wrote in his
memoirs: ''I do not believe that anyone envisaged the kind of military setup
that NATO evolved into and from which de Gaulle withdrew in 1966.''

Conceived as a treaty whose essential purpose was to demonstrate that the United
States would automatically stand by Europe in any conflict, the alliance did not
become primarily military in character until more than a year after its
inception. It was the Korean War that militarized NATO, a change of perspective
condemned by Charles Bohlen as ''not a wise policy.''

In Europe, the metamorphosis was opposed by the West German Chancellor, Konrad
Adenauer, and, later, by President de Gaulle, both of whom believed the alliance
should be primarily political in nature and should extend its influence beyond
Europe. But American Presidents, beginning with Dwight D. Eisenhower, opposed
demilitarizing NATO or widening its sphere of influence. The reasoning was that
the United States would be in a better position to control the Europeans if it
kept the alliance military, and better able to protect its spheres of interest
outside Europe if it kept the Europeans from extending their reach.

Perhaps the time has come to return to some of those earlier, untried ideas. The
military power through which the United States was able to dominate European
policies during the cold war no longer suffices; the notion of Europe as a
regional power with no outside interests can no longer be sustained. Today it is
in the United States' interest to have Europe participate with us in areas, such
as the Middle East and the Persian Gulf, where common interests are involved. It
may also be in our interest to have Europe participate in areas, such as parts
of Africa, where our influence is weak. It is certainly in our interest to have
Europe do more in its own defense.

The Europeans recognize the inevitability of change. Some recent proposals on
their part would go in the direction of an alliance less centered on NATO and
its limited mandate to assure the military defense of Western Europe. West
Germany has proposed to its partners in the European Economic Community the
signing of a ''treaty of union'' as a first step toward giving Europe the
political structure for dealing with the United States on a basis of equality,
and the proposal is gaining momentum. Behind all this is the feeling that Europe
has coalesced and a drastic overhaul of Atlantic institutions is overdue.
Precisely how the new political relationship would function is now being
discussed. But all these notions center on the idea that the present pact among
13 European nations, the United States and Canada should be replaced by a pact
in which Europe would act as an entity.

Fifteen years ago, George F. Kennan wrote that the United States ''was not
fitted, either institutionally or temperamentally, to be an imperial power in
the grand manner, and particularly not one holding the great peoples of Western
Europe indefinitely in some sort of paternal tutelage.'' The truth of this
prediction now stares both Europeans and Americans in the face. But no matter
how divergent our situations and interests or how great the differences in our
ethos, we will continue to need a forum to thrash things out. Europe and America
account for half of the world's 30-odd democratic governments, out of some 160
nations in the world. Whatever our disagreements, that will always bind us
together. We need to restructure our relationship, not terminate it.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: 3 photos of people from western countries photo of a
helicpoter (Page 50) photo of Francois Mitterrand (Page 54 photo of Pres. Reagan
and Helmut Schmidt (Page 52) photo of NATO troops (Page 58)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              143 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AMERICANS AND THE WHITE HOUSE

BYLINE: By AARON LATHAM; Aaron Latham, is the author of ''Crazy Sundays,'' the
novel ''Orchids for Mother,'' and the article and screenplay ''Urban Cowboy.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 1, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1779 words


THE POLITICIAN The Life and Times of Lyndon Johnson.  The Drive for Power, From
the Frontier to Master of the Senate.  By Ronnie Dugger.  Illustrated. 514 pp.
New York: W. W. Norton & Co. $18.95.

You almost cannot go wrong writing about Lyndon Baines Johnson. The biographies
of him are all flawed, like the man himself, but they have also inherited his
energy, his razzle-dazzle, his ability to fascinate. Ronnie Dugger's new book,
''The Politician,'' is in that tradition. Reading it is like being locked in a
room alone with Lyndon Johnson: the book preaches at you, it is sometimes
outrageous, but it twists your arm and makes you keep on reading. And it brings
a special point of view: for Dugger, the editor of ''The Texas Observer,'' gives
you a wild Texan's portrait of a wild Texan. The biographies of Lyndon Johnson
generally differ from their subject in one important way: they are all less
complex than he was. You have to take them all together to begin to appreciate
his complexity. Doris Kearns in ''Lyndon Johnson and the American Dream'' says
essentially that his mother made him who he was. In the excerpts from his book
''The

Years of Lyndon Johnson'' which have so far appeared in The Atlantic Robert Caro
says that greed made him who he was. And now Ronnie Dugger tells us that Texas
made Lyndon Johnson who he was. They are all more or less right, but none, I
believe, is more right than Dugger.

Perhaps you have to grow up in Texas - as Lyndon Johnson did, as Ronnie Dugger
did, and as I did - to understand that Texas can loom even larger in your psyche
than it does on the map. A boyhood of pledging allegiance to the Lone Star flag
and studying the Alamo year after year in Texas history class leaves a deeply
burned brand. You are forever left with the sense that you must try to live in a
way that will be worthy of the men - especially the Texas trinity of Travis,
Bowie and Crockett - who died for you at the Alamo.

Lyndon Johnson remembered the dead heros of the Alamo so well that during one
White House interview with Dugger he ''reared back in his rocking chair and
bellowed'' a verse learned during his schooldays:

''Surrender, or die!'' - ''Men, what will you do?'' And Travis, great Travis,
drew sword quick and strong, Drew a line at his feet ... ''Will you come! Will
you go?'' I die with my wounded, in the Alamo.

Lyndon Johnson remembered the Alamo another time during a meeting of the
National Security Council when, according to Dugger, he said: ''Hell, Vietnam is
just like the Alamo.'' And, hell, Johnson was right, even more than he knew, for
Vietnam turned out to be another bloody defeat. As Dugger writes quite
convincingly: ''The powerful story of the Alamo, structured into the president's
character, was one cause of Vietnam.''

DURING his troubled Vietnam years, Johnson told an audience of soldiers: ''My
great-great-grandfather died at the Alamo.'' As the press was quick to point
out, this was a lie. When Dugger asked for an explanation, Johnson said it was a
slip of the tongue. He said he had in mind his great-great-uncle who fought in
the Battle of San Jacinto - and who appears in a painting of the battle standing
beside General Sam Houston who had been shot in the foot. ''That's what I
thought I said,'' Johnson told Dugger. ''I was seeing this picture of Sam
Houston with his leg up like this...''

Lyndon Johnson had confused a historic victory with a historic defeat. The story
of the Alamo was so much more romantic than the story of the sneak attack at San
Jacinto that Johnson had transmuted the one into the other. He evoked the Alamo
as if it were a lesson in how to win instead of how to lose. He emulated Travis
who had stood and fought without seeming to remember what had happened to him
and all the men he led. As Dugger writes: ''How was he to know that the ghosts
he saw and the poems he believed in would become the trap and the trauma, the
bombs and the broken bodies, the moral calamity and the mortifying defeat of
Vietnam.''

What Ronnie Dugger does not say - and what Lyndon Johnson seemed never to
understand - is that there is another Texas tradition that the Texas President
might have followed. Instead of learning from Travis, he might have at least
attempted to learn from Sam Houston.  Old Sam Houston thought Travis was crazy
to defend the militarily worthless Alamo to the death. And Houston would surely
have thought Johnson even crazier for indulging in an Alamo-like stand in
Vietnam. Houston would have agreed with Johnson that Vietnam was like the Alamo,
but he would not have been caught dead in either one. Good Old Sam was a great
believer in running away. He led a magnificent retreat all the way across Texas,
reviled not only by Santa Anna but also by his own men as a coward. But he just
kept on running until he finally caught Santa Anna's whole army literally
napping - taking a siesta at San Jacinto.

Lyndon Johnson's great-great-uncle was in this victorious naptime army, but
Johnson chose to remember him not among the living victors but among the
defeated dead. And as commander-in-chief, Johnson chose to repeat the history of
the Alamo, not of San Jacinto. For whatever his reasons, Lyndon Johnson enlisted
in the tradition of soft-hearted Texas romanticism rather than the tradition of
hard-headed Texas practicality. His father (a failed politician) and mother (a
failed writer), in their very different ways, were Texas dreamers, who almost
expected defeat. And so, too, in the end, was their boy.

This romanticism grew out of generations of western myth-making which succeeded
in transforming a bunch of practical cowpunchers - like some of Lyndon Johnson's
own hard-headed ancestors - into romantic heroes. ''The ... cattle drives of the
western frontier never involved more than a few ten thousand Americans,'' Dugger
writes, ''but two of them were Tom and Sam Johnson, Lyndon's great-uncle and
grandfather.'' They even met Wild Bill Hickok in Abilene. ''Lyndon Johnson's
forefathers were living men in the adventures that really happened and then,
filtering through the fantasies of millions of people through the decades,
became the myth of the West.''

WHEN he left home for the first time at 16, bound for a short stay in
California, Lyndon Johnson crossed the country in a vehicle which looked like a
covered wagon bred to a jalopy. It was a Model-T crowned with a home-made
covered-wagon top. It seemed as if Lyndon Johnson was trying to find a way to
graft his western heritage onto the modern mechanized world. And he kept on
trying all his life, for he himself was not unlike that Conestoga Model-T.

''Johnson necessarily carried forward into history the influences that formed
him,'' writes Dugger. ''His foreign policy killed Communists while building
schools and hospitals and civilizing the friendly natives. This was perfectly
compatible with, and faithfully expressed, the western heritage of killing the
Indians while Christianizing those among them who would go along.'' Dugger adds,
''In him ... the Christian crusade of aggressive soul-saving became the
Christian crusade of aggressive nation-saving.'' And Johnson, who saw himself as
doing God's work, may have even believed that God came to him personally to tell
him how to do it. Dugger reports a thirdhand story - Johnson is said to have
told an ambassador who told a Congressman and his wife -that ''the Holy Ghost
was visiting him around two or three in the morning at about the time he
received reports from Vietnam.''

The war in Vietnam was bad enough, but it could have led to an even greater
tragedy if America's adversaries had been cowboys, too. As Dugger points out,
the story line of many a western drama climaxes in a ''High Noon'' ''walkdown''.
He adds: ''President Johnson made this western tradition of courage the test of
national policy.'' Grafted onto the 20th century, such a test pushed us toward a
nuclear High Noon. Dugger concludes that ''sophisticated analysis'' has missed
''an important element in American foreign policy'' which is that ''the western
myth ... is dangerous to civilization.''

In a sense, Ronnie Dugger comes out of the same tradition that produced Johnson.
His voice is unmistakably western, just as Doris Kearns' is unmistakably
Harvard, (a tone of voice Johnson himself always feared) while Merle Miller and
Robert Caro are both smooth writers with big-city voices. In some ways, the more
graceful the writing, the more it is incapable of encompassing Johnson's
explosive personality. Dugger's prose moves the way Johnson himself moved; it is
gawky, flailing, like a ''Johnson City Windmill,'' which was one of L.B.J.'s
nicknames.

THIS book is organized along the junk yard principle, the way my Texas uncles
organize their farm machinery. The full title and subtitles suggest the work's
all-over-the-lot nature: ''The Politician'' (followed by) ''The Life and Times
of Lyndon Johnson: The Drive for Power, from the Frontier to Master of the
Senate.'' Dugger intersperses biographical chapters with chapters which are
essays about Texas and Vietnam and the danger of nuclear weapons turning the
whole world into another Alamo. The biographical chapters take us only from
Johnson's birth to his pre-eminence as the most powerful Senate Majority Leader
in history, but the essay chapters go much further to include an evaluation and
an interpretation of the Johnson Presidency, the Johnson war and the Johnson
legacy. This is one of those rare books that one wishes were longer, for it
feels unfinished. It is as though Dugger intended a trail drive all the way to
Chicago but got tired and decided to sell his steers at Abeline.  But it is a
valuable, milling, sometimes stampeding drive as far as it goes.

Lyndon Johnson's personality was to other personalities what his ears were to
other ears, so over-sized that no one book seems large enough to hold him. A
whole shelf is required to tell his story.  Ronnie Dugger has made a welcome
contribution to that bookshelf. Like an old Texas Ranger, he has diligently
pursued and brought back his man, not a mama's boy, not a robber baron, but a
towering western anti-hero. And in these times it is good to be reminded of just
how deadly the Code of the West can be when it stalks the halls of the White
House, for the cowboy president has now been replaced by a cowboy-star
president. And this new cowboy commander-in-chief - with his nuclear
six-shooters strapped to his hips - may once again be tempted to replay old
horse-opera plots disguised as American foreign policy. By trying to re-enact
the way-the-West-was-won we could end up acting out how-the-world-was-lost.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              144 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 9, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BROTHER AND SISTER-MADMAN AND ARTIST

BYLINE: By ANNIE GOTTLIEB; Annie Gottlieb is a freelance critic who lives in New
York.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 10, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 925 words


LEAH AND LAZAR By Elizabeth Swados.  267 pp. New York: Summit Books. $13.95.

AS a composer, songwriter, director and choreographer, Elizabeth Swados has
always been a poet. In her scores for theatrical director Andrei Serban (''The
Cherry Orchard,'' ''Agamemnon''), she used sounds as ''musical metaphors for
poetic images'' (in the words of the New York Times critic Mel Gussow). Besides
writing thousands of songs of her own and a musical, ''Runaways,'' which won her
an Obie and five Tony nominations, Miss Swados (who is 30 years old) has set to
music poems by Sylvia Plath and William Blake, composed a musical of Michael
Herr's book about Vietnam, ''Dispatches,'' and an opera, ''Lullabye and
Goodnight,'' which premiered at the Public Theater this year. She has also
written and illustrated a children's book, ''The Girl With the Incredible
Feeling.''

Clearly, words are no more alien to this ''eclectic'' artist (critics' favorite
term for her) than the bird's cry, the crayon or the Indonesian gamelan. So it
is not surprising that she has now written a novel, or that this novel -
strange, outrageous, cryptic, sometimes narcissistic - gets its unity and power
from its rhythm, a rhythm deeper even than language, creating the very movement
of events. As a writer, Elizabeth Swados is an intuitive, hypnotic musician.

''Leah and Lazar'' is, as its publisher bills it, a ''portrait of the artist as
a young woman''; like many first novels, it is apparently also a sort of
self-portrait or personal origin myth, in which the facts and feelings of the
writer's past are distorted and transformed. Leah - a child who writes songs;
later a skinny person with long hair, guitar and combat boots; an impulsive
performer of solitary dances - certainly resembles the younger Miss Swados. They
share locations, too: an upstate-New York ''industrial city,'' where poisonous
wastes ooze from the ground and spring seems never to come (Miss Swados grew up
in Buffalo); the bucolic Bennington campus; rural Appalachia, where Leah goes on
a work-study program, as her creator did; New York's grungy East Village of the
late 60's and early 70's. But Leah can only be understood as half of a double
star. The other half, the dark star that accounts for both her drive and her
wobble, is her older brother, Lazar.

From childhood, Lazar is both Leah's mentor and her tormentor. Five years older,
he is precocious, haughty, imaginative and already being driven round the bend
by his Oedipal burden. Never has there been a darker portrait than this one of
the Freudian family romance. Seen from a child's-eye view, it has the feel of
one of those Edward Gorey drawings in which a haggard little girl watches
Victorian adults do unspeakable, incomprehensible things. Mother, an ambiguous
invalid, sits, smokes, drinks, sighs; Father, a jovial, frenetic workaholic, is
rarely home. Lazar seizes the duty of bringing Mother her pills, entertaining
her, deciding whether to let Leah in to see her or not; he also screens Leah
(when Father is home) from mysterious quarrels and muffled primal scenes.
(''Lazar opened the door a crack. He peeked in and then abruptly closed the door
again. The sweat was pouring down the sides of his face and ears.

'They're dancing,' he said to Leah. 'Don't look.' '' ) Lazar stands between Leah
and life, promising and withholding his approval. Yet Lazar can't cope with life
at all. Miss Swados gives us brief, excruciating glimpses of his mind: a magic
carpet of grandiose fantasies over an abyss of terror. He falls in love in high
school, goes mad, recovers, goes to college, goes madder; after years of
hospitalization, he flies to Paris with a suitcase full of medication and, his
first day there, jumps off his hotel balcony and is grotesquely maimed.

During these same years, Leah launches herself into experience with a blind,
searching intensity. She escapes from home to Florida with a Mafia chauffeur who
turns her out as a child prostitute (the thinnest, least convincing chapter of
the book); she returns north, exaggerates her life to impress a Bennington
recruiter; lives with an older student at college and has an abortion. Later she
forms a rock band with a blind boyfriend, then terrorizes the band (''Music is
demanding ... I can't be democratic about it.''); sleeps with a black jazz
musician (''... stupidly stoned and probably a little evil, but his music
thrilled her.''); is recognized, here and there, as a genius. The maimed and
manic Lazar rarely allows her to see him, but everything reminds her of him: the
''games'' of her pimp, the fetus in her womb, her own ferocious temper. It's
implicit but obvious that her life's drive is to please Lazar or to defeat him.
Finally, she simply outlives him, because she is an artist and he is a madman,
and that thin but crucial line between them is what this novel is all about.

Much of ''Leah and Lazar'' is grotesque and extreme, and some of it would be
insufferable - the way both grown siblings terrorize their parents, the
well-to-do hippie search for Reality Among the Natives - if it weren't for a
subtle edge of mockery, a slight but saving critical distance between the
narrator and Leah. But what makes the novel stick in the mind with such eerie
authority is not its content, but its music - an underlying idiosyncratic beat
that gets the reader's feet tapping to the strangest steps. Sleepy, sudden,
flat, flowing, jerky, urgent, surefooted and dreamlike, Miss Swados's prose both
startles and mesmerizes, is plain and exotic at once.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              145 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

G.O.P. FEARS THIN MARGIN IN '82 SENATE RACES

BYLINE: By ADAM CLYMER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1986 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 9


Republicans are concerned that this year's elections for the Senate, which they
once thought would provide them enough new seats to hold their majority through
the 1980's, will produce a gain of only one or two seats, a superficial victory
that might foretell a real defeat in 1984 or 1986.

Democrats, who still control the House and once feared losing their majority in
1982, are beginning to look at the recession and ask if they have a chance of
winning back the Senate instead, abruptly ending the first period of Republican
control of that body in a quarter of a century.

A return to the Democratic control of the Senate that was lost in 1980, whenever
it might come, would have at least two major consequences: It would unify and
strengthen Congressional Democrats, either in opposition to a Republican
President or in alliance with a Democrat, and it would take Senate committee
chairmanships dealing with social issues away from such conservative Republicans
as Senators Strom Thurmond of South Carolina and Orrin G. Hatch of Utah.

Few analysts think the chances of a Democratic Senate majority in 1983 are
anything but remote, because the numbers that matter most in the 1982 Senate
elections are not the unemployment, inflation or interest rates but the number
of seats each party has at stake at the polls.

Voters will elect 33 Senators in November, and only 13 will take seats now held
by Republicans. Nineteen of those seats are held by Democrats and one is held by
Senator Harry F. Byrd Jr. of Virginia, who was elected as an independent but has
voted with Democrats.

The Senate is now made up of 54 Republicans, 45 Democrats and Mr.  Byrd. That
means that in order to take control in this year's elections, the Democrats
would have to make a net gain of six seats among the 33 at stake by winning at
least six of the 14 they do not now hold.

Uncertainty in Some Contests

Particular uncertainty attaches to several contests this year, from California,
where Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr. will face a Republican to be nominated June 8 in
the race for the seat of S. I.  Hayakawa, a Republican who is retiring, to
Maine, where Senator George J. Mitchell, a Democrat appointed to the post in
1980, is opposed by Representative David F. Emery, a Republican.

The challenge within the party by Prescott Bush Jr. in Connecticut against
Republican Senator Lowell P. Weicker Jr. whets Democratic hopes for adding a
seat in that state, just as the intense Democratic challenge by Representative
James D. Santini against Senator Howard W. Cannon in Nevada raises Republican
hopes there. And a tight race seems likely for Mr. Byrd's seat in Virginia, a
seat either party would claim as a gain.

Still, 1982 was the year Republicans counted on to solidify their somewhat
unexpected gains of 1980. Howard H. Baker Jr., the Senate majority leader, has
said that his party needs a gain of five to eight seats to achieve a cushion to
protect it in 1984 and 1986, when more Republican than Democratic seats will be
up for voting. He said he now expected a Republican gain of only two or three
seats this November.

'A Crucial Year,' Baker Says'

Mr. Baker called 1982 ''a crucial year for Republican control of the Senate,''
adding, ''The numbers are still with us, basically 2 to 1 in 1982, but we need
to build this year in anticipation of 1984 and 1986, when the numbers will be
against the Republicans.''

Edward Rollins, President Reagan's chief political aide, echoed Mr. Baker,
saying: ''We can't just break even. We've got to add some seats because in 1984
and 1986, the odds certainly shift against us.''

In 1984, 19 Republican-held seats and 14 Democratic-held seats will be decided
on; in 1986, it will be 22 Republicans and 12 Democrats.

Democrats are not willing to concede Mr. Baker the gain of two or three seats
that he takes as a given matter. Patrick H. Caddell, a leading Democratic
poll-taker, said he believed the election was becoming a referendum on the
economy from which a Democratic Senate majority, though unlikely, could emerge.

Eye on California and Connecticut

Ann F. Lewis, political director of the Democratic National Committee, insisted:
''No Democratic seat is as vulnerable as the most vulnerable Republican seats,
California's and Connecticut's.  It's hard for me to conceive a scenario in
which more of our incumbents are defeated than theirs.''

A key ally, John Perkins, who heads the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s Committee on Political
Education, said the political year reminded him of 1958, when Democrats gained
13 Senate seats. ''This recession is much deeper,'' he contended, making
Democratic control ''not probable, but it's still possible.''

A spokesman for the Democratic Senate campaign committee who asked that his name
not be used saw a chance for significant Democratic gains if the public has ''a
perception that Reagan's policies won't change and can't work.''

Reagan and the Economy

Just how any of those perceptions will work out in November is something neither
the candidates nor their handlers will predict. For example, last week's
explosion of the Social Security issue, with Republican leaders calling for
changes that could limit benefits to the elderly, can be read, as Democrats are
gleefully doing, as a devastating Republican mistake. Or it can be taken as a
measure of responsibility and of courageously facing up to a difficult issue.
Republicans say they hope it will, but some of their potentially vulnerable
candidates, such as John H. Chafee of Rhode Island, are already jumping ship on
the issue.

Senate races have more individuality than contests for House seats, and few
politicians see many common threads in the races as they have developed thus
far, except for the economy. ''Economic recovery or recession is going to
provide the major focus for most of the campaigns this year,'' said Richard B.
Wirthlin, President Reagan's polltaker.

But those economic issues would have parochial or regional casts to them, he
noted, in the ''33 very unique events'' that constitute the Senate
battlegrounds. For example, environmental versus economic tradeoffs would matter
in some states, interest rates in others and protectionism in others.

Each party has one common factor in the equation that it thinks will prove
especially valuable to its own Senate candidates: the President himself.

Republicans remain convinced that President Reagan is an important campaign
asset. In a recent round of polls of the 33 states with Senate elections,
Republicans say, they found him with public job approval ratings still over 50
percent everywhere except in Tennessee and Pennsylvania. ''Reagan is in better
shape than you'd think,'' said Robert M. Teeter, president of Market Opinion
Research, the Detroit company that took many of those polls. ''He has some
inherent strength that makes him very different from Carter.''

As for the Democrats, they see Social Security, even before last week's
Republican proposal of $40 billion in unspecified cuts, as a major blunder by
Mr. Reagan that helped them in a big way. Robert Squier, a widely used producer
of television commercials, said that not only polling data but also interviews
he films in homes for the elderly indicated that ''they scared everybody over
about the age of 50, scared them straight into our arms.''

William Hamilton, a Democratic poll-taker, said he had found elderly whites in
the South returning to the Democrats because of fear that Republicans will
''play fast and loose with the Social Security system.'' Even V. Lance Tarrance
Jr., a Republican polltaker, said one might think that ''Ronald Reagan has a
death wish on Social Security.''

Members of the Cast

If the impact of issues on Election Day, Nov. 2, is still unpredictable, the
cast of characters is pretty well set, even though the first Senate primary of
the year was held only May 1.

In that election, Representative James M. Collins of Dallas won the Republican
nomination for the long-shot race against the Democratic incumbent, Senator
Lloyd Bentsen. Indeed, primaries seem critical to the eventual result mainly in
New Jersey, Connecticut, California and Nevada; in other states, the contenders
are already established or one party's primary will only pick an opponent for a
heavily favored incumbent.

One change the recession has helped bring about is an improvement of the
position of several Democrats whom Republicans were once pretty confident of
defeating. Mr. Perkins said, ''There are a number of senators who a year ago we
thought would have been in very serious difficulties, and now they aren't.''

He identified these incumbents as Senators Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York,
Donald W. Riegle Jr. of Michigan, Howard M. Metzenbaum of Ohio, Jim Sasser of
Tennessee and Paul S. Sarbanes of Maryland.

Unemployment is a serious problem in each of their states and has plainly
contributed to Republican failures to find strong candidates against anyone but
Mr. Sasser. In Tennessee, Republicans got the challenger they wanted,
Representative Robin L. Beard, but now concede that he has proved weaker than
they thought. In New York, former Representative Bruce F. Caputo seemed to be a
serious challenger, but he withdrew after having put forth false material about
a war record in Vietnam. In Ohio, Gov. James A. Rhodes spurned a race, and then
Representative John M. Ashbrook, not really a strong opponent for Mr.
Metzenbaum, died suddenly lasts month, leaving a relatively unknown state
senator the G.O.P. frontrunner.

Advantages for Incumbents

But at the same time, few Republican incumbents, except Mr.  Weicker, Mr. Hatch
and Harrison M. Schmitt in New Mexico, seem to be in trouble. This is true even
in such traditionally Democratic states as Minnesota and Rhode Island, where
Republican Senators David Durenberger and Mr. Chafee do not appear hard-pressed
at this time.

Indeed, Peter D. Hart, a Democratic poll taker, argues that 1982 ''may be the
best year for incumbents since 1968,'' and Mr. Teeter agrees. Neither has
offered a confident explanation of why that is the case, with Mr. Hart guessing
that senators offer stability in a confusing time and Mr. Teeter guessing that
Mr. Reagan may have distracted attention from the incumbents and diminished the
steam behind any drive to defeat them.

Inevitably, however, more Democrats are vulnerable, because more Democrats are
running. John Melcher in Montana faces a tough race, as does Quentin N. Burdick
in North Dakota. Even Robert C. Byrd, the minority leader, is the target of a
major effort, and John C. Stennis in Mississippi may still be beloved, but he is
seeking a term that would begin five months after his 81st birthday.

In these and other challenges, the Republicans have much a better support
apparatus than their rivals. Despite recent controversies between the White
House and Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon, said by insiders to have been patched
up with a written promise by him not to attack the President again this year,
the Republican Senate Campaign Committee is flush.

In the first three months of this year, it raised $10,521,557 and had $5,294,992
on hand, according to Federal Election Commission records. Its Democratic
counterpart raised $1,012,040 and had $1,480,696 on hand, but with a current
operating debt of $313,674 to pay.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: charts (page A16)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              146 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF PRESIDENT REAGAN'S ADDRESS ON NUCLEAR POLICY AND EAST-WEST TIES

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3651 words

DATELINE: EUREKA, Ill., May 9


Following is the text of the commencement address prepared for delivery by
President Reagan today at Eureka College:

EUREKA, Ill., May 9 (AP) - Following is the text of the commencement address
prepared for delivery by President Reagan today at Eureka College:

It goes without saying that this is a very special day for you who are
graduating. Would you forgive me if I say it is a special day for me also? Over
the years since I sat where you of the graduating class of 1982 are now sitting,
I've returned to the campus many times, always with great pleasure and warm
nostalgia. It isn't true that I just came back to clean out my locker in the
gym.

On one of those occasions, I addressed a graduating class here, ''neath the
elms,'' and was awarded an honorary degree. I informed those assembled that
while I was grateful for the honor, it added to a feeling of guilt I'd been
nursing for 25 years. I always figured the first degree I was given was
honorary.

If it is true that tradition is the glue holding civilization together, then
Eureka has made its contribution to that effort. Yes, it is a small college in a
small community; it is no impersonal assembly-line diploma mill. As the years
pass, if you let yourselves absorb the spirit and tradition of this place,
you'll find the four years you have spent here living in your memory as a rich
and important part of your life.

Extracurricular Activities

Oh, you'll have some regrets along with the happy memories. I let football and
other extracurricular activities eat into my study time with the result that my
grade average was closer to the ''C'' level required to maintain eligibility
than it was to straight A's. Even now I wonder what I might have accomplished if
I'd studied harder.

I know there are differences between the Eureka College of 1932 and the Eureka
of 1982, but I'm also sure that in many ways - important ways - Eureka remains
the same. For one thing, it is impossible for you now to believe what I've said
about things being the same. We who preceded you understand that very well. We
thought ''old grads'' who came back only five years after they got out - not 50
-couldn't understand what our life was like. Just take my word for it - as the
years go by you'll be amazed at how fresh the memory of these years will remain
in your mind, how easily you can relive the very emotions you experienced.

The class of '32 has no yearbook to record our final days on the campus. The
class of '33 didn't put out a ''Prism'' because of the hardships of that Great
Depression era. The faculty went without pay sometimes months on end. And yet
this school made it possible for young men and women, myself included, to get an
education even though we were totally without funds, our families destitute
victims of the Depression.

Yes, this place is deep in my heart. Everything that has been good in my life
began here.

'Commencement'

Graduation day is called ''commencement'' and properly so because it is both
recognition of completion and of beginning. I would like to talk with you about
this new phase - the society in which you are now going to take your place as
full-time participants. You are no longer observers; you will be called upon to
make decisions and express your views on global events because those events will
affect your life.

Meeting of Allies in Europe

I've spoken of similarities, and the 1980's, like the 1930's, may be one of
those, a crucial juncture in history that will determine the direction of the
future.

In about a month I will meet in Europe with the leaders of nations who are our
closes friends and allies. At Versailles, leaders of the industrial powers of
the world will seek better ways to meet today's economic challenges. In Bonn I
will join my colleagues from the Atlantic Alliance nations to renew those ties
which have been the foundation of Western, free-world defense for 37 years.
There will also be meetings in Rome and London.

These meetings are significant for a simple yet important reason.  Our own
nation's fate is directly linked to that of our sister democracies in Western
Europe. The values for which American and all democratic nations stand represent
the culmination of Western culture.

Sakharov Message

Andrei Sakharov, the distinguished Nobel Laureate and courageous Soviet human
rights advocate, has written in a message smuggled to freedom: ''I believe in
Western man, I have faith in his mind, which is practical and efficient and at
the same time aspires to great goals. I have faith in his good intentions and
his decisiveness.''

This glorious tradition requires a partnership to preserve and protect it. Only
as partners can we hope to achieve the goal of a peaceful community of nations.
Only as partners can we defend the values of democracy and human dignity we hold
so dear.

There is a single, major issue in our partnership which will underlie the
discussions that I will have with European leaders: the future of Western
relations with the Soviet Union. How should we deal with the Soviet Union in the
years ahead? What framework should guide our conduct and policies toward it?
What can we realistically expect from a world power of such deep fears,
hostilities and external ambitions?

I believe the unity of the West is the foundation for any successful
relationship with the East. Without Western unity, we will squander our engines
in bickering while the Soviets continue as they please. With unity, we have the
strength to moderate Soviet behavior. We have done so in the past and we can do
so again.

East-West Ties

Our challenge is to establish a framework in which sound East-West relations
will endure. I am optimistic we can build a more constructive relationship with
the Soviet Union. To do so, however, we must understand the nature of the Soviet
system and the lessons of the past.

The Soviet Union is a huge empire ruled by an elite that holds all power and all
privilege. They hold it tightly because - as we have seen in Poland - they fear
what might happen if even the smallest amount of control slips from their grasp.
They fear the infectiousness of even a little freedom and because of this in
many ways their system has failed. The Soviet empire is faltering because rigid,
centralized control has destroyed incentives for innovation, efficiency and
individual achievement. Spiritually, there is a sense of malaise and resentment.

But in the midst of social and economic problems, the Soviet dictatorship has
forged the largest armed force in the world. It has done so by pre-empting the
human needs of its people, and, in the end, this course will undermine the
foundations of the Soviet system. Harry Truman was right when he said of the
Soviets that ''when you try to conquer other people or extend yourself over vast
areas, you cannot win in the long run.''

Lessons of the Past

Yet Soviet aggressiveness has grown as Soviet military power has increased. To
compensate, we must learn from the lessons of the past. When the West has stood
firm and unified, the Soviet Union has taken heed. For 35 years Western Europe
has lived free despite the shadow of Soviet military might. Through unity, you
will remember from your modern history courses, the West secured the withdrawal
of occupation forces from Austria and the recognition of its rights in Berlin.

Other Western policies have not been successful. East-West trade was expanded in
the hope of providing incentives for Soviet restraint, but the Soviets exploited
the benefits of trade without moderating their behavior. Despite a decade of
ambitious armscontrol efforts, the Soviet buildup continues. And despite its
signature of the Helsinki agreements on human rights, the Soviet Union has not
relaxed its hold on its own people or those of Eastern Europe.

Warning of President Kennedy

During the 1970's, some of us forgot the warning of President Kennedy who said
that the Soviets ''have offered to trade us an apple for an orchard. We don't do
that in this country.'' Well, we came perilously close to doing just that.

If East-West relations in the detente era in Europe have yielded disappointment,
detente outside of Europe has yielded a severe disillusionment for those who
expected a moderation of Soviet behavior. The Soviet Union continues to support
Vietnam in its occupation of Kampuchea and its massive military presence in
Laos. It is engaged in a war of aggression against Afghanistan. Soviet proxy
forces have brought instability and conflict to Africa and Central America.

We are now approaching an extremely important phase in East-West relations as
the current Soviet leadership is succeeded by a new generation. Both the current
and the new Soviet leadership should realize aggressive policies will meet a
firm Western response.

On the other hand, a Soviet leadership devoted to improving its people's lives,
rather than expanding its armed conquests, will find a sympathetic partner in
the West. The West will respond with expanded trade and other forms of
cooperation.

But all this depends on Soviet actions. Standing in the Athenian marketplace
2,000 years ago, Demosthenes said, ''What same man would let another man's words
rather than his deeds proclaim who is at peace and who is at war with him?''

P.U. FIRST & LAST AD PREXY TEXT

5-Point Guide to Relations

Peace is not the absence of conflict, but the ability to cope with conflict by
peaceful means. I believe we can cope. I believe that the West can fashion a
realistic, durable policy that will protect our interests and keep the peace,
not just for this generation, but for your children and grandchildren.

I believe such a policy consists of five points: military balance, economic
security, regional stability, arms reductions and dialogue.  These are the means
by which we can seek peace with the Soviet Union in the years ahead. Today, I
want to set out this five-point program to guide the future of East-West
relations.

Military Balance
First, a sound East-West military balance is absolutely essential.  Last week
NATO published a comprehensive comparison of its forces with those of the Warsaw
Pact. Its message is clear: During the past decade, the Soviet Union has built
up its forces across the board.

During that same period the defense expenditures of the United States declined
in real terms. The U.S. has already undertaken steps to recover from that decade
of neglect. And I should add that the expenditures of our European allies have
increased slowly but steadily, something we often fail to recognize here at
home.

Economic Security
The second point on which we must reach consensus with our allies deals with
economic security. Consultations are under way among Western nations on the
transfer of militarily significant technology and the extension of financial
credits to the East, as well as on the question of energy dependence on the
East.

We recognize that some of our allies' economic requirements are distinct from
our own. But the Soviets must not have access to Western technology with
military applications, and we must not subsidize the Soviet economy. The Soviet
Union must make the difficult choices brought on by its military budgets and
economic shortcomings.

Regional Stability
The third element is regional stability with peaceful change. Last year in a
speech in Philadelphia and in the summit meetings in Cancun, I outlined the
basic American plan to assist the developing world. These principles for
economic development remain the foundation of our approach. They represent no
threat to the Soviet Union. Yet in many areas of the developing world we find
that Soviet arms and Soviet-supported troops are attempting to destabilize
societies and extend Moscow's influence.

High on our agenda must be progress toward peace in Afghanistan.  The United
States is prepared to engage in a serious effort to negotiate an end to the
conflict caused by the Soviet invasion of that country. We are ready to
cooperate in an international effort to resolve this problem, to secure a full
Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, and to ensure self-determination for the
Afghan people.

In southern Africa, working closely with our Western allies and the African
states, we have made real progress toward independence from Namibia. These
negotiations, if successful, will result in peaceful and secure conditions
throughout southern Africa. The simultaneous withdrawal of Cuban forces from
Angola is essential to achieving Namibian independence, as well as creating
long-range prospects for peace in the region.

Central America also has become a dangerous point of tension in East-West
relations. The Soviet Union cannot escape responsibility for the violence and
suffering in the region caused by its support for Cuban activities in Central
America, and its accelerated transfer of advanced military equipment to Cuba.

In Eastern Europe

However, it was in Eastern Europe that the hopes of the 1970's were greatest,
and it is there that they have been most bitterly disappointed. There was hope
that the people of Poland could develop a freer society. But the Soviet Union
has refused to allow the people of Poland to decide their own fate, just as it
refused to allow the people of Hungary to decide theirs in 1956, or the people
of Czechoslovakia in 1968.

If martial law in Poland is lifted, if all the political prisoners are released,
and if a dialogue is restored with the Solidarity Union, the United States is
prepared to join in a program of economic support. Water cannons and clubs
against the Polish people are hardly the kind of dialogue that gives us hopes.
It is up to the Soviets and their client regimes to show good faith by concrete
actions.

Arms Reduction
The fourth point is arms reductions. I know that this weighs heavily on many of
your minds. In our 1931 ''Prism,'' we quoted Carl Sandburg, who in his own
beautiful way quoted the Mother Prairie, saying, ''Have you seen a red sunset
drip over one of my cornfields, the shore of night stars, the wave lines of dawn
up a wheat valley?'' What an idyllic scene that paints in our minds - and what a
nightmarish prospect that a huge mushroom cloud might someday destroy such
beauty. My duty as President is to ensure that the ultimate nightmare never
occurs, that the prairies and the cities and the people who inhabit them remain
free and untouched by nuclear conflict.

I wish more than anything there were a simply policy that would eliminate the
nuclear danger. But there are only difficult policy choices through which we can
achieve a stable nuclear balance at the lowest possible level.

I do not doubt that the Soviet people, and, yes, the Soviet leaders have an
overriding interest in preventing the use of nuclear weapons. The Soviet Union
within the memory of its leaders has known the devastation of total conventional
war, and knows that nuclear war would be even more calamitous. Yet, so far, the
Soviet Union has used arms-control negotiations primarily as an instrument to
restrict U.S. defense programs and, in conjunction with their own arms buildup,
a means to enhance Soviet power and prestige.

Unfortunately, for some time suspicions have grown that the Soviet Union has not
been living up to its obligations under existing armscontrol treaties. There is
conclusive evidence the Soviet Union has provided toxins to the Laotians and
Vietnamese for use against defenseless villagers in Southeast Asia. And the
Soviets themselves are employing chemcial weapons on the freedom fighters in
Afghanistan.

Criteria and Agreements

We must establish firm criteria for arms control in the 1980's. If we are to
secure genuine and lasting restraint on Soviet military programs through arms
control, we must seek agreements which are verifiable, equitable and militarily
significant. Agreements that provide only the appearance of arms control breed
dangerous illusions.

Last November I committed the United States to seek significant reductions on
nuclear and conventional forces.  In Geneva, we have since proposed limits on
U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range missiles, including the complete elimination
of the most threatening systems on both sides.

In Vienna, we are negotiating, together with our allies, for reductions of
conventional forces in Europe.  In the 40-nation Committee on Disarmament, the
United States seeks a total ban on all chemical weapons.  Since the first days
of my Administration, we have been working on our approach to the crucial issue
of strategic arms-control negotiations with the Soviet Union. The study and
analysis required have been complex and difficult. It had to be undertaken
deliberately, thoroughly and correctly. We have laid a solid basis for these
negotiations, we are consulting with congressional leaders and with our allies,
and we are now ready to proceed.

The Nuclear Balance

The main threat to peace posed by nuclear weapons today is the growing
instability of the nuclear balance. This is due to the increasingly destructive
potential of the massive Soviet buildup in its ballistic missile force.

Therefore, our goal is to enhance deterrence and achieve stability through
significant reductions in the most destabilizing nuclear systems -ballistic
missiles, and especially intercontinental ballistic missiles -while maintaining
a nuclear capability sufficient to deter conflict, underwrite our national
security and meet our commitment to allies and friends.

Phased Reduction Plan

For the immediate future, I am asking my Start negotiating team to propose to
their Soviet counterparts a practical, phased reduction plan. The focus of our
efforts will be to reduce significantly the most destabilizing systems -
ballistic missiles - the number of warheads they carry, and their overall
destructive potential.

At the end of the first phase of the Start reductions, I expect ballistic
missile warheads - the most serious threat we face - to be reduced to equal
ceilings at least a third below current levels. To enhance stability, I would
ask that no more than half of those warheads be land-based. I hope that these
warhead reductions, as well as significant reductions in missiles themselves,
could be achieved as rapidly as possible.

In a second phase, we will seek to achieve an equal ceiling on other elements of
our strategic nuclear forces, including limits on ballistic missile throwweight
at less than current American levels.  In both phases, we shall insist on
verification procedures to insure compliance with the agreement.

The monumental task of reducing and reshaping our strategic forces to enhance
stability will take many years of concentrated effort.  But I believe that it
will be possible to reduce the risks of war by removing the instabilities that
now exist and by dismantling the nuclear menace.

Letter to Brezhnev

I have written to President Brezhnev and directed Secretary Haig to approach the
Soviet Government concerning the initiation of formal negotiations on the
reduction of strategic nuclear arms - Start - at the earliest possible
opportunity. We hope negotiations will begin by the end of June.

We will negotiate seriously, in good faith, and carefully consider all proposals
made by the Soviet Union. If they approach these negotiations in the same
spirit, I am confident that together we can achieve an agreement of enduring
value that reduces the number of nuclear weapons, halts the growth in strategic
forces, and opens the way to even more far-reaching steps in the future.

I hope the commencement today will also mark the commencement of a new era - in
both senses of the word a new start - toward a more peaceful, more secure world.

Dialogue
The fifth and final point I propose for East-West relations is dialogue. I have
always believed that problems can be solved when people talk to each other
instead of about each other. I have already expressed my own desire to meet with
President Brezhnev in New York next month. If this cannot be done, I would hope
we could arrange a future meeting where positive results can be anticipated.

And when we sit down, I will tell President Brezhnev that the United States is
ready to build a new understanding based upon the principles I have outlined
here today. I will tell him that his Government and his people have nothing to
fear from the United States. The free nations living at peace in the world
community can vouch for the fact that we seek only harmony. And I will ask
President Brezhnev why our two nations cannot practice mutual restraint. Why
can't our peoples enjoy the benefits that would flow from real cooperation? Why
can't we reduce the number of horrendous weapons?

Perhaps I should also speak to him of this school and the young graduates who
are leaving it today - of your hopes for the future, of your deep desire for
peace, and yet your strong commitment to defend your values if threatened.
Perhaps if he could someday attend such a ceremony as this, he would better
understand America. In the only system he knows, you would be here by the
decision of government and on this day the government would be represented here
telling many of you where you were going to work after your graduation.

But as we go to Europe for the talks and as we proceed on the important
challenges facing this country, I want you to know I will be thinking of you,
and Eureka and what you represent. In one of my yearbooks I remember reading
that, ''The work of the prairie is to be the soil for the growth of a strong
Western culture.'' I believe Eureka is fulfilling that work. You, the members of
the 1982 graduating class, are this year's harvest.

Eureka is an institution, and you as individuals are sustaining the best of
Western man's ideals. As a fellow graduate and in the office I hold, I will do
my best to uphold these same ideals.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              147 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE NATION;
Local Issues Dominate Primary in Nebraska

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 164 words

DATELINE: OMAHA, May 9


A battle over two issues on the ballot in Lincoln is generating most of the
interest in the Nebraska primary Tuesday in which no Congressional incumbent is
opposed.

There is also a Democratic fight for the right to challenge Gov.  Charles Thone,
a Republican. ''I don't hear any great interest in the Democratic gubernatorial
race,'' said Tom Kelley, a former Democratic national committeeman, of the race
between Robert Kerrey, a businessman who earned the Congressional Medal of Honor
in Vietnam, and State Sen. George Burrows, who has labor endorsement.

The issues in Lincoln concern Sunday liquor sales and preventing discrimination
against homosexuals.  Senator Edward Zorinsky, a Democrat, and the Republican
House members, Hal Daub, Virginia Smith and Douglas K. Bereuter, have no primary
challengers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              148 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Francis X. Clines and Lynn Rosellini

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 865 words


Somebody Else's War

D uring the two weeks when the British fleet was steaming toward the Falkland
Islands and their Argentine occupiers, the public's attitude in Washington
included a willingness to tell mild jokes and show a certain Gilbert and
Sullivan bemusement at an event set to such a World War I pace. There seemed an
almost sepia tone to somebody else's crisis, and Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr.even had time for tennis during his run at shuttle diplomacy.

When the battle was finally joined in the appallingly swift and deadly exchange
of exploded warships, the American capital's mood reached shock, but then
dwindled quietly, almost mysteriously.  Lately, the noninvolvement is palpable.
Congress is getting little in the way of constituent reaction. A generation once
involved nightly with films of the guns and helicopters of Vietnam finds the
censored television news of this war distant. Front-page interest in the
perpetual Federal budget fight has been rekindled, as if it was a distraction
from somebody else's crisis that has become somebody else's war.
Stag Party Backlash

T he Washington women's network is alive and well. United in spirit and
dedicated to exchanging bits of intelligence about their lot, the unofficial
sisterhood of working women in the capital lately is passing the word about
what's called the ''N.R.C. stag bash,'' a retirement party for an administrator
at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

Angry word of the party, which had only male guests except for an entertainment
appearance by a female agency worker clad in shorts and tank top, was passed on
through the network, then confirmed through a female worker at a suburban
Maryland restaurant by Sheila Hershow, associate editor of Federal Times, the
newspaper that keeps an eye on the bureaucracy.

Miss Hershow dug into the event and pronounced it ''raunchy,'' finding that an
agency pamphlet on sexual harassment was portrayed as a party joke, and viewing
as particularly distasteful the cake baked in the shape of ''a well endowed
female torso.''

The N.R.C. has no official comment to offer, though there are private cautions
against misconstruing and overreacting to a simple party. However, Jim Thomas,
head of the employees union at the commission, said the story reflected some of
the saddest evidence yet of how the agency has resisted change and maintained a
maledominated attitude and hierarchy.

After Miss Hershow found that the party had taken place in working hours,
participants stressed they were using personal leave time to partake. They also
insisted that the affair came nowhere near the crudities of a true stag party. A
''roast'' but not a ''smoker,'' was the metaphysical distinction offered by one
participant. Miss Hershow's final commentary was to imagine a similar workday
party for whites only, featuring watermelon and an appearance by a black worker
doing a bit of Stepin Fetchit entertainment. ''Imagine the effect on agency
morale,'' she wrote, ''And imagine the consequences.''
Barbecue for Staubach

R oger Staubach, the former football quarterback and continuing Texas hero, may
have renounced immediate ambitions to run for the United States Senate, but he
is still considered a hot political property. Cabinet members, legislators and
ranking political financiers inside Texas and outside are responding to
invitations to a ''Ya'll Come Texas Barbecue'' later this month. Mr. Staubach
will be honored along with his former coach, Tom Landry of the Dallas Cowboys,
and he will speak on ''the relevancy of Jesus Christ in personal and
professional life.''
No Rescue Plans

D r. Glenn W. Geelhoed, associate professor of surgery at George Washington
University Medical Center, describes his working address as ''2150 Pennsylvania
Avenue, the nuclear hypocenter between the White House and the Pentagon.''

''We're talking about a crater,'' says Dr. Geelhoed, vividly summarizing his
professional station in the event that nuclear weapons rain on Washington. The
physician, who is also chairman of the medical advisory committee for the
American Red Cross, will be speaking extensively in this hypothetical mode
tomorrow when an expected 1,300 physicians and others gather for a symposium at
the university on the medical consequences of nuclear war, one of a national
series sponsored by Physicians for Social Responsibility and the Council for a
Livable World Education Fund. The doctors will starkly warn Washington to expect
to find no medical treatment after the bomb.

''I want everyone to know they should not be planning on my rescuing them,'' Dr.
Geelhoed says quite simply. ''The only resolution is prevention; that's the
strongest possible message that can come from this.'' Francis X. Clines Lynn
Rosellini

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              149 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

SPECIALIST CALLS TERRORIST TACTICS PREDICTABLE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 924 words

DATELINE: SANTA MONICA, Calif., May 9


When Brig. Gen. James L. Dozier was kidnapped by the Red Brigades in Italy last
December, Brian M.  Jenkins kicked himself.

''I should have known it,'' he says. ''They said in their strategic directives
they were targeting NATO, but in their previous modus operandi they had never
struck foreign targets.

''So we were looking for Italian targets. I've written it on the wall: 'The
modus operandi is not immutable.' '' Mr. Jenkins is the director of the Rand
Corporation's section on security and subnational conflict, in which role he
devotes himself to tracking terrorism in a dispassionate and scholarly way.

He has not personally ended any terrorist actions. He declines to get involved
in active antiterrorist operations. But his research provides important
information to law-enforcement agencies all over the world.

Nations Are Among His Clients

His clients include the State Department, the Central Intelligence Agency, the
Defense Department, the Justice Department, the Commerce Department, local
law-enforcement agencies and foreign governments.  Those who ask the clients
about terrorism often find the trail of information leading back to Mr. Jenkins.
It works both ways: Those agencies are among Mr. Jenkins's sources.

He also has inquisitive, nonpaying visitors, novelists and screen writers
seeking background. As a result, Mr. Jenkins has popped up as a recognizable
character in several novels and films.

He has three full-time associates, and a dozen Rand staff members work with him
part time. One is the German-born Konrad Kellen, who began his career as Thomas
Mann's personal secretary. Mr. Kellen emigrated to the United States when Hitler
came to power and was a propaganda analyst for United States Army Intelligence
in World War II. He later worked for Radio Free Europe and then joined Rand.

Mr. Kellen is semiretired now, working four days a week on Rand staff papers
with straightforward titles like ''What Makes Terrorists Tick?''

A Beginning in Vietnam

Brian Michael Jenkins, 40 years old, was hired by Rand in Vietnam, where he was
a member of the Special Forces, the Green Berets. He began his work for Rand by
interviewing Vietcong prisoners and studying so-called pacification efforts.
Studying terrorism seemed the logical next step.

Mr. Jenkins has degrees in fine arts, the humanities and history.  He prefers
the scholarly or the reportorial approach to his work, saying: ''We don't meet
people in dark alleys. That's for the movies.'' His ideas on fighting terrorism
reflect the views of the American Civil Liberties Union as well as those of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation.

He sometimes talks about terrorism in a way that reflects his background in art.
''You know those abstract paintings that use little points of light?'' he asks.
''You pore over them on the assumption that the little dots are related. At
first it seems they're not. Then you back up and composition and patterns
emerge.  Studying terrorism is like that.''

A Hint in 'Ponderous Prose'

On a trip to Italy he immersed himself, with the help of a dictionary and an
Italian-speaking colleague, in Red Brigade Strategic Directive 18, 350 pages of
''ponderous prose and dense jargon.'' Afterward, he speculated about a
previously undetected middle level of Red Brigades leadership.

When General Dozier, a high-ranking American official of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, was freed and members of the Red Brigades were questioned,
Mr. Jenkins discovered that he had been correct. They acknowledged the existence
of an executive committee that translates instructions from the policy arm and
transmits them to the operational arm of the organization.

Mr. Jenkins's views often run counter to conventional wisdom. He speaks
disparagingly, for example, of ''Carlos,'' the Venezuelan who reportedly led a
1970's raid on a meeting in Vienna of the ministers of Organization of Petroleum
Exporting Countries and who was mentioned as a possible member of the Libyan
''hit squads'' that were said to have been assigned to ''get'' President Reagan
and other American officials.

Carlos: The Myth and the Facts

''The popular view is based on headlines, movies, a couple of boilerplate novels
and some quasi-fictionalized real-life characters like Carlos,'' he said.
''There's this thing about Carlos, the master terrorist. Actually, he's messed
up everything we know he was involved in, but people talk about him as though
he's invincible.  There are more sightings of Carlos than there are recipes for
chili.''

He says that he sees no proof of the existence of Libyan ''hit squads,'' but
adds, ''In the context of all the assassination attempts last year and from
Libya's behavior, the Secret Service would be derelict'' not to take the matter
seriously.

''The Terrorist Mindset, and Terrorist Decision-Making,'' one of the more than
150 papers that Mr. Jenkins and his staff have turned out, contains profiles of
a group of terrorists who, after being captured, submitted to psychological
testing. It reported, among other things, that many terrorists had an abnormal
fascination with firearms and explosives and tended to take risks for the sake
of taking risks.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              150 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IMPARTIAL COVERAGE OF CRISIS INFURIATRING SOME IN BRITAIN

BYLINE: By WILLIAM BORDERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 868 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 10


The crisis over the Falkland Islands has provoked a debate about press and
television coverage, with angry charges that some British journalists are
behaving treasonably.

The debate, recalling the similar furor in the United States during the Vietnam
War, centers on the question of how much credence should be given to Argentine
battle reports, and how they should be presented to readers and viewers.

Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and some of her Cabinet ministers are said to
be incensed at the evenhanded practices of some newspapers and broadcasters, in
which they sometimes report conflicting accounts from the two Governments as if
they were equally credible.

''I understand there are times when we and the Argentine are almost being
treated as equals,'' Prime Minister Thatcher said the other day in Parliament,
complaining about press coverage. ''If that is the case, it gives offense and
causes great emotion among many people.''

BBC Under Attack

The Prime Minister, and others, have been particularly scathing about reporters
and newscasters who refer to this side as ''the British,'' rather than ''we'' or
''us.'' In the parliamentary debate, as Conservative backbenchers cheered her
on, she deplored commentators who say, ''if the Argentine did something and the
British did something,'' as if they were both foreign countries.

The BBC, in particular, has come under attack for news clips that portray the
Argentines sympathetically. The BBC is theoretically free of Government control.
Its revenues come not from Parliament but from license fees that are charged the
owners of radio and television sets.

When the evening news recently showed the funeral of some of the Argentine
sailors killed in the South Atlantic, with weeping widows and children, a
Conservative Member of Parliament named Robert Adley denounced the BBC as
''General Galtieri's fifth column in Britain,'' referring to the Argentine
President, Leopoldo Galtieri.

Some of the criticism of the press has come from newspapers, particularly The
Sun, which has followed a wildly jingoistic line throughout the crisis, with
headlines like ''Gotcha!'' on the story reporting that the Argentine cruiser
General Belgrano had been torpedoed by the British.

'What Is It but Treason?'

The largest-circulation paper in the country, The Sun was particularly outraged
by a large editorial cartoon on the front page of The Guardian last Thursday,
after the hostilities had brought the loss of a big ship on each side, and
substantial casualties.  The cartoon, which was grim and haunting, showed a
British soldier clinging to a raft floating on a threatening sea with the
caption, ''The price of sovereignty has been increased - official.''

In a bitter editorial, The Sun said of The Guardian's cartoon: ''What is it but
treason?'' The criticism has had some noticeable effect. The Daily Mail this
morning carried dramatic pictures of the General Belgrano sinking, with this
somewhat tortured caption: ''The moment any ship sinks - whatever its home port,
however mistaken the cause it may have died for - is one of desperate sadness.''


Journalists Defend Reports

Replying to the critics, some journalists maintain that their patriotism should
not oblige them to ignore the facts. Peter Snow, a BBC commentator who has been
the object of some of the sternest criticism, put it this way in a letter to The
Times: ''This is an anxious time for all of us in this country. But as a
journalist, I would be even more deeply anxious if it were generally thought
that we in the press and television should not continue to try to report and
analyze events as dispassionately as we have done in more normal times.''

The journalists also point out that the Argentine Government has often been
hours ahead of the British Government in reporting a particular bomb attack or
strafing mission. On Sunday, for example, Buenos Aires began reporting military
action before 10 A.M. London time, and the British Defense Ministry did not
confirm it until after 6 P.M., which meant an entire day of unsubstantiated
rumors and confusing news broadcasts.

Even after the Ministry began issuing details, its information was often several
hours behind the much more vivid reports coming in from British journalists
aboard the ships in the task force, despite the fact that their dispatches had
to go through military censorship.

As the debate continues, the letters columns of the major newspapers regularly
carry a block of correspondence on all sides of the issue. Today's range of
opinions was typical. In The Times, a reader excoriated the BBC reports for
''the failure to recall that the Argentine was the aggressor and that it is our
own people who are under the jackboot.'' In The Guardian, a letter writer
offered this observation: ''Truth is more important than 'patriotism.' Real
patriotism cannot exist without it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              151 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 11, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ELECTRONICS TIPS THE SCALES OF COMBAT;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 848 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 10


The sea and air fighting between Britain and Argentina around the Falkland
Islands has demonstrated that electronic guidance has added another dimension to
war, with the attack, at least for now, well ahead of the defense.

The history of war shows a constant swing between dominance by the attack and by
the defense. The tank in World War II wiped out the machine gun's pre-eminence
as a defensive weapon. Today, the tank and every other major weapon system, from
infinitely more complex, heavily armored tanks to aircraft carriers, are
vulnerable to missiles guided to their targets electronically.

Superweapons, military history shows, always produce in time counterweapons that
blunt or eliminate their effectiveness. One British analyst called it a ''safe
bet'' that every military research organization in the industrial world is now
seeking weapons that will counter the demonstrated effectiveness of
electronically guided missiles.

Conclusions Called Premature

It is premature, military sources here said, to translate the proven
effectiveness of such weapons in the Falkland Islands fighting into assertions
that the day of the big attack aircraft carrier or the surface warship or the
heavy tank is done. What the fighting showed, they said, was that for the moment
such weapons must be used more cautiously.

This new kind of weapon was first used in 1971 when the Air Force destroyed two
bridges in North Vietnam that had resisted repeated attacks by conventional
bombs.

The new weapons' first extensive use was in the Arab-Israeli war of 1973. The
Egyptians used ''fire and forget'' missiles against Israeli tanks, and they used
Soviet-made surface-to-air missiles against Israeli aircraft. The Israelis used
electronic countermeasures that blinded or diverted the missiles as they homed
in on their planes and tanks.

The sinking of the Argentine cruiser General Belgrano by longrange torpedoes and
the destruction of the British warship Sheffield by an Exocet missile fired by a
Super Etendard naval fighter-bomber have focused attention on the effectiveness
of sophisticated missiles against surface ships.

Signals Sent Along Wires

The General Belgrano was stalked and hit by the Conqueror, a British
nuclear-powered submarine with inertial navigation and the latest sonar
detectors. The Conqueror was armed with Tigerfish torpedoes that are directed to
their target by signals transmitted along wires.

The Sheffield was hit by a radar-guided missile to which target range and
bearings are transmitted from the carrying aircraft's radar before launch. At a
range from the target of about six miles, the missile's own radar takes over for
the final attack. As the missile approaches the target on a course six to nine
feet above the waves, nothing betrays it but a small blip on radar screens that
is lost in the clutter thrown up by the waves.

The successful attacks on the General Belgrano and the Sheffield, which sank
today while under tow, have prompted comments that the Exocet and the Tigerfish
have made surface navies obsolete. What the new weapons are bound to do, naval
sources said, is change how ships are built.

Future surface combatants, these sources said, will be smaller, faster and
better equipped to deal with missiles from submarines, aircraft and other
surface ships. The arrival of such ships will depend on the rate of
technological progress prompted by the missiles' successes.

Help in the Air

Electronic devices have also played an important role in British successes in
the air.  The Vulcan bombers attacked the Stanley airfield arrived in darkness
after the long flight from Ascension Island. In view of one former R.A.F.
officer, ''those chaps couldn't miss.'' They were guided by advanced radar and
bombing computers that brought them dead on target after a 3,500-mile flight.

The bombers escaped without loss because Argentina had not equipped its
British-made Tigercat antiaircraft missiles with a radar-guidance device that
would have made them effective at night.

Sophisticated electronics also contributed to the effectiveness of Britain's
Harrier jets in the early fighting. The Harriers knocked down an Argentine
Mirage with an American Sidewinder air-to-air missile.

This is a heat-seaking missile that homes in on the exhaust of enemy aircraft.
The British do not yet deploy the improved version of the Sidewinder, the
AIM-9L, which is attracted by the fuselage of an approaching aircraft because
heating due to friction. The tactical conclusion drawn by former air force
officers here is that the Harriers are likely to maintain air superiority over
the Falkland area partly because of their missiles but, to a considerable
degree, because of a higher standard of pilot training.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Super-Etendard jet

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              152 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 12, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NUCLEAR FREEZE: 'WE ARE FIGHTING TO STAY ALIVE'

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 443 words


To the Editor:

What bittersweet irony that Benjamin Stein's critique of what he styled ''junk
thought'' - the nuclear freeze movement - should have appeared on your May 5
Op-Ed page next to James Reston's ''Forgotten Lessons'' column.

According to Reston at least, one of the main forgotten lessons of history is
''that wars are easy to start but hard to stop.'' And the whole point of the
nuclear freeze movement, like the Jonathan Schell New Yorker articles that
arguably triggered it, is surely anything but a cliche: it is to prevent a
nuclear war that could well signal the end of mankind, the ''death of death''
itself.

Just how would Mr. Stein propose going about avoiding such a fate?  He says
that's been the ''United States' paramount goal'' since the end of World War II,
in other words, for all of 37 years - during which time, he might recall, we
also managed to fight two fair-sized wars even so, in Korea and in Vietnam.

I wonder whether Mr. Stein can remember that World War I was to have been ''the
war to end all wars,'' and that before that conflict, despite a plethora of
efforts by sane persons across the centuries, war after war after war was fought
and endured as if there were nothing more inevitable in life.

The point of the current movement is to convince realpolitikers like Mr. Stein,
in power or out, that we are not prepared to forestall our protest against the
real possibility of an end to our world simply because we have been told, once
again, that we are being unrealistic, even dangerous.

Mr. Stein says we may end up terribly Red if we pursue a course of ''unilateral
... disarmament,'' but he has clearly missed the point that Schell hammered
home: Dead is very much worse than Red, especially if it happens simultaneously
to the whole human race.

Like most popular protests, the current anti-nuclear protest, by no means
limited to advocating a nuclear weapons freeze, cannot in fairness be indicted
for not including neat prescriptions in its agonized resistance. Those can come
later. The point of all such organized opposition - whether by Poles in Warsaw,
freedom marchers in Alabama or Pentagon picketers in Washington - is that there
are limits to popular - meaning human - endurance, and those who rule us or
purport to rule in our behalf had better listen when those limits are
overstepped.

Listen carefully, Mr. Stein: Your intellectual food is cold food, food for the
dead. We who protest against nuclear weapons and nuclear war are fighting to
stay alive, and we will not accept your platitudes, this time, as a substitute
for unconditional victory.
C. STEPHEN BALDWIN, New York, May 5, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              153 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 12, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

PETER WEISS, 65, AUTHOR OF 'MARAT SADE,' DIES

BYLINE: By JOHN CORRY

SECTION: Section D; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 813 words


Peter Weiss, author of ''Marat/ Sade,'' one of postwar Europe's most important
plays, died, apparently of a heart attack, Monday in Stockholm. His wife,
Gunilla Palmstierna, said in Stockholm yesterday that the German-born playwright
entered a hospital Sunday after complaining of chest pains. He was 65 years old.

In its bold, experimental staging by Peter Brook, the British director, in 1964,
''Marat/Sade'' created a sensation first in London and the next year in New
York.

''My plays do not have conventional lead roles,'' Mr. Weiss once said. ''The
lead roles are played by history and ideas.'' The playwright was a product of
history and ideas, or at least ideologies. He was an avowed Marxist, although
scarcely a doctrinaire Communist, who found his greatest acceptance in the
Western world even as he denounced it. Whatever his ideology, his plays were
extraordinarily theatrical.

Father Fled Germany

Mr. Weiss was the son of a Jewish father who fled Germany in 1933.  On finally
settling in Stockholm in 1942, the playwright told an interviewer years later,
he found ''the courage to starve or write or do both.'' He turned to films,
journalism, novels, plays and even painting, but it was not until 1964, with
''Marat/Sade,'' that he attracted world attention.

The play - its full title is ''The Persecution and Assassination of Marat as
Performed by the Inmates of the Asylum of Charenton Under the Direction of the
Marquis de Sade'' - was performed first in West Germany. That same year, Mr.
Brook, director of the Royal Shakespeare Company, staged it in London. On Dec.
27, 1965, Mr. Brook's production opened at the Martin Beck Theater on Broadway,
shocking the first-night audience with its graphic imagery and vividly realistic
performances.

''Marat/Sade'' takes place in the bathhouse of the insane asylum at Charenton.
It is 1808, and the Marquis de Sade, an inmate, is allowed to stage a play for
the other inmates. He chooses a work about the stabbing 15 years before of
Marat, the Jacobin leader, by Charlotte Corday. As much as anything else,
however, the play is a dialogue between de Sade and Marat about conservatism and
radicalism, justice and injustice, rampant individuality and united action.

Theatricality Won Critics

The critics were divided over the intellectual merit of the dialogue, although
scarcely one failed to be impressed by what was happening on stage - Glenda
Jackson, as Charlotte Corday, lashing Ian Richardson, as Marat, with her hair;
Patrick Magee, as de Sade, arguing with Mr. Richardson, who sat in a bathtub;
lunatics slavering and drooling, bodies crashing and upheaval everywhere.

''Marat/Sade'' won the American Theater Wing's Tony award for best play in 1966.
Mr. Brook won a Tony as director; Mr. Magee won a Tony as best actor, and Miss
Palmstierna, Mr. Weiss's wife, won the Tony for costume designer.

Mr. Weiss also wrote ''The Investigation,'' which was presented first in
Germany, and then in Sweden, where it was directed in an uncut version by Ingmar
Bergman and ran five hours. A two-hour version was presented at the Ambassador
Theater on Broadway in 1966, under the direction of Ulu Grosbard.

War-Crimes Testimony

The play was a rearrangement of the transcripts of testimony at the German
war-crimes trial of 1964. The critics divided on its literary value, although
again scarcely any denied its impact.

''It is disturbing in its implications, repetitive in its method, wearing as an
experience, yet incontestably an experience of some sort,'' Walter Kerr wrote.
''Criticism is in a way irrelevant.''

Mr. Weiss followed the ''The Investigation'' with ''The Song of the Lusitanian
Bogey,'' an indictment of Portuguese policies in Angola, Mozambique and
Portuguese Guinea. It was performed in New York in 1968 as the first production
of the new Negro Ensemble Company. When it was revived in West Berlin in 1980,
it created a minor scandal, much of it centered on what some called the bad
taste of the production.

''The logic of the production is very clear to me, and I think it is successful
because it has gotten people to talk,'' Mr. Weiss said characteristically,
although he had not seen the production.  ''Controversy about the subject is
better than ignoring it.''

Mr. Weiss's other plays included ''Trotsky in Exile'' and ''Vietnam Discourse,''
a 1968 condemnation of American policy in Southeast Asia. Mr. Weiss's most
recent play, ''The Process,'' based on Kafka's ''The Trial,'' is at the Royal
Dramatic Theater in Stockholm. ''Weiss was no doubt one of the greatest
playwrights in Europe,'' a spokesman for the theater said. ''His loss is
immense.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Peter Weiss

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              154 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

2 ARGENTINE JETS DOWNED IN ATTACK OFF THE FALKLANDS

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1183 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 12


Two Argentine A-4 Skyhawk attack planes were shot down today when they attacked
a Royal Navy warship off the Falkland Islands, the Ministry of Defense announced
tonight.

The ship was not identified in the initial ministry statement, but it appeared
to have been one of Britain's new frigates, either the Brilliant or the
Broadsword, both of which were commissioned in the last three years. They are
usually assigned to provide antiaircraft protection to the aircraft carriers
Hermes and Invincible in the British battle fleet.

Unofficial reports said the American-made Argentine jets were brought down in
dense fog and cloud by new shipborne Sea Wolf missiles 20 or 30 miles west of
the Falklands. The Sea Wolf had never before been fired in anger. It was said
that the jets had been acting as escorts to transport planes trying to run the
British blockade.

No British Casualties Reported

There was no indication whether the Argentine pilots had bailed out, but the
ministry spokesman, Ian McDonald, reported that no British ships had been
damaged and that no British sailors had been injured.

Later, the Argentine military command said in confirming the loss of its planes
that ''considerable damage'' was done to British ships in an Argentine
counterattack.

Argentina also said it shot down a British Sea King helicopter, but the British
report said only that one had been ditched at sea, apparently for mechanical
reasons, and that the four crewmen had been picked up immediately.

Argentina gave no casualty figures for the fighting today but said that over all
41 Argentines had been killed and 44 wounded in fighting with the British.

At the United Nations, both sides met again separately with Secretary General
Javier Perez de Cuellar but offered no assessment of the negotiations or of the
effect of the new fighting on the talks. (Page A18.)

According to Mr. McDonald, three Skyhawks launched the attack while one of the
ships in the British task force was patrolling the waters within the 200-mile
blockade zone around the islands. All the planes were ''engaged,'' the
announcement said, but one escaped.

Argentina is believed to have 15 Skyhawks aboard its carrier, the Veinticinco de
Mayo, which has remained in port through most of the five-week struggle in the
South Atlantic, and 68 others at an air base at Rio Gallegos in the southern
part of the country. The planes, of a type widely used in the Vietnam War,
normally carry bombs.

Military action in the area has stepped up considerably in the last 72 hours,
since the task force commander, Rear Adm. John F. Woodward, began sending some
ships in close to the islands, which Argentine troops seized from the British on
April 2.

Nonetheless, the Foreign Secretary, Francis Pym, said after a meeting of the war
cabinet that Britain was ''continuing to work with all intensity at the United
Nations'' for a peaceful solution.

'Some Promise of Progress'

''There were some developments overnight,'' he said, ''which hold out some
promise of progress, and that is a good thing, but I must tell you that many
difficult problems still remain. We have had our hopes raised several times
before only to have them dashed later.''

Privately, senior British officials sounded even more guarded. An aide to Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher, speaking before the latest war news had arrived from
the South Atlantic, said that ''it would be quite wrong to suppose that we are
necessarily going places in these negotiations.'' This country had learned, he
said, that it ''must look at the detail of what they propose through a
magnifying glass.''

The aide said that Britain would want at least a year for any substantive talks
with Buenos Aires on the islands' sovereignty.  Asked about reports in the
British press that Mrs. Thatcher was prepared to wait another week before
ordering a landing in the Falklands, so as to give further time to Javier Perez
de Cuellar, the United Nations Secretary General, the aide replied, ''There is
no timetable and never has been.''

But it seemed highly unlikely that the Prime Minister could postpone much longer
the day when, as one Conservative politician put it, ''she will have to decide
whether to take what she can get or to fight for what she wants.''

The day's best news for Mrs. Thatcher came from Strasbourg, in eastern France,
in the form of strong backing for a continuation of European Economic Community
sanctions against Argentina. The trade ban expires next Monday, but the directly
elected European Parliament voted to extend it for one month by 131 votes to 79.
The community's commission, which is composed of senior representatives of the
10 member countries, also urged that the sanctions be renewed.

Final Decision Due Sunday

A final decision will be made by foreign ministers or their representatives in
Brussels on Sunday, but they are considered all but certain to go along with the
viewpoints expressed today. The key factor in Common Market thinking, said the
commission president, Gaston Thorn of Luxembourg, was Argentina's failure to
comply with United Nations Resolution 502, calling for withdrawal of Argentine
troops from the Falklands.

But Ireland, one of the 10, may end sanctions itself if the community renews
them. Charles J. Haughey, the Irish Prime Minister, hinted broadly in Dublin
today that his country might decide to go it alone because of what he described
as ''the use of economic sanctions in support of military action.''

In the Channel port of Southampton, meanwhile, thousands of people waved Union
Jacks as the 67,000-ton luxury liner Queen Elizabeth 2 slipped away from her
berth to begin the long voyage to the South Atlantic. As tugs nudged the
black-hulled liner, hurriedly converted into a troopship, out into the Solent,
sirens sounded and weeping wives clutched crying children.

The mission of the 3,000 troops on board has never been spelled out in any
detail. But the Chief of the General Staff, Gen. Sir Edwin Bramwall, said just
before the QE2 set sail that ''a commander down there can't have his nearest
reserves almost 8,000 miles away.'' Some military analysts believe the liner
will wait at Ascension Island until British forces have secured a strong base in
the Falklands.

Soldiers March Aboard

Just after dawn, the troops marched on board in a colorful scene: the Scots
Guards, to the skirl of a piper playing ''Scotland the Brave;'' Welsh Guards,
with their band blaring out ''Men of Harlech,'' and the rugged Gurkhas, all
volunteers from Nepal, to the accompaniment of Hindu prayers.

From one of the railings, some of the soldiers hung a banner that said, ''To all
mums and dads - we'll see you all soon.'' Sailing not far behind the QE2, pride
of the British merchant fleet, will be five newly commandeered ships - the
9,000-ton St.  Edmund, a North Sea ferry that will be used as a troopship; the
11,000-ton Contender Bezant, to be used to transport aircraft and supplies; the
Alvega, a 5,700-ton tanker; the Balder, a 33,700-ton tanker, and the Scottish
Eagle, a general-purpose freighter.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of relatives of troops at dockside (page A18)
photo of A-4 Skyhawk jet (page A18) photo of British troops

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              155 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
THE REALITY PRINCIPLE

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, May 12


An American President who hopes to break through the inertia and suspicions of
international life to reach significant new agreements must sometimes
deliberately change his tone in a public speech. President Kennedy did so in his
American University speech of June 1963, laying the ground for the test ban
treaty. President Reagan did so at Eureka College.

''I do not doubt,'' Mr. Reagan said, ''that the Soviet people and, yes, the
Soviet leaders have an overriding interest in preventing the use of nuclear
weapons.'' Those were remarkable words from a man who at his first Presidential
press conference said Soviet leaders claimed ''the right to commit any crime, to
lie, to cheat.''

Why this dramatic change in rhetoric? Was it a political tactic, designed to
make an essentially unyielding hard line on relations with the Soviet Union more
acceptable to American and allied public opinion? Or did it reflect a real
change in Mr. Reagan's view of the world?

My sense is that both factors were involved - and that they are complementary,
not inconsistent. Political judgment and appreciation of true national interests
in a nuclear world both require a willingness to face the facts. And that is
what is beginning to affect the Reagan Presidency after 16 months: reality.

The Eureka speech was shrewdly timed to take some of the steam out of the
nuclear weapons protest movement in this country, which is pointing toward major
demonstrations in New York in June. In the same month Mr. Reagan will go to
Europe to meet allied leaders, and his initiative on strategic arms assures him
a much happier welcome from politicians with publics restive on the issue.

But the political skill of the speech need not be viewed cynically. Mr. Reagan
might instead have attacked the nuclear freeze movement, questioned its motives,
dug himself in as Lyndon Johnson did on Vietnam. Adjusting to reality, even if
it begins only with political rhetoric, may have substantive consequences.

And Mr. Reagan did more than take the strident edge off his rhetoric. He put
aside some long-asserted conditions that would effectively have blocked any
early possibility of talking with the Russians about strategic nuclear weapons.

Just a few months ago the Administration refused to set a date for resumption of
the strategic talks, citing the ''long and dark shadow'' of Poland. Now, like
other Presidents before him, Mr. Reagan has evidently decided that reducing the
threat of nuclear disaster is too important to be made dependent on other
issues.

In the past, too, Mr. Reagan has suggested that America had to build up its
military strength before negotiating. Now buildup and talks are to go on at the
same time.

Realism marks all this. And it is not the first sign of that characteristic
creeping into the Reagan Administration. Secretary of State Haig signaled the
shift on the nuclear issue when he said two weeks ago that U.S.-Soviet rivalry
was ''constrained by another central fact of our time - nuclear weapons. Total
victory by military means has become a formula for mutual catastrophe.''

With such realistic words compare the continuing fulminations of the right-wing
ideologues who have not taken places in the Administration. Norman Podhoretz of
Commentary, writing about the inadequate bellicosity of his President, sounds
almost sorry that the bombs are not actually falling. The responsibility of
power has made a difference in Ronald Reagan.

What remains to be seen is how serious Mr. Reagan will be about the process of
getting from his new arms proposals to an agreement of some kind with the Soviet
Union. Strategic arms negotiations are a grinding business. They require as much
diplomacy inside the American system -about what new weapons we might forgo, for
example - as with the other side. They require patience, will, a perhaps
illogical optimism.

One doubt about what will follow Mr. Reagan's brave new words lies in the people
he has to do the job. His man at the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency is
Eugene V. Rostow, who has shown about as much faith in the possibility of arms
control as he has in the perfectability of the Harvard football team. The chief
strategic arms negotiator is another negative character, Gen. Edward Rowny, who
helped kill the second strategic arms agreement. The appointment of a new,
senior figure to head the strategic arms team would be a compelling sign of the
President's commitment.

Another test of Mr. Reagan's seriousness will be speed. The world and the
American public will not wait another seven years for an arms agreement.
Psychologically and politically, it is essential to take some early interim
step. That could be the revival of SALT II, but Mr. Reagan seems to have ruled
that out because of objections on his right. Some variant will have to be found,
to keep alive the revived hopes in negotiated arms control - and in him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              156 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 13, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NOW 'ALL THINGS CONSIDERED' IS A BOOK

BYLINE: By HERBERT MITGANG

SECTION: Section C; Page 28, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 702 words


THE closest thing in the United States to the BBC's estimable radio service is
National Public Radio, which is financed in part by the Government but is also
pretty much immunized from the static of news- and arts-watchers in Washington.

Under the direction of Frank L. Mankiewicz, its president since 1977, the
nonprofit public radio has flourished in drama, music, education and, of course,
news on a network of 264 stations in the 50 states and Puerto Rico. In the New
York area, WNYC-AM and FM and WBGO-FM are hooked into the service.

Perhaps the program that has achieved the most loyal audience of all is the
seven-day - an hour and a half weekdays and an hour on weekends - afternoon
program called ''All Things Considered.'' Listeners keep discovering it; it is
often called the best-kept secret in radio. Seven million listeners stay tuned
every week.

Now they can learn all about it in print. In ''Every Night at Five: Susan
Stamberg's All Things Considered Book,'' the co-host of the program replays
excerpts from the best segments during the last 11 years and reveals some of her
own and her colleagues' techniques of reporting and human affairs. The oversized
trade paperback, edited by Sara Bershtel, is newly published by Pantheon Books.

Confusion Over Category

The co-host was in New York recently, playing the talk circuit and bookstores
and discovering that ''Every Night'' caused a certain degree of confusion about
which shelf to place it on - communications, sexual guidance or simply near the
cash register?

Mrs. Stamberg even turned the tables by recalling for an interviewer how she had
interviewed herself recently for her own program, ''All Things Considered.''
Half of her colleagues at the time thought it was self-serving; the other half
thought it was amusing. So the unshy majority -Susan Stamberg - ruled, and it
was played on the air. The self-interview started out like this, talking about
the book:

'' 'Is this nothing more than a crass bid for commercial gain?' 'Yes, it is.'
'Why do you keep dropping the name of the book?' 'Because every author I've ever
interviewed has done so, and I thought that that's what it meant to be a
writer.' ''It was really a parody of my own work,'' Mrs. Stamberg said,
laughing. ''I even included a lot of uh-huhs, which I often do anyway.''

Informal History of Decade

Over the years, ''All Things Considered'' has touched just about every base in
the news. The author considers it an informal history of the decade, covering
such topics as Vietnam, Watergate, Three Mile Island's nuclear accident,
headache remedies for war and peace and such less than world-shaking subjects as
how to unfreeze car locks, find the best hamburger and make Mama Stamberg's
cranberry relish. ''The program is a daily equivalent of a newsweekly,'' Mrs.
Stamberg said, ''and 'All Things Considered' does just that.''

Public radio's range of programs include ''Morning Edition''; ''Earplay,''
drama; ''Communique,'' foreign affairs; ''Let's Hear It,'' the handicapped;
''Sunday Show,'' news and the arts; ''A Prairie Home Companion,'' humor by
Garrison Keillor, and other specialized broadcasts that remind listeners
familiar with trans-Atlantic radio of the best of the BBC.

Authors Are Preferred

Mrs. Stamberg is normally at public radio's Washington headquarters, with her
co-hosts, Sanford Ungar and Noah Adams, and reporters, editors and technicians.

As an interviewer, Mrs. Stamberg has learned many things about the art of
charming or disarming people in front of a microphone. Given the choice of
talking to an author or a politician, she prefers the author, ''because writers
think in your presence without canned answers.'' Ideally, an interview turns
into a real conversation.

The most fundamental requirement of all for an interviewer?  Unhesitatingly, she
replied, ''Listening.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              157 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 14, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

DOLE FINDING ROLE OF THE MODERATE SUITS HIM

BYLINE: By HEDRICK SMITH, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1275 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 13


When the Senate stalemate over the Voting Rights Act finally broke last week,
the main author of compromise was Senator Bob Dole, the Kansas Republican who
artfully bridged the gap between Democratic liberals such as Edward M. Kennedy
of Massachusetts and Republican conservatives such as Strom Thurmond of South
Carolina.

''He was a very positive, constructive and significant force,'' Senator Kennedy
said afterward. Conservative allies of President Reagan were equally pleased.
''Without Dole, it wouldn't have been done,'' said Senator Paul Laxalt,
Republican of Nevada.

Senator Dole sold the White House on his compromise as a way not only to avoid
passage of a more liberal bill but also to take positive action on voter
discrimination to improve Republican credibility among blacks and Hispanic
Americans. The Dole formula would base proof of discrimination on the overall
effects of Government action, not election results alone, but would not require
proof that discrimination was intentional.

The Senator has also been promoting compromise in other areas, including farm
matters, gun control, food stamps and the Reagan budget. As chairman of the
Senate Finance Committee, he has guided the progress of Administration
legislation, but he has also sounded an independent voice, criticizing the
feasibility and equity of some specific proposals.

'Acid-Tongued Villain'

In all this, the tall, dark-haired, third-term Senator has come across as a far
different figure from the aggressive, partisan ''hatchet man'' of the early
1970's when he was Republican national chairman and later, in 1976, as Gerald R.
Ford's Vice Presidential running mate.

The biting wit and sarcastic cut-and-slash political attacks that became a Dole
trademark gave him what Senator Howell Heflin, an Alabama Democrat, termed an
exaggerated image as ''an acid-tongued villain.''

Former Senator George McGovern, the 1972 Democratic Presidential nominee,
recalled: ''He was awful tough on me. He used to eat me for breakfast.'' The
McGovern camp was convinced, one aide recalled, that ''Dole was out to prove to
the Nixon White House that he was as tough as they were.''

In the 1976 Vice Presidential debate with Walter F. Mondale, Senator Dole
wisecracked that the late George Meany, then president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.,
''was probably Mondale's makeup man.'' Then, in a heavy-handed comment, he said
that Watergate was no more appropriate a campaign issue than ''the Vietnam War
would be, or World War I or World War II or the Korean War - all Democrat
wars.''

But in person, the 58-year-old Kansan has long seemed to colleagues and
reporters a more relaxed, charming, witty, reasonable and amusing figure, more
moderate than his conservative image, more generous toward other politicians
than he has been on the stump.

McGovern's Assessment

In Congress, he worked with Senator McGovern to protect food stamps, nutrition
and other programs for the disadvantaged. In 1980, he refused to sign a
conservative fund-raising letter against Senator McGovern, saying ''the language
was too offensive.'' And now Mr.  McGovern, like others, comments on how much
''Bob Dole has grown'' in recent years.

Some, like Robert C. Byrd, the Senate minority leader, think he still has an
excessive taste for partisan debate. But others say that the Dole sting is
softer now and that his quick, agile humor is often turned against himself and
other Republicans as well as Democrats.

Some credit the Senator's second wife, Elizabeth, an aide in the Reagan White
House, with helping mellow her husband since their marriage seven years ago.
After the 1976 campaign, the couple reviewed television tapes, especially that
of the Dole-Mondale debate. A few months later, in a major speech, the Senator
poked fun at himself, demonstrating that he knew his harshness had backfired.

''I'll never forget the Dole-Mondale debate, and don't think I haven't tried,''
he quipped. ''I won't say how we did, but halfway through the debate, three
empty chairs got up and walked out. If you remember those debates, President
Ford was supposed to take the high road and I supposed to go for the jugular.
And I did. My own!''

With a shift to the right in the Senate, Mr. Dole now sits closer to the
political center. Liberals and moderates speak of him as a ''responsible
conservative'' whose sense of compassion for the underdog, arising from his
family background and a right arm crippled in World War II, has sometimes
tempered the sharp edges of the Reagan program.

No Fan of '83 Tax Cut

For although he voted with the Republican majority 94 percent of the time last
year, it was no secret that Senator Dole was no fan of the tax cut scheduled for
1983. This year, he was an early critic of the 1983 Reagan budget. For years he
has backed civil rights legislation, and lately, he has been pushing for taxes
on corporations and those in the upper income brackets.

''We're dealing with the truly needy at one end and the truly greedy at the
other,'' he said. ''If we're going after somebody in the food stamp line, let's
tighten up on some of these goodies for the wealthy - tax shelters, business
deductions, and a lot of generous benefits.''

Musing about his political evolution, Senator Dole says his image has followed
his changing roles - his shift from the upstart tactics of the Republican
opposition and the 1976 campaign to the responsibility of the Senate majority
and committee chairmanship.

''You move from the national committee job where you have to be partisan and a
heavy, and you get that out of your system,'' he said. ''As Ford wrote in his
book, he stayed in the Rose Garden while I went out in the briar patch and took
on Carter and Mondale. You don't do that without being scratched up a bit. Then
you get to be a committee chairman and it's almost like being born again. The
longer you're in this business, the more careful you are about what you do and
say.''

'A Less Caustic Side'

Democrats, too, credit legislative responsibility with moderating and maturing
him, though they observe that he rarely sticks his neck out unless other
Republicans are ready to move with him.

''There's less of a caustic side to Bob Dole now because he can't afford to have
people out to get him,'' said Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., a liberal Democrat
from Delaware. ''He's got to provide consensus. I like the guy. He understands
the issues. He's a vehicle rather than an architect of compromise. He doesn't go
beyond what's realistic. But when there's a general willingness to move, Dole is
a good vehicle.''

Others suggest another motive for his mellowness. Despite his disastrous showing
in the 1980 Republican primaries, they suspect that he has not forsaken
Presidential ambition.

With a Republican in the White House, Senator Dole is understandably reticent
about such speculation. But he travels widely, accumulating political chits by
speaking for Republican colleagues. He has formed his own political action
committee, Campaign America. And he does not dismiss the thought out of hand.

''If I were to do it again,'' he says, ''I'd approach it in a different way,
good campaign management and money in advance.'' And, he didn't have to add, a
more moderate image.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Senator Bob Dole

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              158 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CITIZENS' ACTIVISM GAINING IN NATION

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1899 words

DATELINE: MINNEAPOLIS, May 13


When Women Against Military Madness staged a march for nuclear disarmament here
last weekend, about 4,000 people from such diverse groups as unions, churches
and the American Indian Movement joined in.

They joined not only to advocate disarmament but also to carry their banners
through poor neighborhoods to protest the diversion of Federal funds from social
programs to the military.

The sponsors expressed surprise at the turnout, noting that a similar event a
year ago had attracted only a few hundred marchers.  Indeed, in communities
across the nation, citizen activism seems to have bloomed anew this spring after
a period of relative dormancy.

More Than Public Demonstrations

Public demonstrations are only a part of the picture. New coalitions and
campaigns have been forming around both economic and international issues on the
national, state and local levels, many groups have been broadening their focus
and new organizations are springing up at the community level.

In many states, including Georgia, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island,
South Carolina, New Hampshire and Vermont, statewide coalitions are being formed
by minorities, women and other groups to lobby state governments to use Federal
money under the new block grants for their constituents.

On another issue, a group in Santa Fe, N.@M., has obtained money from a private
foundation to publish literature and bring various interests together in an
effort to exercise more public control over water rights.

Leaders of these movements say that the Reagan Administration, by cutting social
programs and building up the military, has stimulated the formation of new
coalitions of organizations with such disparate aims as lower interest rates and
nuclear disarmament. Moreover, they say, the continued recession this spring and
increased fear of nuclear war have created a climate more conducive to citizen
protest than existed in the last few years.

There is disagreement as to whether the new activism will last, but there is a
broad consensus that it does not signal a return to the 1960's and early 70's,
when there were pitched battles in the streets and on college campuses between
protesters and the authorities.

Today's activists seem less confrontational, more dispersed and more directed
toward legal channels.  ''It is not apocalyptic,'' said David Cohen, president
of the Washington-based Social Development Corporation, which was set up to find
alternatives to Federal financing of social programs. ''It is very quiet and
down to earth. But remarkable things are happening.  New forms of involvement
and new leadership are developing.''

Impact on Arms Negotiations

Political analysts generally agree that President Reagan's recent decision to
negotiate on arms reductions with the Soviet Union without preconditions
resulted in large part from the political strength exhibited by the antinuclear
movement.

It is too early to tell what effect the new coalitions will have on domestic
programs, but in Minnesota and other states coalitions have forced public
hearings and at least delayed diversion by the states of Federal block grant
money from low-income people. Furthermore, a national coalition has, at least
for the time being, stopped the Administration's plan to dismantle the VISTA
program, which sends volunteers to work in poor communities.

The activism at the local and state levels is so scattered and diverse that no
one has been able to measure its precise nature or extent. It is growing out of
the neighborhood organizations, consumer movements, cooperatives and legal and
political action agencies that emerged in the 1970's, when many people became
disillusioned with the prospects of influencing the national government and
turned to local and state issues, where they felt they could have more effect.

New York, New Jersey and Connecticut have been at the forefront of community
organizing in recent years, and groups are now involved in efforts to create new
coalitions. New York City has thousands of neighborhood organizations, many of
them active in both advocacy and services. The New Jersey Tenants Organization
was one of the most aggressive in the nation in the 1970's. The Connecticut
Citizens Action Group was one of several groups across the nation noted for
winning concessions for low-@ and middle-income families from government and
corporate bodies.

Providing Jobs and Services

''These grass-roots organizations have made a major difference in the quality of
life for millions of people,'' said Pablo Eisenberg, director of the Center for
Community Change, which provides technical assistance to the groups. ''They have
provided jobs, created economic and business opportunities in their
neighborhoods or rural areas, provided services that were not otherwise
available, developed indigenous leadership and won victories over insensitive
and sometimes mean-spirited public and private institutions.''

For example, a San Antonio group called COPS, for Citizens Organized for Public
Service, put pressure on local governments to channel millions of dollars into
improvement of streets and water mains in low-income neighborhoods.

''Coalitions are forming all over the place,'' said Gale Cincotta of Chicago,
the leader of National Peoples Action, a network of neighborhood organizations
that has been confronting various levels of government and business
coorporations since 1972 in behalf of such things as consumer protection and
lower fuel prices.

Broad Array of Pickets

Last Monday Mrs. Cincotta's group joined Icare, for Illinois Coalition Against
Reagan Economics, PUSH (People United to Serve Humanity, the black rights
organization headed by Jesse Jackson), and old-line union members and Women for
Peace in picketing Mr.  Reagan on his visit to Chicago. Lobbying coalitions
containing an even broader array of interests are being formed nationally, she
said.

''After we decided to sponsor a Reclaim America Week in September'' in
conjunction with environmentalists, blacks and other groups, Mrs.  Cincotta
said, ''we learned that other groups were planning demonstrations with similar
names - Rebuild America and Reconstruct America, for example.''

All of this marks a shift from only a few months ago, when officials across the
nation reported that there had been very little organized opposition to the cuts
in Federal funds for domestic programs that took effect Oct. 1.

The nuclear disarmament movement, said Stuart Langton, director of the Lincoln
Filene Center for Citizenship and Public Affairs at Tufts University, ''has
become a magnet attracting traditional peace groups, other social movements,
professionals and many citizens new to political activism. In this sense, it is
a grass-roots happening of unprecedented proportion.''

Those looking for a march on Washington in the Ground Zero Week last month were
disappointed. Instead, the action was in states and communities across the
nation. State legislatures and city councils have become battlegrounds for the
nuclear issue, as well as other concerns that were formerly brought directly to
Washington.

The national clearinghouse for the Nuclear Freeze Campaign in St.  Louis reports
that resolutions calling for a freeze have been adopted in nine Legislatures,
those of Massachusetts, Oregon, Connecticut, Maine, Vermont, Minnesota,
Wisconsin, Iowa and New York, in 81 city councils, 26 county councils and in
more than 300 New England town meetings, and that it is pending before many
others.

Fewer Students Involved Now

College students are not yet reported heavily involved in disarmament and other
issues, as they were in the Vietnam War protests.

''It is largely an adult movement,'' said Harry C. Boyete, director of the
Citizen Heritage Center of Minneapolis and author of a book on citizen
movements, ''The Backyard Revolution.''

Those who have encouraged the growth of activist groups at the state and local
level approve of the dispersed form that the new protests are taking. Although
local governments have no authority in foreign affairs or national economic
policy, they say, it is more in keeping with American traditions for policies to
bubble up from the various communities and thus become more effective in the
long run.  Protests organized by national organizations, which became common in
the 1960's and early 1970's, they say, were an aberration of American history.

Minnesota, which has a tradition of strong citizen participation, provides an
example of how the grass-roots activitism seen this spring has developed and
affected policy at various levels.

Madge Micheels-Cyrus is program director for Friends for a Nonviolent World, one
of 18 groups involved in the statewide drive for a freeze on nuclear weapons
under an umbrella organization called People for Survival. It was put together,
she said, as people across the state began expressing concern last winter about
the danger of nuclear war.

First they selected volunteers to canvass the neighborhoods, which in cities
such as Minneapolis and St. Paul form a dense social fabric of self-help and
advocacy organizations. In a matter of weeks, they obtained 126,000 signatures
favoring a freeze and persuaded the Legislature and a number of city councils to
adopt freeze resolutions. Their cause became so popular that the American Legion
in Ashby, Minn., approved it, and sportsmen in northern Minnesota established
Anglers for a Nuclear Freeze.

'Feels Like the Mainstream'

By the time of the Minneapolis march last weekend, Lois Holzemer, a participant,
told The Minneapolis Tribune: ''I was a protester in the 60's, but it wasn't
like this. This feels like the mainstream.''

Federal budget cuts may have put the future of the citizens' movement in
jeopardy. Thousands of community groups got their start with Federal funds or
received Federal aid to provide services for people. Much of that assistance has
been eliminated, and the Administration has also severed the office in the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, which assisted community groups.

Mr. Eisenberg of the Center for Community Change said thousands of organizations
were endangered.  ''In many cases, these Federal funds comprised the bulk of
their budgets, not because they liked such a state of dependence but because,
historically, they have found it difficult, if not impossible, to provide
private funds,'' he said.

Others, however, pointed out that some of the more successful groups have never
accepted Federal funds and that others have survived after the money was
withdrawn.

Mr. Langton notes that the advocacy groups have become more active as Federal
funds have declined.  ''At the moment at least there is a resurgence,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of protestor at Eureka College

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              159 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. AIDE WARNS OF RISING CHEMICAL WARFARE

BYLINE: By DAVID W. DUNLAP, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 48, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: PRINCETON, N.J., May 15


A State Department official said today that the current use of chemical agents
in war -contrary to both international law and practice - could lead to more
such warfare if action were not taken immediately to halt it.

The official, Gary B. Crocker of the department's Bureau of Intelligence and
Research, told a meeting at Princeton University, ''If we don't get it stopped
now, these are going to become common, accepted weapons.''

Mr. Crocker said that as a result of reports that his office had been receiving
since 1975, the State Department by last year ''had concluded that lethal
chemical agents were used in Kampuchea, Afghanistan and Laos'' and that the
''Soviets have it, have produced it, have transferred it to Vietnam and are
using it themselves in Afghanistan.'' Kampuchea is the traditional name for
Cambodia.

'Subject Goes Back to 1975'

He asserted that the documentation now being offered by the Government stood as
proof that the United States was not engaged in ''another propaganda campaign to
get the Soviets.''

''This subject goes back to 1975,'' Mr. Crocker said. ''It is not just a way to
get money to improve the United States chemical stockpile. None of us are out to
get money for chemical warfare. We are trying to get rid of chemical weapons.''

Mr. Crocker was one of more than a dozen government officials, doctors,
journalists and scholars who met under the auspices of Princeton's Woodrow
Wilson School of Public and International Affairs and the Undergraduate American
Whig-Cliosophic Society in Whig Hall.

The first two panelists who addressed the morning session differed sharply about
the use of chemical weapons against members of the Hmong tribes of Laos, many of
whom had participated in military operations in support of the United States
against Communist forces in the mountains of central and northern Laos.

Jane Hamilton-Merritt, a reporter and photographer who stayed in Indochina after
the overthrow of the South Vietnamese Government in 1975, said that ''the Hmong
had been singled out for extinction by any means, including biochemical
warfare.''

She proceeded to cite dozens of instances in which she said Hmong refugees
coming into Thailand had told her stories of ''poison rains in colors of red,
blue, green and yellow,'' and she said that such attacks, resulting in death and
serious injuries, continued to the present.

Another panelist, J. Fred Swartzendruber, who represented the Mennonite Central
Committee aid project in Laos from 1979 to 1981, said that the Hmong were
leaving the country because of ''economic circumstances and Government
restriction on their way of life.''

He said that there was ''only a small minority who had any knowledge of chemical
attacks,'' and that the greatest fear for physical safety was ''stepping on a
mine or other land ordinance that had never been removed.''

What Mr. Crocker demanded of his critics was an accounting for what he said was
the similarity between the circumstances and injuries of the Hmong in Laos and
the Mujhadeen refugees from Afghanistan.

''How do you explain that the Mujahadeen got together and coordinated his story
with the Hmong?'' he asked. ''And how do you explain that they both have the
same damn symptoms?''

Among others in the audience was Shi Jinkun, military adviser to the Chinese
mission to the United Nations, who repeated Mr. Crocker's concern. ''We have the
same problem as the United States Government, '' he said.

''We do not have hard evidence,'' he added. ''Whatever strong evidence there is,
the Soviets still have ways of denying it. That is why they can use chemical
weapons in Afghanistan, Kampuchea and Laos.''

Nevertheless, Mr. Shi said, ''the information released by the State Department,
in my personal opinion, is quite convincing. So far it is the strongest.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              160 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Capital Principles

SECTION: Section 3; Page 23, Column 4; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 312 words


To the Business Editor: Please allow me to correct one word in a quote
attributed to me in ''Neo-Economist'' (May 9), which accompanied excerpts from
my latest book. The sentence should read: ''Sometimes the world changes and you
have to change your position just to stay principled.'' The example I gave your
writer was the role of the United States military during its buildup in Vietnam
and its decline in the 10 years afterwards. It seems to be principled to have
been against both, since the pendulum swung too far both times.

Similarly, one may favor social welfare programs and activist government when
both are too weak, and oppose excesses when they become too dominant.

Finally, democratic socialism is attractive in ideal but, once one begins to
detect its characteristic faults, the same impulse which led to admiration leads
to frank criticism, even rejection. I have changed my judgment on certain
matters of political economy as I learned to ask better questions. That seems to
me to be the normal course of sustained inquiry.  MICHAEL NOVAK American
Enterprise Institute Washington, May 10, 1982
---------------------------------------------------------------------
The Times welcomes letters from readers. Letters for publication should include
the writer's name, address and telephone number.Letters should be addressed to
The Editor, Sunday Business Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street,
New York, N.Y. 10036. We regret that because of the large volume of mail
received, we are unable to acknowledge or to return unpublished letters.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              161 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Combat Deaths

SECTION: Section 7; Page 22, Column 5; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 153 words


To the Editor:

In John Curtis Perry's review of ''The Origins of the Korean War: Liberation and
the Emergence of Separate Regimes, 1945-1947'' and ''Korea: The Untold Story of
the War'' (April 11), it was stated that more Americans died in Korea than in
Vietnam. This is incorrect.  Combat deaths in Vietnam were far greater than in
Korea, and although noncombat deaths were greater in Korea, the total number of
deaths was still greater in Vietnam.  DAN HARRISON Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
[Editor's note: Combat deaths in Vietnam were 47,239 and noncombat deaths were
10,446; in Korea combat deaths were 33,629 and noncombat deaths 20,617. Total
deaths were: Vietnam, 57,685; Korea, 54,246.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              162 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLAND JOURNAL

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 3, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1692 words


C.E. MOREY of Utica, N.Y., built 261 pipe organs between 1893 and 1935, the year
he went out of business. The instruments are prized to this day for their sturdy
construction and rich sound.

So when a year and a half ago the vicar of St. James of Jerusalem Episcopal
Church in Long Beach heard that a Morey organ, built in 1911, was for sale, he
immediately went to look at it.

''I'd been looking for one for about three years,'' the vicar, the Rev. Marlin
Bowman, said. ''These organs cost a lot less than modern organs, and it seems a
shame to see them thrown on a scrap pile.''

The organ was purchased for an undisclosed sum, and Father Bowman said that it
''should last a couple of hundred years.'' The Morey organ belonged to the
Fellowship Baptist Church of Richmond Terrace on Staten Island. The Baptist
Church was willing to part with the Morey so that it could get an electric
organ.

The Morey is the type of instrument Bach and the early masters played on. It is
known as a ''tracker'' organ - it has a direct communication between the keys
and valves. The Morey now in Long Beach is known as Opus 282 because it was the
the 282d organ the company produced. It was built for the Seaman's Home at
Mariners Haven, which is the former name of Richmond Terrace.

An anonymous donor provided Father Bowman's church with the money to buy the
organ. It was disassembled by seven members of the congregation and shipped from
Staten Island in a large U-Haul truck and several cars. It spent the winter in
Father Bowman's basement.

Last summer the disassembled organ was transported, by hand, to the church next
door. Allen Dreyfuss, a pipe organ builder, spent two months putting the organ
back together. ''Piece by piece - like an Erector set,'' Father Bowman said.

Today at 4 P.M., St. James's will have a dedicatory concert, open to the public,
to celebrate its great fortune. The church is on West Penn Street and Magnolia
Boulevard in Long Beach. Todd Wilson, director of organ music at Adelphi
University, will perform pieces by Johann Sebastian Bach, Vaughn Williams and
Buxtehude. Mr. Wilson is also the organist at the Cathedral of the Incarnation
in Garden City.

On a bandstand behind barricades, the Rocky Point High School Band played
outside the Alvin Theater when the musical ''Little Johnny Jones'' opened on
Broadway on March 21. The band's members - 170 strong, including flag carriers -
and their chaperones then went inside to see the show from the balcony. ''Little
Johnny Jones'' closed that night.

Tomorrow, the band, under the direction of Peter Hertling, who lives in Wading
River, will play another sort of one-night stand on the streets of New York City
when the premiere of the film ''Annie'' takes place at the Radio City Music
Hall.

With ticket prices ranging from $50 to $1,000 a pair, the band members will not
be allowed inside to see the film. The event is expected to raise $500,000 for
WNET (Channel 13) -''the single biggest nonbroadcast fund-raising event ever,''
according to the public television station's spokesman.

That will be the kickoff for many splashy ''Annie'' premieres - all of them for
the cause of public television, which, across the country, may come out $5
million richer, thanks to the little musical orphan whose film producer, Ray
Stark, clearly found the answer when he reportedly asked, ''How can I make a
buck and do something good for public television?''

On Thursday night the cinematic ''Annie'' arrives on the Island at the Loews
Nassau Quad in Levittown. Tickets cost $35 and $100. At 6 P.M., a ''1930's
Sidewalk Eats and Drinks'' party will be held under a tent outside the theater.
Antique cars used in the film will be in the streets, and little Annie
''clones'' will be mixing with the crowds.

After the 8 P.M. screening, the $100 donors will partake of a ''Daddy Warbucks
supper party'' at, appropriately enough, a mansion - the de Seversky Conference
Center in Old Westbury. The event is expected to bring in about $50,000 for
WLIW, Channel 21. Ticket information may be obtained by calling 454-8866.

Residents of the Five Towns area and officials of the Town of Hempstead are
pleased that the revitalization of a blighted shopping mall on Rockaway Turnpike
is under way.

According to a spokesman for the town's Department of Industry and Commerce, the
Bande Development Corporation of Garden City, with private financing, is
acquiring 294,400 square feet, formerly the site of a closed Korvette's
department store and more recently the scene of a flea market, at a cost of $11
million.

Wilber F. Breslin, the company's president, is negotiating with one major
department store to lease space in the new Inwood Peninsula Mall. Construction
is expected to start within two months.

Local residents long have complained about both the lack of stores and the
appearance that the flea market gave to this, the gateway to the Five Towns
area.

''I am delighted that this is coming to fruition,'' said William F. Heins,
Commissioner of the Town of Hempstead's Department of Industry and Commerce, who
said that the town was working closely with the developer ''because this will
renovate the area dramatically.''

''It will greatly add assessed value to the local school district; spillover
business to local merchants will be tremendous as well as increased bank
deposits and providing secondary jobs for employees,'' Mr. Heins said.

Mr. Heins believes that the surrounding business areas should receive some $15
million in gross sales as a spillover from the new business. Sales taxes, he
said, will generate $4.62 million, and he estimates that 1,240 jobs will be
created with a payroll of $12.48 million.

It's awards time again, and the Long Island Coalition for Fair Broadcasting,
which has been encouraging New York City-based stations to increase coverage of
Long Island news and public affairs, has bestowed two prizes on WNBC-TV for its
stories on the LTV attempt to take over the Grumman Corporation and its ''Town
Meeting'' last June.

WCBS-TV took the honors for editorials, WABC won in the news-feature category
with ''Killer Craze in College'' and Channel 5 won a prize for ''The Man Behind
the Mask.'' WLIW's series, ''Drunk Driving: The American Tragedy,'' also was
cited at an annual awards lunch on Friday at the State University at
Farmingdale.

Drunken driving was also the subject for award-winning radio stations. WCBS's
editorials on drunken-driving laws and WLIR's fourpart series called ''Toast of
the Highways'' won honors.

WGSM took two awards, for its coverage of the trial of Joseph M.  Margiotta, the
Nassau Republican chairman, and ''The Forgotten Vietnam Vet.'' A memorial to
Harry Chapin, aired on WBAB-FM, won in the news-feature category, and WOR won a
prize for its ''Inside Long Island'' program.

Telltale signs of Ed Jaffe's popularity as a teacher are usually not in evidence
in Oceanside, where he lives, or in Brooklyn, where he teaches. But they are in
evidence in California, at least this weekend. Mr. Jaffe and his wife flew
across the country to accept the kudos at the first California reunion of the
far-flung graduates of Erasmus Hall High School today.

Mr. Jaffe, who has taught English and drama at Erasmus since 1961, is being
honored along with Al Badain, a former basketball coach.  ''It was like
Camelot'' is how Mr. Jaffe described his salad days at the high school on
Flatbush Avenue. Apparently, over the years the 40-year-old teacher acquired
quite a loyal following.

''We sent out ballots with 60 teachers' names listed,'' said Larry Robbins,
chairman of the reunion committee, ''and they came out ahead'' -Mr. Jaffe and
Mr. Badain. About 900 alumni were expected to show up from over 12 states,
including an alumnus of the Class of '03.

Part of Mr. Jaffe's teaching repertory involved an adapted British word game,
''Hinky Pinky,'' used to fine-tune the vocabularies of juniors and seniors.''
His students turned ''obese sea lions'' into ''fat cats'' and ''novices in
Egypt'' into ''Cairo tyros.'' He also used his know-how from four summers as a
borscht circuit and Poconos emcee to ease classes into European literature and
Shakespeare. In the last few years, one could even hear some Jamaican folk songs
and calypso before a lesson.

''Students appreciate a moment or two of hilarity or song, before studying the
great myths of the Greeks, of Midas and Agamemnon,'' he said.

Last semester Mr. Jaffe was on sabbatical to study communications at Nassau
Community College. Before returning to school next fall he plans to spend the
summer as a square dance caller and folk dancing leader at Eisenhower Park and
six other parks around the Island.

Dr. Burton Bronsther, a pediatric surgeon on the staff of Long Island
Jewish-Hillside Medical Center and a director of pediatric surgery at the Nassau
County Medical Center, and his wife, Ellyn, the Mayor of Hewlett Bay Park, share
a love of children and a concern for children growing up in countries that have
limited medical and surgical facilities. Last year they established a foundation
called SACOW - Surgical Aid to Children of the World - to sponsor medical
education and training in underdeveloped nations.

In affiliation with UNICEF, they spent six weeks last summer in China, where Dr.
Bronsther instructed physicians at a children's hospital in Peking in new
techniques of pediatric surgery. Mayor Bronsther volunteered her services to
teach English to the hospital staff during that period. Now, through the
sponsorship of their foundation and the World Health Organization, they have
arranged for a visit here over the summer months by one of China's leading
pediatric surgeons, Dr. Zhang-Jin-Zhe.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of C. E. Morey organ

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              163 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 16, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFTERMATH OF BLAST STILL FELTT IN BERGEN

BYLINE: By ALBERT J. PARISI

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 12, Column 6; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 877 words


PARAMUS SHOCK, astonishment and anger pervaded the faculty, staff and student
body at Bergen Community College last week, days after a bomb went off in a
hallway that only minutes earlier had been filled with students.

The blast shredded three lockers and damaged 15 others in a school widely known
for its specialized academics and passive student body.  The Paramus police
believe that the bomb, which exploded on May 7, had been set by a student
bearing a grudge for another, but they would not elaborate.

Howard Nebel, the college's Director of Security, echoed the sentiments of many
when he said: ''No one ever thought something like this could happen at
Bergen.''

The college was opened in 1968, offering Bergen County residents a two-year,
low-tuition associate's degree program in science and the fine arts.

Even during the tumultuous Vietnam War era, when student protests across the
country were marked by bombings and building takeovers, disorders on the campus
here were limited to peaceful demonstrations, school officials recalled.

Politics has been ruled out as a reason behind the bombing. No group or
individual has taken responsibility for the incident, even though an anonymous
bomb threat (campus switchboard operators say the voice was male) was received
less than a minute after the explosion.

Police Chief Joseph Delaney. said that laboratory findings on debris taken from
the scene were awaited.  Officials believe the bomb was fashioned from two M-80
type explosives, equivalent to half a stick of dynamite. A candle is believed to
have been used as a delayed-action fuse.

''It didn't work out that way,'' Chief Delaney said. ''The candle probably fell
over and set off the explosive fast.'' Minutes afterward, the building was
evacuated. A Morris County Sheriff's Office dog team trained in detecting
explosives searched the area, but found no other explosives.

Examinations that had been canceled were rescheduled, and graduation took place
last Wednesday.  ''I saw what was going on and I got the eeriest feeling,'' said
Elaine Maltese, who has managed the campus bookstore for 13 years.  ''And I've
been asking myself if this is going to happen again.''

The store is 25 feet from the blast site.  ''I just couldn't believe it,'' Mrs.
Maltese said. ''I didn't want to believe it. This isn't supposed to happen here.
Maybe in New York, but not here.''

One 17-year-old freshman, whose locker is six feet from the damaged area and who
asked not to be identified, called the bombing a ''stupid prank - a way to end
the year with a bang.''

Asked if she would return to classes in the fall, she said she had no choice
because ''it's the only school I can afford.'' School administrators and the
police say that, had the explosive been placed in a locker closer to an exit
leading to a main hallway, the concussion would have blown out glass windows
facing a welltraveled walkway.

Last week, the police were questioning a 20-year-old Saddle Brook woman, whom
they would not identify. Chief Delaney said that the explosion seemed to have
originated from a locker she had used during the past semester and which she
vacated the day before the incident.

Both faculty members and students said that rumors over the blast had been
rampant.  ''It was like the 'big fish' story,'' said Ann Lieger, 19, of Clifton.
''The more time that went by, the more the story got blown out of proportion.''

Dr. Steven Fischer, a horticulture instructor, said that the incident was
reminiscent of violence he had witnessed at other campuses in the 1960's, but he
noted that the one here appeared to be without reason.

''It's hard to conceive of with the type of students here,'' he said. ''The
students I come in contact with are here for an education.''

Dr. Jose Lopel-Isa, the school's acting president called the incident an
isolated one.  ''The students here are small-townish and they hold respect for
one another,'' he asserted.  Most of the college's 10,000 day and night students
live at home and commute to school, and many work part or full-time.  There is
little vandalism, Dr. Lopel-Isa said, adding that he saw no reason to readopt an
evacuation plan that had been in effect during the Vietnam War years.

Campus security officials said that an average of three bombing threats were
made a year.  Chief Delaney said that a number of students had come forward to
volunteer information about the bombing because ''these people are angry.''

''They realize that, had the bomb gone off a few minutes earlier, they or their
friends could have been maimed,'' he said. ''Students really do care, you
know.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              164 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ASIAN LENDER FACES A CUT IN DONATIONS

BYLINE: By PAMELA G. HOLLIE, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 1, Column 1; Financial Desk

LENGTH: 977 words

DATELINE: MANILA, May 16


When Indonesia, Hong Kong and South Korea made their first contributions to the
Asian Development Bank last month, it should have been a cause for celebration.

In theory, as the member nations that now rely on aid from the bank make
progress, they will begin to help the other poorer members. The new
contributions were thus confirmation that the development bank theory was
working.

As it happened, however, the bank's new president, Masao Fujioka of Japan, was
too busy to celebrate. He was working furiously to make up a shortfall caused by
the refusal of nations such as the United States, Britain and West Germany to
maintain or increase their traditional percentage shares of contributions to the
Asian Development Fund, which lends money to the region's poorest nations.

So it goes with the development bank. Like the other international organizations
that provide low-cost loans to developing nations, it is faced with a difficult
new problem: While the need for funds in the third world is growing, the
once-generous developed nations are straining to cope with their own economic
troubles, and are accordingly less willing to contribute.

$520 Million U.S. Contribution

The bank had asked the United States to contribute $903 million to the fund; it
received $520 million. Japan, by offering to match every dollar that other
countries gave in excess of their normal share, made up the difference, with the
help of Australia.

So a modestly triumphant Mr. Fujioka, at his first annual meeting last month as
president of the bank, was able to announce that it had reached its minimum
requirement of $3.2 billion. But the bank had asked its members for a total of
$4.1 billion.

The financing retreat was expected. The Reagan Administration is known to prefer
bilateral to multilateral aid, and all the multilateral institutions face the
same problem. But it was hoped that the United States would want to maintain its
22 percent share in the Asian Development Fund.

The United States's contribution, as it turned out, was only 17 percent of the
total. (In dollar terms, however, the amount of money donated did not decline.)
Apparently angered by the American attitude, the Malaysian Finance Minister,
Tengku Razaleigh Hamzah, demanded: ''Can this responsibility be simply cut off,
in total disregard for the millions in the less developed world who are
virtually condemned to continual poverty and misery?''

More Than Economic Problems

Although the economy has had an effect on the bank, its problems are as much
political as they are economic. When the bank was formed in 1966, the United
States was keenly interested in winning friends in Asia and the Pacific as its
involvement in Vietnam widened.

With the United States withdrawal from Southeast Asia in the early 1970's, and
the oil crisis of 1974, the bank started to find funding more difficult to
obtain. As the United States began to show a declining interest in the bank, the
Japanese began to assume a bigger role in leadership and financial aid.

The bank's problems go deeper, however, than any shift in emphasis by the United
States.  As one European banker put it: ''The poor are still poor. The middle
countries are being forced into a position where they are not poor enough for
soft loans but are not rich enough to afford conventional loans. One donor,
India, wants to become a borrower next year. And one major donor doesn't want to
contribute. Under these circumstances, you could question whether the Asian
Development Bank can be effective.''

The bank is asking its members to increase their commitments to its general fund
by 125 percent. Its capital now stands at $8.2 billion.

Borrowing in Capital Markets

On the strength of its reputation, certain members believe, the bank can borrow
in capital markets in Japan, West Germany, Switzerland and the Middle East
sufficient funds to lend at a $2.3 billion annual rate from 1982 to 1984.

One solution, said Mr. Fujioka, is to restructure the bank, developing areas of
co-financing with commercial banks, initiating a program of equity financing and
decreeing that only the poorest of the poor have access to the bank's soft loan
window, under which they may receive loans at an annual cost of only 1 percent.

Of the changes proposed for the bank, Mr. Fujioka seems to be most eager to
develop co-financing, a method of joint financing, usually with commercial
banks. Up to now, the bank's co-financing arrangements have been with
governments or other international financial institutions such as the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.

John A. Bohn, who represents the United States at the Asian bank, has endorsed
co-financing as a way to stimulate American investment in developing countries.
With a change in American law, he said, pension funds and life insurance
companies might be able to invest in foreign development projects.

What the Banks Want

Last year, co-financing grew 60 percent, to $627 million, or just over a third
of the $1.7 billion in total loans. One problem, however, is that the commercial
banks are not particularly interested in the same projects - roads, ports and
irrigation systems - as the development banks. And projects with a high return
are not likely to need a development bank's help.

But Mr. Fujioka is confident that his organization's research and prestige will
raise many more projects into a category where banks and private investors will
invest in ventures that they might otherwise have passed by.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              165 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 17, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CAMPUS ACTIVITIES FOCUS ON STUDENT LOANS ISSUE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section D; Page 15, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 667 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 16


Student leaders are forming two committees to campaign for Congressional
candidates who advocate tuition loans and other student aid, saying that the
issue of student financial help had restored political activism to campuses.

''Students have really responded to this issue,'' said Janice Fine, national
director of the United States Students Association, a 30-year-old lobbying
group. ''Two years from now I think the student movement in this country over
this issue is going to be tremendous.''

Officials of the association created an independent political action committee,
which they registered with the Federal Election Commission, in March after
Student Solidarity Day drew 7,500 to Washington for a demonstration against cuts
in financial aid.

According to Joe Sweeney, its treasurer, it is the first such student political
action committee.  Officials of the Coalition of Independent Colleges and
University Students have announced plans to form a second committee with similar
goals.

Targets Being Selected

Mr. Sweeney said leaders of his group had selected as targets a dozen
Congressmen with large student constituencies and would campaign for or against
them depending on their voting records on financial aid. He said that the
committee would conduct voter registration drives on campuses and hold workshops
where students can learn effective campaigning.

He said he had received calls from Congressmen asking for support and
endorsement, although he declined to name them.  ''The P.A.C. is just one area
of student activism,'' Mr. Sweeney said. ''There are traditional methods of
demonstration and they are being held on campuses all over. There is lobbying,
there is letter writing. The bottom line is that students are really concerned
that they may not be able to return to school next year and they want to be
heard. For the first time in many years they are being heard in substantial
numbers.''

On Capitol Hill, the claims of student leaders meet mixed responses.  ''There is
more concern now among students than I have seen since Vietnam,'' said
Representative Paul Simon, Democrat of Illinois.  ''But there is a perception
among my colleagues, an accurate perception, that students are largely
indifferent and that people over 65 vote more than the 18-@ to 25-year-olds.''

He Sees Parents as Formidable

He pointed out, however, that the parents of students who would have to make up
for aid cuts out of their own pocket were a formidable group of voters. ''I
would, however, say students are having more and more sway,'' he said.

According to student association figures, Representative Bobbi Fiedler,
Republican of California, has almost 50,000 students in her Southern California
district and won by 756 votes in the last election.

''She is someone the P.A.C. would look to work against,'' said Mr.  Sweeney,
although he refused to identify Congressmen who had been targeted.

Representative Fiedler is not concerned. ''I can't see them making the slightest
difference in the election,'' said her spokesman, Paul Clarke. ''There seems to
be no real interest in financial aid in her district.''

Mr. Clarke acknowledged that there had been an increase in letters of support
for financial aid flowing into the Congresswoman's office but said they were
''only form letters.''

Representative Larry J. Hopkins, Republican of Kentucky, is less inclined to
dismiss student activism. His voting record on financial aid rated a 20 out of
100 on the student organization's chart in 1980, but he has since introduced
legislation to keep major financial aid programs at their 1982 levels and has
asked the committee for endorsement, according to Mr. Sweeney.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              166 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

INDIA AND CHINA RESUME BORDER TALKS

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, May 17


India and China resumed official talks here today on the protracted border
dispute that has soured relations between the two Asian nations for more than 20
years.

An Indian spokesman said that a solution of the dispute was ''central to our
relations'' and that progress on the issue would ''have an impact on other
spheres of the relationship.''

The spokesman, Mani Shankar Aiyer, refused to say if there was any progress at
today's opening round of the talks.  The Indian-Chinese discussions marked the
start of a flurry of diplomatic activity by Prime Minister Indira Gandhi's
Government.  Indian officials are in Afghanistan for talks on economic
cooperation with leaders of the Soviet-installed Government, India and Pakistan
are to hold talks in Islamabad soon on a proposed nonagression treaty and Mrs.
Gandhi has announced plans to visit Washington and Moscow later this summer.

Two Most Populous Nations

Mr. Aiyer said Monday that the talks between the two neighbors, which are the
world's most populous nations, continued through Monday and that the two
delegations had broken up into four groups to discuss the border issue, economic
relations, scientific cooperation and cultural exchanges.

The two sides are led by Eric Gonsalves, a secretary in the Indian External
Affairs Ministry, and Fu Hao, a special envoy of the Peking Government.

The negotiations, which are scheduled to last five days, are the second round of
talks between the two sides over the disputed Himalayan border since the visit
of Huang Hua, the Chinese Foreign Minister, to India last June. The first round
was held in Peking last december.

The dispute over the frontier stems from the 1962 war when Chinese troops swept
across the Himalayas and captured large areas previously controlled by India.
They later withdrew from the eastern sector but still hold a large part of the
desolate region of Ladakh in the west.

Main Hurdle in Talks

Diplomats say that China would drop its claim to the east if India accepted
Peking's sovereignity over the captured territory in Ladakh. This is believed to
be the main hurdle in the negotiations.  India refuses to recognize what it
describes as ''China's continuing illegal occupation.''

India and China exchanged ambassadors in 1976 after a break in relations of 14
years. In 1979, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, who was then Indian Foreign Minister,
visited Peking, but cut short his trip when China attacked Vietnam.

Another twist to the troubled relations occurred in 1980 when Mr.  Huang
canceled his trip to India after Mrs. Gandhi recognized the pro-Soviet Heng
Samrin Government in Cambodia. When he came last June, the Chinese leader
advocated a broader relationship between the neighbors, saying that border talks
should be accompanied by cooperation in other fields such as culture and science
and technology.

Mr. Huang's visit was the first to India by a top Chinese leader since 1960.
However, the initial enthusiasm generated by that visit has since cooled and the
first round of talks between Indian and Chinese officials was held last December
after a three-month delay.

No breakthroughs are expected at the official talks but Mr. Fu told a banquet
here on Sunday that he wanted a ''full and frank exchange of views with our
Indian friends in the hope of achieving positive results.''

The Chinese delegation is expected to meet Mrs. Gandhi before it returns to
Peking. Mrs. Gandhi, who has been busy for the last two weeks campaigning for
her Congress Party in elections for four state legislatures, has said that she
will visit the United States late in July and the Soviet Union toward the end of
September. No dates have been announced for either trip.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: map

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              167 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 18, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

LIBERALS' FEARS ON SECURITY UNIT EASE

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 17


The creation last year of a Senate subcommittee on internal security and
terrorism alarmed many liberals who feared it might signal a revival of
inquisitorial hunts for subversives like those of the 1950's. The subcommittee
chairman, Republican Senator Jeremiah Denton of Alabama, protested, ''I am no
Joe McCarthy.''

The liberals' fears have since faded considerably. Senator Denton, a retired
admiral and a pilot who spent more than seven and a half years in a North
Vietnamese prisoner-of-war camp, has held more than 20 hearings on international
terrorism, alleged Communist manipulation of the press and the actions of
Communist intelligence agencies in America. But he has not tried to use subpoena
power to summon nonvoluntary witnesses to be interrogated on their political
associations, as Senator Joseph McCarthy, Republican of Wisconsin, did three
decades ago. Nor has Senator Denton yet introduced legislation that is
considered a major threat to civil liberties.

But the liberals' eased apprehension about Mr. Denton seems based not so much on
a revised estimate of his political orientation as on a feeling that he has not
developed the political drama, personal following and national attention that
might have excited the passions that earlier investigations did.

''He can't get his subcommittee off the ground,'' a Democratic Senator said
privately. Jerry Berman, an official of the American Civil Liberties Union in
Washington, added, ''It seems to be a play without a script.'' And a lobbyist
for a black organization called Transafrica said, ''We thought of picketing when
he scheduled hearings on Communist control of African national liberation
movements, but then decided that protest would draw more attention than the
hearings.''

Cites 'Unfair' Coverage

Such views appear to be widespread, but some officials are reluctant to express
them openly for fear they might goad Mr. Denton into more vigorous action.

Senator Denton, who stirred strong national emotions when he led home the first
contingent of Vietnam War prisoners, declaring, ''God bless America,'' is aware
of the negative assessments of his performance, but he defends his work. ''I am
satisfied that we have done an acceptable job at an acceptable pace,'' he said
in an interview. He added that he believed that the press and television
networks had ''unfairly'' failed to give his inquiries continuing and serious
coverage and, like the American public, had failed to understand the security
dangers facing the country.

The Senator's initial hearings a year ago attracted considerable attention when
several witnesses outside the Government argued that the Soviet Union and its
''surrogates'' were guilty of supporting and encouraging terrorist organizations
that were described as being part of an international network. Subsequent
hearings, however, have not attracted much coverage by the broadcasting or
printed news media.

Hearings Set for June

The next round of hearings, the Senator said, is scheduled for late June and
will focus on the so-called ''Levi guidelines,'' promulgated by President Ford's
Attorney General, Edward H. Levi. The guidelines, adopted after intrusive
investigations of radical political groups by the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, state that the F.B.I. may not investigate or monitor a political
group unless there is reasonable ground to suspect that the group intends to
engage in criminal activity.

Many of those concerned with potential terrorism or other internal security
issues consider the guidelines too restrictive. But William H. Webster, the
F.B.I. Director, has said he finds them acceptable and has testified to that
effect before Senator Denton.

''I will tend to probe rather deeply to find out whether he might not be too
inhibited about what's O.K. and not O.K. to say about what his restrictions
are,'' Mr. Denton said of Mr. Webster.

Senator Denton also is considering legislation that would make terrorism itself
a Federal crime, thereby permitting Federal prosecutions in many bombing
incidents and other cases of violence.  Other legislation under discussion would
prohibit United States citizens from making financial contributions to terrorist
organizations.

View of Irish Unit

At a hearing last year Mr. Denton made clear that he regarded the Provisional
Irish Republican Army as both a terrorist and a Marxist group. In March he
conducted hearings into the question of Soviet bloc control of black nationalist
organizations in South Africa.

Asked how much difficulty he foresaw in developing a Governmental mechanism that
could determine whether a foreign organization billing itself as a liberation
force was actually an international terrorist group, he said, ''A good bit.''
But he indicated that he would search for a formula.

Some liberals privately express concern about such proposals, but the A.C.L.U.'s
Mr. Berman was calm, recalling last year's fears. ''We didn't know where Denton
was coming from,'' he said. ''But we did know the country was far more skeptical
than it was in the 1950's, the press was far more vigilant and there was a much
more organized civil liberties community. He has not demonstrated or really
attempted to demonstrate a serious terrorist problem in the United States.''

Mr. Denton, who has also attracted attention in Washington because of his strong
advocacy of teen-age chastity, said he believed that he had won some people over
to his point of view. ''I don't fit in with the right-wing, purely fiscal
conservatives, nor am I a prude in the moral sense,'' he said. ''I don't want to
be seen that way. I don't want false perceptions to get in the way of doing a
job in the Senate.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jeremiah Denton

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              168 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


Soldier Girls, and Strength

''I wanna live a life of danger ... I wanna kill an Eye-ranian!'' The chant sent
a rumble through the Greenwich Village movie theater.  On the screen, running
toward the camera, was a platoon of Army recruits, boots thumping, arms pumping,
all women.

They are the real-life cast of ''Soldier Girls,'' a documentary film about Army
training. It will be televised tonight (8:30 P.M., Channel 13) but those who see
it at home may miss something important.

As a veteran of a peacetime Army, I was drawn to the movie to see how much basic
training has changed -and how much the Army softens the pace for women. To my
surprise, the answer in both cases was hardly at all. Most of the women seemed
to learn the same thing I did in basic: accepting military discipline is not a
mark of weakness; on the contrary, it is a way to find internal strength.

That lesson, however, seemed lost on the audience. To judge by the hisses, jeers
and mutters of the young adults around me, ''Soldier Girls''

For the Audience, The Movie Seemed To Prove Brutality
proved to them the insensitivity and dogmatism of the military. They snorted in
disgust as a drill instructor put a young black woman from rural Mississippi
through punitive pushups. They laughed sardonically at a lecture on nuclear
warfare. They winced as machine-gun bullets whizzed over the bedraggled women
crawling through the mud.  ''Brutality!'' someone exclaimed when the drill
instructors shouted insults at a young white woman.

But what brutality?  The dressings-down may have been unrelenting, but
invariably they seemed deserved. The training, while rugged, was shown to be
fair.  Trainees who learned and who helped each other were seen to succeed.  At
first the audience reaction made me uneasy, implying that young people have
turned glib, soft, prejudiced. But of course they have not. The thirst for
internal strength is probably as strong as ever.  How else explain the appeal of
testing experiences like Outward Bound? Why not, the thought arose, harness
these feelings? Why not revive the draft, but for universal service rather than
just the military?

When America abolished the draft, our aim was resoundingly to demonstrate
national disgust with the war in Vietnam. But there is no reason for Vietnam and
the draft to remain equated. It would in no way endorse a terrible war to resume
a tradition of peacetime service. On the contrary, it might endorse some
traditions and experiences of value.

A draft, or universal service, could give young Americans a way to do something
in common, to serve others and to learn for themselves, soldier boys and soldier
girls alike, the difference between brutality and strength.

JACK ROSENTHAL

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              169 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
REAGAN AND TRUMAN

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 786 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 18


In the last few days, President Reagan has proposed a formula for the reduction
of nuclear weapons, and President Brezhnev of the Soviet Union, while rejecting
Mr. Reagan's specific suggestions, has agreed that they should get together
later in the year to talk this over.

Mr. Brezhnev said that Mr. Reagan's proposals were ''insincere'' and implied
that they were a trap to give Washington a nuclear advantage, which in the
normal vindictive language of the Politburo is almost a compliment. Mr. Brezhnev
even described this exchange as a ''step forward,'' which in a way it was.

So the melody, if not the policy, on nuclear war is changing - not much but
some. Washington and Moscow have recently been modifying their ''diplomacy'' of
public insults. Mr. Reagan is no longer denouncing the Soviet leaders as a band
of godless liars and cheats who would do anything to conquer the world. And he's
no longer insisting that they get out of Afghanistan and be decent to the Poles
before he'll talk to them about the stupidity of blowing up the world.

It will no doubt be a long time, if ever, before the two nuclear giants agree on
the reduction, emplacement and development of nuclear weapons, but it would
probably be a mistake to ignore this recent tendency to reduce the level of
verbal violence.

As a basis for the nuclear negotiations, Mr. Brezhnev made some practical
maneuvers that officials here agree are at least worth discussing. They have
their doubts but also their hopes, and despite the opposition of some officials
in the Pentagon and the National Security Council, President Reagan has
apparently been persuaded that before he goes to Europe next month and starts
negotiations with Moscow in the fall, it may be wise to cool the anti-Soviet
rhetoric.

The Kremlin has a way of excusing its reckless cold war language - I listen to
Radio Moscow every night at 11 and the charges against the United States are
beyond belief - but paradoxically, it is highly sensitive and defensive about
any statement made against it by even the most junior Con-gressman, or the
silliest anti-Communist columnist.

It so happens that this week is the 35th anniversary of the day when Congress
endorsed the Truman Doctrine, which by giving economic and military aid to
Greece and Turkey started Washington's policy of ''containment'' of Soviet
military expansion.

The history of this ''doctrine of containment'' is instructive, and tells us
something about the power of words and the influence of domestic politics on
foreign policy. A few days after Franklin Roosevelt died, the then Foreign
Minister of the Soviet Union, Vyacheslav M. Molotov, called at the White House
on President Truman, who lectured him on the sins of Soviet foreign policy.

Truman quotes Mr. Molotov as saying, ''I have never been talked to like that in
my life.'' Shortly thereafter Stalin made, as James Forrestal wrote in his
diary, a declaration of war on the capitalist world. And Churchill responded
almost at once by his speech at Fulton, Mo., about ''the iron curtain'' that had
descended between East and West.

The Greek-Turkish debate in Washington also illustrates the accidents of
history. It started as a practical and limited objective in 1947 of giving aid
to these two countries to oppose a Communist takeover of Greece, which the
British no longer had the power or the funds to oppose.

However, when Secretary of State George Marshall suggested to the leaders of
Congress that they should vote funds to help Greece and Turkey, they protested
that Truman was merely trying ''to pull Britain's chestnuts out of the fire.''

At that point, Under Secretary of State Dean Acheson changed the question, and
argued that this was not merely an issue of Greece and Turkey, but a global
issue ''to support free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed
minorities or by outside pressure.''

In these sweeping and dramatic terms, the Greek-Turkish aid bill was not only
passed but became a symbol of the threat of Communist expansion.

That was also President Nixon's and President Johnson's view when they went into
the war in Vietnam and President Reagan's opinion when he came into the White
House. But now, confronted by the nuclear threat, even Mr. Reagan is beginning
to have second thoughts, and wondering, not entirely about the things that
divide Washington and Moscow, but also maybe about the only thing that unites
them - the threat and control of nuclear weapons.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              170 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 19, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

RATES ON OVERSEAS PHONE CALLS DECLINE

SECTION: Section C; Page 14, Column 5; Living Desk

LENGTH: 582 words


While prices for many services have been continuing to climb, one has come down:
overseas telephone rates.  On Monday rates for overseas calls were restructured
for the second time in a year. According to Richard Meyer of the long-lines
division of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the 35 percent
reduction last year and the new cut averaging 4.5 percent were effected to bring
the profit on overseas services, previously much higher, in line with that for
domestic operations.

When overseas calling was offered via high-frequency radio transmission in 1927
fewer than 12,000 calls were placed, at a cost of $75 for three minutes from New
York to London.

Not until the first trans-Atlantic cable was completed in 1956 and
communications satellites went into operation in 1962 did largescale
international service become possible. As a result, overseas service has been
the fastest-growing segment of A.T.&T.'s business, expanding by an average of 27
percent a year, from 4.5 million calls in 1965 to 200.4 million in 1981. By 1986
the number is expected to triple. Of the 84.4 million calls originating in the
United States, 29 percent were placed in the Greater New York area.

In 1970 New York became the first American city where customers could dial their
own overseas calls. Now approximately half of American phones can be connected
to 82 countries without going through an operator. A.T.&T. expects international
dialing service to be nationwide by the end of the decade.

It is possible to reach 99 percent of the more than 470 million phones in the
world. Only a few countries, among them Albania, North Korea and Vietnam, are
inaccessible. During lower-rate periods direct-dial calls cost up to 80 percent
less than operator-assisted ones; for example, a three-minute call to Western
Europe is $3.02, compared with $12.60 for a person-to-person call. Britain is a
mere $1.25 away for the first minute, plus 76 cents for each additional minute,
and Japan and Australia can be reached for $2.53, plus 95 cents for each
additional minute. However, there are some increases to nearby points in the
Western Hemisphere. If a phone is not in a direct-dial zone and a call does not
require special operator assistance, the same rates apply.

The country and city codes for most places, as well as full dialing
instructions, can be found in the phone book. For additional information call
800-874-4000.

Travelers calling the United States from abroad can cut costs by calling collect
or billing the call to a telephone company calling (credit) card. By doing so,
person-to-person and operator-assisted rates apply for the first three minutes,
after which the direct-dial rates take effect. Also, many foreign hotels
participate in Teleplan, limiting surcharges on calls placed from guest rooms.
Cost-conscious callers may also want to make a short call and ask to be called
back.

According to Carolyn Gardella of A.T.&T., the introduction in 1988 of a
fiber-optics trans-Atlantic cable capable of handling 36,000 simultaneous
conversations will offset the impact of inflation in overseas calling rates. One
of the company's challengers, M.C.I., hopes to begin offering overseas service
within a year at competitive rates.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              171 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 20, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

CLEAVER RETURNS TO COAST CAMPUS

BYLINE: By WALLACE TURNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 25, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 871 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 19


Eldridge Cleaver, a former Marxist who was a founder of the Black Panthers, came
to the University of California campus at Berkeley today to praise President
Reagan and the American Way.

The last time he came to the university, in 1968, his attempts to teach a class
precipitated a riot. Today's reaction was milder, although a group whose members
said they were Communists did disrupt Mr. Cleaver's speech, which was sponsored
by a branch of the Rev. Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church.

About half the 220 people in the hall hissed and booed as Mr.  Cleaver was
introduced. Then a man wearing a T-shirt labled ''Dead Kennedys,'' the name of a
punk rock band here, took the microphone to say ''Malcolm X is more alive'' than
Mr. Cleaver. He was referring to the Black Muslim leader who was slain in New
York in 1965.

One of the demonstrators attempted to strike Mr. Cleaver and campus police broke
up the scuffle.  A woman who said her name was Sonya carried a sign that said
''Eldridge Cleaver - world record breaking belly crawler.'' She said the
disruption was caused by members of the Revolutionary Communist Youth Brigade.

'Prepared for Anything'

''When you come to speak in Berkeley you have to be prepared for anything,'' Mr.
Cleaver said as he resumed his speech, a rebuttal of Communist theory.

''The youth of America is crazy because they want to destroy the country,'' he
said.  In an interview earlier today, Mr. Cleaver said, ''American Government is
the best on earth,'' and he praised Mr. Reagan as a ''hardline anti-Communist,''
adding that ''shifting power back to the states and the corporations is the best
thing he has done.''

In an open letter in 1968 to Ronald Reagan, then Governor of California, Mr.
Cleaver wrote: ''I will never submit to your demagogic machinations. I think you
are a cowardly, craven-hearted wretch.'' But Mr. Cleaver, who has become known
for his radical changes in everything from politics to religion, endorsed Mr.
Reagan's 1980 Presidential candidacy.

The speech today was sponsored by the Collegiate Association for the Research of
Principles, whose members referred to it by the acronym CARP.

The Unification Church group is registered as a student organization on the
Berkeley campus. This entitled it to ask for use of the Wheeler Auditorium
lecture hall for Mr. Cleaver's speech, which was far different from what he
planned to say in his 1968 lectures for which the university's Board of Regents
refused to grant credits. The course, which would have included other outside
speakers, was titled ''Dehumanization and Regeneration in the American Social
Order.''

A Born-Again Christian

A few weeks after the regents said Mr. Cleaver could not lecture, he jumped bail
on charges of attempted murder and assault with a deadly weapon. He went to
Canada, Mexico, Cuba, Algiera, North Korea, China, North Vietnam and France. He
returned to the United States in 1975 and was arrested on the old charges, which
were later dropped.Mr. Cleaver, 47 years old, says he is a born-again Christian
and a strong anti-Communist.

In the interview this morning at the church group's residence just off the
university campus, he said he was not a member of the Unification Church, but
that he worked with its members because ''they are anti-Communist and so am I.''

The collegiate association branch of the Unification Church, which has chapters
at many college campuses, is involved in plans for a mass rally next Saturday in
Civic Center Plaza here.  Coalition for a Free World is the umbrella
organization sponsoring the rally, which appears designed to attract
anti-Communist refugees from Cuba, Nicaragua, Vietnam and El Salvador.

Mr. Cleaver said he had founded a group called the Fourth of July Movement,
which is listed as a sponsor of Saturday's rally. Others on a letterhead of the
Coalition for a Free World are Salvadoran Patriotic Forces United, Union
Salvadoran, Cuban Independence and Democracy, Nicaraguan Democratic Union,
Action for a Free Vietnam, Nicaraguan Union for Democratic Action, American
Committee to Insure Democracy, and Nicaraguan Anti-Communists Organized, as well
as the Unification Church group.

Group's Aim Is 'Education'

Only members of the Unification Church group were present at the coalition's
Market Street offices when a reporter visited there this morning.  Margaret
Syme, speaking for the coalition, said the organizations making up the group
''met on the street'' and banded together after they discovered a common goal
''to educate the American people.''

She described the Unification Church group as ''a student movement.'' ''It is an
educational movement on college campuses,'' she said.  ''A lot of the problems
in America are coming from a lack of awareness among students of the tyranny of
Communist ideologies.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              172 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 20, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

EVENTS FORCE A CLEARER OUTLINE OF FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


For roughly a year, the world provided President Reagan an unusual grace period
in the area of foreign policy, but reality is now crowding in on him, belatedly
forcing a clearer delineation of where his Administration stands.

Over the years, friends say, one of Mr. Reagan's enviable political assets has
been his Irish luck. Rarely has this been more apparent than in foreign affairs.
Precisely as Mr. Reagan took the oath of office, the demoralizing Iranian
hostage crisis came to an end. In the succeeding months, he had no Vietnam War
to contend with, as Lyndon B. Johnson did when he took office; no Bay of Pigs
invasion to decide upon, as John F. Kennedy did in the early days of his
Presidency. In short, there was no major foreign crisis to cripple, divide or
preoccupy the Reagan Administration until the crackdown in Poland last December.

That allowed the Reagan team the luxury of concentrating on economic policy,
battling with Congress over budget cuts and taxes.  Beyond periodic anti-Soviet
and anti-Cuban rhetoric, the sale of radar planes to Saudi Arabia and the
assertive American involvement in El Salvador, foreign policy remained
relatively undefined.

Oddly, given Mr. Reagan's sharp criticism of President Carter's foreign policy
in the 1980 campaign, much of the Carter policy was quietly carried forward. In
1981, the one major new Reagan initiative was the President's proposal last Nov.
17 for the ''zero option'' in Europe: offering to forgo American medium-range
nuclear missile deployment in Europe in 1983 if the Soviet Union would pull back
its nuclear missiles in European Russia.

Falklands Forced Choice

But, lately, circumstances have forced the pace of important foreign policy
decisions and the outline of the Reagan foreign policy has become clearer.

The Falkland Islands crisis made the President and his advisers choose between
loyalty to a close European ally and the much touted anti-Communist thrust in
Latin America that banked on Argentina as a proxy force. Backing Britain was a
delicate choice that is expected to have costly repercussions on Washington's
relations with the Latins for years to come.

This spring the insistent pressures of the nuclear freeze movement have prodded
the President to accelerate the public unveiling of his formula for reducing the
strategic arsenals of the United States and Soviet Union and to press eagerly
for the arms negotiations that the Administration had previously been slow to
embrace.

Lately, too, the Administration's talk of ''linkage,'' the tying of American
involvement in arms talks or summitry to Soviet restraint around the globe, has
vanished. Indeed, the ailments of the Soviet President, Leonid I. Brezhnev, and
the prospective change in Kremlin leadership caused the President to put aside
reluctance to a summit meeting because of objections to Soviet behavior in
Afghanistan and Poland and to push for an early meeting with Mr. Brezhnev.

Palestinian Priority

In the Middle East, the Reagan State Department now has high on its agenda the
drive to develop momentum in Egyptian-Israeli talks on Palestinian autonomy,
after only desultory interest for the past year. Indeed, some officials hint
that Washington may produce some compromise ideas of its own.

On China policy, the Reagan team became so concerned that its modest continuing
supply of military spare parts to Taiwan was seriously derailing relations with
China that it sent Vice President Bush to Peking to try to repair the damage and
let Peking know of the priority it attaches to Chinese-American relations.

''There are still plenty of loose ends,'' conceded one policy maker. For
example, the Administration is now soft-pedaling its once highly vocal pressure
on Western Europe to abandon its natural gas pipeline deal with Moscow but still
lacks agreement on a concerted Western credit squeeze on Moscow and Warsaw as a
substitute tactic.

More broadly, William P. Clark, the new national security adviser, is trying to
prod the bureaucracy to produce a coherent global strategy that will match the
nation's military forces and Pentagon budgets with more clearly defined national
security objectives.

Clark's Influence Cited

Whether Mr. Clark succeeds, even the effort to formulate a rational structure
for foreign policy and for committing military resources marks a switch from the
Reagan freshman year when, high officials now concede, early Pentagon budget
increases were loosely chosen ballpark figures that became sacrosanct once the
military services had filled in their pet weapons projects.

''One reason you see more foreign policy being made in the past three or four
months than before,'' said a senior State Department official, ''is that with
Clark in place of Richard Allen, you don't have the same tensions and
turf-fighting between State and the national security staff.''

''Then, too, the political advisers around the President wanted something on
nuclear policy,'' this official added. ''The two things they see as the biggest
winners are the President's speech last November on European nuclear forces and
his Eureka College speech on strategic arms reductions. They've begun to see the
American people prefer a calmer line. Good statesmanship is good politics.''

Conservative Complaints

In all this, there is a substantial shift from the sharply ideological,
anti-detente rhetoric of the 1980 Reagan campaign to a more moderate, mainstream
foreign policy. Right-wing conservatives like Norman Podhoretz, editor of
Commentary magazine, complain that Mr. Reagan is shifting to the old line of the
Nixon, Ford and Carter Administrations. Just yesterday, for example, the
Administration went along with an Atlantic alliance commnique calling for ''a
more constructive East-West relationship aiming at genuine detente.''

In Washington's unending interest in the political pecking order, some see the
stock of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr.  bolstered as the prevailing
voice of conservative moderation, at the expense of the more hardline Defense
Secretary, Caspar W. Weinberger.

But the latest trends may less reflect Mr. Haig's personal influence than
foreign policy experience that made him more realistic than others from the
outset about the diplomatic and political realities that can no longer be
denied.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              173 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 20, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

STOCKMAN BACKS AMENDMENT FOR BALANCED BUDGET

BYLINE: By EDWARD COWAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 18, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


Speaking for President Reagan, David A.  Stockman, the budget director, today
endorsed the proposed constitutional amendment to require balanced Federal
budgets.  However, he suggested changing the language to permit suspension of
the requirement in a national emergency.

The proposed amendment now includes a provision authorizing Congress to waive
the budget-balancing requirement in time of war.  Mr. Stockman, director of the
Office of Management and Budget, suggested in testimony to a House Judiciary
subcommittee that the wording be revised to allow fiscal flexibility in the
event of ''an imminent threat to national security.''

The ''amendment ought to reflect modern practice,'' and the way foreign policy
is conducted, Mr. Stockman said, referring to the Korean and Vietnam Wars,
neither of which was formally declared by Congress. The 1961 Berlin crisis, the
Cuban missile crisis of 1962 and the Iran hostage crisis of 1979-80 have also
been cited as examples of emergencies in which the balancing requirement should
be suspended.

Some supporters of the proposal said privately that a search for new language
that would be satisfactory to Congress, the White House and the private
organizations that have backed the amendment could slow the momentum that has
been building up for approval of the measure this year. Supporters have been
cheered by statements by Mr.  Reagan, most recently in his May 1 radio speech,
in which he has expressed specific backing for the measure.

Senate Vote Could Come in June

The Senate version of the measure, Joint Resolution 58, was approved a year ago
by the Judiciary Committee and a vote by the full Senate is expected in June or
July. The House bill, Joint Resolution 350, is sponsored by two members of the
Ways and Means Committee, Barber B. Conable Jr. of upstate New York, the ranking
Republican, and Ed Jenkins, Democrat of Georgia.

Mr. Jenkins said he ''would be willing to look at suggestions'' related to Mr.
Stockman's proposed change. ''He may well have a point,'' he added.

A constitutional amendment requires approval by two-thirds of each house of
Congress and then ratification by the legislatures of threefourths of the
states, or 38.

Representative Peter W. Rodino Jr. of New Jersey, chairman of the Judiciary
Committee, led the Democrats in today's hearing as they asked Mr. Stockman
challenging and skeptical questions while the Republicans gave him comfort.

Mr. Rodino, a prominent opponent of the proposed amendment, read excerpts from
Mr. Stockman's Senate confirmation hearing on Jan. 8, 1981, in which the nominee
opposed a budget balancing requirement.

Among the excerpts Mr. Rodino read were: ''I don't think it is a very workable
solution in the operational sense,'' and, ''A better way to do it is to do it
through the budget process that we have established.''

Appearing unruffled, Mr. Stockman said he had changed his view based on 16
months as budget director. The problems that face Congress in controlling
spending ''are far greater than I thought,'' he said, and ''the problems I
foresaw and still see'' in a constitutional amendment ''are not as severe as I
once thought.''

Mr. Stockman's prepared statement was the first Administration testimony on the
issue this year. He contended that despite the Reagan Administration's efforts
to moderate Government spending, ''the Federal budget is still out of control.''


Foe Calls Measure 'Unworkable'

Representative John F. Seiberling, Democrat of Ohio, called the proposed
amendment ''an unworkable idea.'' Mr. Stockman conceded that it might not be
possible to enforce any requirement absolutely.

''It is likely that on the margin the amendment will be violated,'' he said, and
spending might exceed the authorized level ''by a few billion dollars.'' That
possibility illustrates the need for development of ''reserve budgeting or
contingency budgeting,'' Mr.  Stockman said.

Representative Henry J. Hyde, Republican of Illinois, called the proposal ''a
leap into the dark, but maybe a necessary leap.'' Sympathetically, Mr. Stockman
replied, ''Warts and all, the amendment is needed. The process has to be
changed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              174 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 22, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE FLYERS SENT HOME FROM THAILAND

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Vietnamese airmen raising aloft an official from their Government who
arrived in Bangkok to return them to Hanoi. The 12 airmen had been detained in
Thailand since their air force plane crashed there more than three months ago.
United Press International

TYPE: caption

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              175 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PEKING CAUTIONS AGAINST THE DANGER OF SPIES

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER S. WREN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 6, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 676 words

DATELINE: PEKING, May 22


The Chinese Government has cited the sensitive subject of state secrets in
explaining the prison term imposed on a newspaper editor here who leaked details
of a Communist Party session last summer to a foreign journalist.

Li Guanyi, who was editor of the biweekly China Finance and Trade News, was
convicted last February of ''betraying state secrets'' to a foreigner and was
sentenced to five years in prison. The foreigner was not named, but two sources
here said they understood that he was a Japanese journalist.

Mr. Li's crimes were said to include disclosing the time, place and agenda of
the last full party session at which Hua Guofeng was ousted as Chairman and
replaced by Hu Yaobang.

Mr. Li, who is 64 years old, was also charged with revealing the contents of
documents submitted at the session. These would have included a critical
assessment of Mao Zedong that was afterward promulgated as party doctrine.

Warning in People's Daily

People's Daily, the party newspaper, reported the case after Mr.  Li's appeal
was rejected in late March. The newspaper went on to warn the Chinese that spies
were at work in Peking's foreign community. It said that those who did not learn
from Mr. Li's experience ''themselves might possibly embark upon the criminal
path.''

Some foreign journalists and diplomats here saw the cautionary punishment of Mr.
Li as a new round in the Government's efforts to stop Chinese from talking to
them. The tactic seemed to work, as more than a few Chinese officials began
avoiding phone calls and dodging lunch invitations or requests for chats.

Still, the publicity has been awkward enough that Beijing Review, a weekly
magazine that the Government circulates abroad in five foreign languages,
devoted a full page in its latest issue to explaining why the editor was sent to
prison. In the process, it offered what may be the most candid definition yet
given outsiders of what constitutes a state secret in China.

The article, after reminding readers that the Communist Party was China's ruling
political party, said, ''Before they are made public, all of the party's private
activities are state secrets.'' The article was attributed to the review's
political editor, An Zhiguo.

1980 Criminal Code

The editor was convicted under article 186 of China's 1980 criminal code. It
says that ''any state functionary who betrays an important secret of the state
in violation of state security regulations, to a serious degree, shall be
sentenced to imprisonment for not more than seven years, or to detention, or to
deprivation of political rights.''

The last prominent offender prosecuted here was Wei Jingsheng, a 29-year-old
political dissident who was convicted in October 1979 of giving foreign
journalists information about China's punitive strike against Vietnam early that
year.

While Beijing Review insisted that Mr. Li was not punished for talking to
foreigners, the article followed a recent circular that has been read to Chinese
at their compulsory political study sessions cautioning them against
fraternizing with ''foreign guests.''

Chinese who do meet foreigners need prior permission from their work unit and
must report later on what happened. Ironically, Mr. Li was among those cleared
to meet with foreigners.

Most Foreigners Excluded

In March, Wang Renzhong, who was replaced recently as director of the party's
propaganda department, charged that some foreigners living in China were spies.
Mr. Wang, writing in the ideological journal Red Flag, said that not all
foreigners were trying to subvert Chinese but added that ''it would be naive to
believe that some of those who have sneaked in are not spies.''

Some officials have since taken pains to emphasize that most foreigners are
probably innocent, but Chinese are left to infer that it is not worth trying to
tell which are spies and which are not.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              176 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PRESIDENT APPEALS FOR G.O.P. BUDGET

BYLINE: By MICHAEL deCOURCY HINDS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 9, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 957 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 22


After the Senate passed a budget late Friday night that has the tacit support of
the Reagan Administration, the President made his first public appeal today for
the House to produce a budget resolution that would more closely conform to his
objectives.

At the end of the eighth in his series of weekend radio broadcasts, he told
listeners, ''It wouldn't hurt if you told your Congressman to vote for the
bipartisan recovery budget - but do so right away.''

Until now the President has not endorsed the Republican alternative in the House
but has lobbied members of Congress on the telephone.

Concern for G.O.P. Moderates

A reason for his cautious stance, according to some members of Congress, is that
the President did not want the measure viewed as an Administration proposal. As
such, it might have alienated moderate Republicans hoping to avoid association
with a Reaganomics budget.

The Republican-controlled Senate voted, 49 to 43, mostly along party lines, for
a $784 billion budget in the fiscal year 1983. The measure projects a record
deficit, $116 billion. The only major Democratic amendment attached to the
resolution was one adding $1.7 billion in pension funds for retired railroad
workers. The budget would freeze cost-of-living increases for other Federal
retirees and beneficiaries.

Today, Mr. Reagan called the Senate budget resolution ''another step in the
right direction.'' But, he added, '' I'll be honest with you. I would have liked
more reductions in spending.''

''In contrast to this responsible action by the Senate leadership, the
leadership of the House of Representatives is trying to spend more and to
eliminate $150 billion or so of your tax cut,'' he added.

Udall Replies for Democrats

Representative Morris K. Udall, Democrat of Arizona, responded to the radio
address. He said that President Reagan's proposal of $1,500 billion in military
spending in the next five years, without eliminating his tax-cut program, would
lead the country into ''the economic equivalent of Vietnam.''

''President Johnson made a mistake in not trying to finance Vietnam with higher
taxes,'' Mr. Udall added. ''If we actually need increased national defense,
let's be willing to pay the cost and not go out to borrow the money for that on
top of borrowing all the money for the tax cuts that we needed.''

Starting next week in the House, three major budget resolutions, four minor ones
and more than 60 amendments will be discussed. The leading contenders are the
budget resolution produced by the Democratic-controlled Budget Committee; the
''bipartisan recovery budget'' Mr. Reagan endorsed today, which was drafted by
Republican leaders with the help of conservative Democrats, and a compromise
measure drawn up by moderates of both parties.

The House votes are expected to be close. Parliamentary procedures give a slight
edge to the Democratic proposal.

Medicare Perceived as Main Issue

In a reference to the House discussions, Thomas P. O'Neill Jr., the Speaker of
the House, said today that the ''No. 1 issue in this debate will be the cruel
and unwarranted Republican attack on the Medicare program.''

Mr. O'Neill, a Massachusetts Democrat, said that the Republicans had proposed
doubling the out-of-pocket cost of medical expenses for the 29 million people
enrolled in the Medicare program. Under the proposal, a Medicare participant
would have to pay $534 next year for a two-week hospital stay. This maximum
out-of-pocket fee would be increased annually, reaching $851 in 1985.

''I am determined,'' the Speaker said, ''that America's senior citizens be
protected from this disaster.'' Anticipating the criticism, President Reagan
said in his radio address that many of the Democratic ''spending proposals are
motivated by sincere compasssion, compassion we all feel. But pretty soon, if we
aren't careful, we find ourselves inventing miracle cures for which there are no
known diseases.''

The budget measures cover the political spectrum. On each step in the direction
of the Democratic left, the proposals for taxes and domestic programs increase
and those for military spending decrease.

G.O.P. Plan by Michel and Latta

The Administration-backed House resolution is sponsored by Republican
Representatives Robert H. Michel of Illinois and Delbert L. Latta of Ohio. It
would trim the Administration's proposed military spending $22 billion in the
fiscal years 1983, 1984 and 1985, and would raise taxes by $95 billion in
comparison with the Administration's proposal to raise $44 billion in taxes.

But the Michel-Latta measure is similar in its treatment of domestic spending.
It would cut social programs and Government benefits by $118 billion, compared
with the Administration's request for a $124 billion reduction.

The compromise measure is being promoted by Democrats Les Aspin of Wisconsin and
Leon E. Panetta of California and Republican Joel Pritchard of Washington. It
would remove $46 billion from the military budget, more than twice as much as
the reductions proposed in the Michel-Latta resolution. It would raise $135
billion in new taxes and cut domestic spending and government benefit programs
$71 billion.

The House Budget Committee resolution, favored by the Democratic leadership,
cuts $47 billion in military spending, raises $147 billion in taxes and reduces
domestic spending and Government benefits by $69 billion.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              177 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE PUBS, BRITONS ARE LINKED BY CONCERN FOR PRINCE ANDREW

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 22


Because they almost always do on a Saturday, Alice and Hilda Morgan went down to
the King's Arms Pub around noon today for a gin and tonic and a chat with their
neighbors.

But the two women, sisters in their late 50's, said the tone of the place seemed
different than usual.  ''Somber,'' Hilda Morgan said as she nibbled at a
vinegar-flavored potato chip. ''I think everyone is thinking of the British boys
over there on that cold island near Argentina.''

The British public house, even more than most bars in America, is a local social
center, reflecting the tone and spirit of the neighborhood it is in.

If the mood of the King's Arms is like the mood of the other pubs around the
country today, Britain is tense and troubled as its undeclared war in the South
Atlantic moves into a deadly new phase.  But there is also a great sense of
national pride at what is seen as a principled international stand.

'Got to Be Over There'

''Sure, most people here are apprehensive about it,'' said Alistair Smithing,
who tends the bar at the King's Arms, a cheerful little place in southeast
London, with the typical stained glass windows and red-flecked wallpaper. But as
several men at the bar nodded in agreement, he continued:

''Mind you, we've got to be over there getting those Argentinians off the
islands. If we don't stop them this time, it will mean that anybody can grab up
land whenever they want.''

Like many aspects of this seven-week-old confronation in the South Atlantic, the
reaction to it in the pub this afternoon was nostalgic, with overtones of the
long-gone days when Britannia really did rule the waves.

Hilda Morgan said that when she watched the television accounts of the landing
at Port San Carlos Friday night, she wept and thought about the D-day landings
in Normandy in 1944. Her friend Charles Thomas, bringing his pint of bitter over
to the Morgans' table and pulling up a stool, added, ''It was one of those times
when you're proud to be British.''

Support for Mrs. Thatcher

The King's Arms, in a no-frills, working-class neigborhood, is not the sort of
place in which one would expect to find a lot of Conservatives. But many of its
patrons today expressed great admiration for Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher
and the tough stand she is taking in the crisis.

Nationally, her standing in the public opinion polls has soared in the last
seven weeks, and the Conservative Party now ranks first where just two months
ago it ranked third.

Still, doubt slipped into some of the conversations in the pub.  Over by the
dart board Henry Braddock, a carpenter, paused with two darts in his hand to
express a concern that has bothered many other Britons throughout the crisis.

''We don't really want the Falklands, right?'' he said. ''So what are we going
to do with them if we win them back? And what about them is worth dying for
anyway?''

In such expressions of disquiet, there are echoes of the conversations that
Americans used to have about the war in Vietnam - a confusing, growing battle in
a faraway land that few people back home had previously took note of.

Concern for Prince Andrew

In the battle for the Falklands, there is also a widening circle of personal
involvement - many thousands of Britons have some relationship with those
closely involved in the task force.

No one in the King's Arms had any friends or relatives in the South Atlantic.
But in the intensely personal way that most of the British feel about the royal
family, they all have Prince Andrew, and he figured today in their
conversations.

Prince Andrew, 22 years old, is a marine helicopter co-pilot with the task force
somewhere in the region of the Falklands. At Buckingham Palace, Queen Elizabeth
and the rest of the family are said to be ''deeply concerned'' about his
well-being, and there was concern as well at the King's Arms.

''I remember the day he was born,'' said Mr. Thomas, a bus driver with a cockney
accent. ''Last week, when they had his picture in the paper wearing his uniform,
my wife cut it out. If anything happened to him over there, there'd be an
outrage, you can bet.''

''But mind you,'' his wife said, ''it's not that he's special because he's the
prince exactly. We are concerned about all the British lads who are there. It's
a job they've got to do, I know, but I wish they'd get it over and come back
home soon.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              178 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
Refugee Groups March To Protest Communism

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 20, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 167 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 22


Two hundred demonstrators, many of them refugees from Communist countries or
members of a group affiliated with the Rev. Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church,
rallied outside City Hall today. They came to condemn what organizers described
as world ''Communist tyranny.''

The demonstrators were led by Eldridge Cleaver, the former leader of the Black
Panthers and now head of a group called the 4th of July Movement.

''I'm not doing this for money,'' Mr. Cleaver told the crowd. ''We are trying to
save the world from slipping under the boot of Communism.''

Mr. Cleaver visited Cuba, North Vietnam, Algeria and China after leaving the
United States while on bail on felony charges. He returned in 1975, and the
charges against him were dropped.

The event was World Freedom Day, a protest organized by the Coalition for a Free
World, made up of 12 groups, including members of the Collegiate Association for
Research Principles, a branch of the Unification Church, and anti-Communist
refugee groups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              179 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CASEWORKER TO HISTORY'S VICTIMS

BYLINE: By NADINE BROZAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 56, Column 3; Style Desk

LENGTH: 1136 words


When Susan Thames Pettiss was in the fifth grade in Mobile, Ala., she was asked
what she would like to be when she grew up. ''My mother wasn't a circus acrobat
or President of the country, so I said I would like to be a plain lady like she
was,'' she recalled the other day.

Dr. Pettiss, who retired this month as director of blindness prevention for
Helen Keller International because she will soon be 70, turned out in fact to be
anything but ''a plain lady.''

Participant in History

Rather, she became a witness and often a direct participant in several major
historical events of the last four decades. She was in Europe when World War II
ended and helped countless refugees build new lives. She was in South Vietnam to
plan for reconstruction of essential services ''after we had won the war,'' she
said, when the Tet offensive was started by the other side. She was a student at
an American university when the protests of the late 1960's erupted, and she
marched in opposition to the war. She was in Afghanistan, helping establish a
program to prevent blindness in children, when Soviet troops invaded.

That was not the kind of life to be expected of girls growing up in the Deep
South more than half a century ago. ''The pattern was to make a debut, go to
college, get married and have children,'' Dr.  Pettiss said before going to
Switzerland to speak on blindness.

She graduated from the University of Alabama in 1933, was married briefly but
had no children. ''I got out of college in the Depression, and the only thing to
do was to get a job in relief,'' she said. ''So I worked with the Mobile
department of public welfare and with a children's casework service. I was the
caseworker.''

Assigned to Germany

In 1945 she joined the United Nations Relief and Rehabilitation Administration
and was assigned to the American-held zone of Germany.

''I was part of a team to operate the displaced persons' camps and was also on a
search committee to reunite children who had been brought to Germany from other
countries with their parents,'' she said. ''They had been deported in groups to
Germany to be 'indoctrinated into German policy.' ''

She also worked with Jewish children; after the war they were being organized
into groups to go to kibbutzim in Palestine. ''We fed them, clothed them and
then closed our eyes when we let them go illegally,'' Dr. Pettiss said.

When the United Nations effort was disbanded in 1947, she decided to come home
''to tidy up my social-work education,'' and she enrolled in the New York School
of Social Work at Columbia University. Then for eight years she served as a
resettlement officer with the International Refugee Organization in Washington.

''That was the time during which it became obvious that the Latvians,
Lithuanians and Poles were not going home, so plans had to be made,'' she said.
''Over one million were brought to the United States all with sponsors and
homes.''

''Part of my job was to make plans for handicapped refugees,'' she continued.
''There were not many countries that wanted them, so we took in a significant
number of blind and physically disabled people.''

In one of her more bureaucratically difficult assignments, she became involved
with a mission to get White Russian and Jewish refugees out of Shanghai when the
Communist regime took over in China. ''We got them out to Samar, an island in
the Philippines, and then arranged to take them to camps in Germany,'' she said.

But there was no American immigration office to process papers on Samar, so they
had to go to the United States before proceeding to Germany.

''One of my jobs was to accompany the trains from California to the East,'' she
said. ''There is nothing comparable to seeing the country through the eyes of a
refugee who would give anything to live here.''

Several years later, she turned her attention to the plight of children born to
women who had had liaisons with American servicemen. ''Our agency, the
International Social Service, played an important role in the passage of special
immigration laws permitting those children to come here for adoption while
protecting them from blackmarket placement procedures,'' she said.

In 1963 she took yet another direction, joining the Department of Health,
Education and Welfare as an international social-welfare adviser. On loan to the
Agency for International Development, she was appointed to the task force that
went to South Vietnam in 1967 to plan for postwar rehabilitation. ''We came back
after the Tet offensive, and all our recommendations for the care of the aged,
the widowed, the orphaned, for day-care centers and hospitals went down the
drain,'' she said.

To read and think, she decided to take a year at Brandeis University and wound
up getting her doctorate there. She also became an active participant in the
student protests against American involvement in Vietnam. ''There I was,'' she
said with a bemused smile, ''a white-haired student marching on the Boston
Commons and then on Washington.''

Ten years ago she learned that Helen Keller International, a voluntary
organization, was about to organize a blindness-prevention program, and she
became its director.

The program concentrated on xerophthalmia, a sight disease that in its advanced
stage is known as nutritional blindness. Associated with malnutrition and caused
by a deficiency of vitamin A, the disease strikes children between the ages of 6
months and 6 years.  Prevention - and in many cases reversal or at least
diminution of the condition - is available through the administration twice a
year of a concentrated dose of vitamin A. One dose costs less than two cents.
Helen Keller International now assists three countries - Indonesia, Bangladesh
and Haiti - in vitamin distribution.

It is estimated that more than 10 million children contract xerophthalmia each
year, 5 million of them in Asia. Dr. Pettiss remembers certain ones. ''It's one
thing to talk about 1,000 blind children, it's another thing to look in the face
of a child who may be too young to walk or talk and know that he will never be
able to see his mother's face or the landscape,'' she said.

Asked what she sees ahead based on the past, she reflected: ''I'm highly
optimistic, not about the world but about the capacity of individuals to adapt
and survive. I have felt this way since working with people coming out of
concentration camps. A human being has a resiliency that ought not be
underestimated.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Susan Thomas

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              180 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SMALL, SAVAGE FALKLANDS WAR HOLDS MAJOR LESSONS

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words


LONDON PRIMARY principles of modern war on which vast modern military
establishments are based are under test in the battle raging on, above and
around the Falkland Islands. The outcome of this small, savage war between
Britain and Argentina can answer some of the rude questions that trouble the
mystique of sea power and perhaps much more.

The Royal Navy has exercised its power traditionally, projecting strength 8,000
miles from home bases to enforce a blockade and support an invasion. The
operation differs little in concept, but much in strength, from the amphibious
campaigns waged by Adm. Chester Nimitz and Gen. Douglas MacArthur four decades
ago in the Pacific.  The essential difference lies in the introduction of
radar-controlled missiles and torpedoes. These Exocets, Stingrays, Rolands and
Rapiers are the highly sophisticated descendants of the ''smart bombs'' first
used in Vietnam and the second generation of missiles employed in the
Arab-Israeli war of 1973.

The question they pose is simple: Can modern warships armed with defensive
missiles survive mass attack by submarines, aircraft and surface ships armed
with offensive missiles? And almost as important, can British ground forces
equipped with surface-to-air and surfaceto-surface missiles for use against
enemy aircraft and tanks overcome numerical inferiority to defeat a larger
force?

Beyond the iron clamor of the fighting, another military theory is being tested.
The British forces, are volunteer professionals. Will high standards of
training, coupled with dearly bought tradition, enable them to outfight
Argentina's forces, which are largely made up of conscripts? Sixty-nine percent
of its army and about half the navy and air force are draftees. This is a test
of great importance to Britain, America and Canada, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization powers that rely entirely on volunteers.

Britain's classic use of sea power to blockade the Falkland Islands cost the
navy one ship, the destroyer Sheffield. Support of the landings last week, with
destroyers and frigates moving inshore to bring their 4.5 inch guns to bear on
Argentine fortifications, cost another ship, the frigate Ardent.

Balanced against these losses was the sheer size of the task force - 20 to 25
warships supported by 46 merchantmen, from the 1,600 ton tug Salvageman to the
67,000 ton Queen Elizabeth II carrying the Fifth Brigade of the British Army.
Also on the same side of the balance sheet was the success, despite persistent
attacks by Argentine Mirage III's, A-4 Skyhawks and Italian-built Macchis, in
landing 2,500 marines and paratroops, light tanks and armored cars, Rapier
antiaircraft missiles, a regiment of 105 millimeter guns, a radar unit and
signals sections.

From the perspective of military history, the second day of a landing is likely
to be as hazardous and more decisive than the first. It is in those 24 hours
that defending forces can assemble for a major counterattack supported by air
power.

Two factors are likely to be of paramount importance. One is the ability of
Argentine planes and ships to operate in the heavy clouds that were expected to
envelop the Falklands, after the clear weather prevailing during the landings.
Both forces have been trained for operations above and close to the mainland.
They must now venture out in appalling weather.

Paradoxically, the Royal Navy and its seamen and airmen are more accustomed to
this sort of weather than the Argentines. For 10 years, Britain's share in
NATO's naval defense has been concentrated on the North Atlantic, particularly
around Greenland, Iceland and the Faroe Islands, where the weather is as bad as
anything the Falklands can provide.

A second factor is the resilience of the Argentine forces, particuarly on East
Falkland Island. They include the garrison at Port Stanley of about 5,000 men
and that at Darwin of roughly 1,100.  Neither force intervened effectively on
the first day and if they are to have an impact, they must move soon. But, if
the British buildup continues, movement on the ground will be met by attacks
from Harriers and helicopter gunships and, for any force approaching Port San
Carlos from Port Darwin, the terrain at this time of year is watersoaked. ''A
Marine can march 20 miles in a day,'' a British officer said, ''but the
Argentines will be lucky if they can make 10 miles over that ground in one of
their armored personnel carriers.''

Argentine freedom of action to counterattack is likely to be curtailed if the
commanders are convinced that the landing at Port San Carlos is only one of a
number and that to leave Darwin or Port Stanley uncovered could invite further
British attacks at either or both positions. Finally, the commanders must choose
between a counterattack over open ground, inviting air action, and remaining in
defensive positions to await British attack.
Argentines Cannot Wait

Argentina's best tactic, in the eyes of NATO officers, lies in unrelenting air
attack on the British fleet supporting the ground forces. Some neutral naval
officers also believe that ''in the worst case'' the Argentine navy, which by
yestererday had played only a minor role, would sally out of its mainland bases
to attack.

This would reproduce the situation that prevailed last month when the navy
assembled in three divisions and made for the British fleet. That attack was
broken off when the heaviest surface combatant, the cruiser General Belgrano,
was sunk by a British submarine. There are circumstances, these sources
emphasized, when the Argentine navy, which played a major role in the invasion
of the Falklands seven weeks ago, might feel bound by honor and duty to attack.

The air force, however, is best suited to the role of opening a
counteroffensive. It was not immediately known whether its Frenchbuilt Super
Etendard fighter-bombers, which carry Exocet missiles, were employed in the
early fighting. They may have been kept out of combat and the major attack role
given to Mirages and A-4's because the air command wanted to save them for a
climactic attack.

The Argentines cannot wait too long. The weather, which was passable on Friday
and early Saturday, was closing in. British airmen have noted that Argentine
planes, especially the A-4's which have no radar, appear to have navigational
difficulty in heavy clouds.  Although Buenos Aires has never confirmed them,
reports were circulating at NATO headquarters of significant Argentine losses of
aircraft due to navigational errors during the last two weeks.

Two days ago, the British were under the pressure of time. Now the burden has
shifted to the Argentine forces. To reverse the situation, they must react
rapidly and effectively. If they do not, the course of war will favor the
British and sea power, although battered, will have survived to fight again.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Margaret Thatcher photo of Leopoldo Galtieri,
Adm. Jorge Issac Anaya photo of British soldiers raising the Union Jack on
Falklands

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              181 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Foreign Affairs;
THE VALUE OF THE U.N.

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section 4; Page 23, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 878 words


Paris, May 22 - It has come to seem natural that the United Nations should be as
busy talking as Britain and Argentina are busy fighting in the Falklands. This
is a moment to consider the value of the world organization.

For some, it is evidence that U.N. gabble is a failure. Certainly, initial high
hopes for a world order where nations would settle their disputes without force
have been dismally disappointed.

A combination of big-power cynicism and small state hypocrisy and log-rolling
have traduced the aspirations of the drafters of the United Nations Charter.
Yet, fresh from World War II, they were not innocents who relied on good will
and moral argument to resolve conflict.

There were long debates about how to provide military teeth, a police force to
impose what were expected to be evolving international rules. But it was never
possible to establish a standing army.

Two attempts to send the United Nations into battle - Korea and Zaire (Congo
then) - discouraged further ideas that the organization might force compliance
to a higher rule of law. Nor have political condemnation or economic sanctions
proved effective.

Still, the Falklands dispute shows how far attitudes have begun to be permeated
by the ideas underlying the U.N. It was only in this century that the very
notion of war changed from a glorious, exhilarating test of man's highest
capacities to an occasional tragic necessity. Britain has gone to war for no
special national interest, neither conquest nor security, but in defense of a
general principle against military seizure of land.

Whether this particular game will be worth the candle is another matter. In the
gradual way human perceptions shift, the United Nations has helped spread
recognition that violation of that principle is a danger for all, even if some
get away with it. No human laws are perfectly enforced, yet they remain valid.

It is even considered essential nowadays to advance some kind of historical
claim, no matter how involuted, as justification for grabbing territory. Being
able and eager is no longer enough.

Self-determination is another U.N. notion, urged on Europe a generation earlier
by President Woodrow Wilson, and now endorsed, though with some ugly reserves,
worldwide. Perhaps it has been carried to excess at times. Certainly it has
complicated the world system. But it has been largely accepted as a superior
rule to the dominion of strength.

Soviet support for Argentina's stand on the Falklands should not be surprising,
despite sharp political and ideological differences, and it probably is not only
opportunistic. The Soviet Union kept lands it conquered from most of its
neighbors in World War II.

There is a long list of borders revised to Soviet benefit: Finland, the Baltic
states, Poland, Germany, Czechoslovakia, Rumania and Japan. Though it supports
''wars of liberation'' in areas beyond its control, Moscow opposes any thought
of self-determination for peoples it dominates. The Kremlin continues to fight
in Afghanistan and to support Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia.

The United Nations has never been able to prevent or reverse these challenges to
principle. But it has broadened a sense of the value of asserting it in a world
where so many are weak and so few are mighty.

Unfortunately, the U.N. has also enhanced the idea of national sovereignty, a
contradiction of its original aim since a world order based on law and
cooperation would inevitably limit national rights.  It went a step beyond the
impotent League of Nations, but it also encouraged a proliferation of adamant,
self righteous states.

With all its failings, its pettiness at times, the United Nations is still the
place the world turns to when war comes because it still represents the goal of
peace. There isn't anywhere else, because there isn't a regular concert of
powers, and without one the U.N. can only achieve small successes.

If it has put no muscle on the arm of the law, it has developed the idea of
peacekeeping forces to maintain fragile settlements when conflict is halted
short of unreachable victory. It's hard to imagine what might have taken their
place in Cyprus and the Middle East. Even the new Sinai Multinational Force,
which couldn't be established under the U.N. because so many states oppose Camp
David, was clearly inspired by U.N. experience. So are the attempts at regional
peacekeeping, in Chad for example.

There are many reasons to be disillusioned with the world organization, which
most of the time remains a forum where nations plead their demands instead of a
focus for the communal needs of mankind. But given the long reign of warfare, it
has managed in a rather short time to move public perceptions on the proper
relation among societies.

Now, if it can help settle the Falklands dispute under its own flag, perhaps
with British and Argentine flags alongside, it will advance its claim to being
the slow, but most worthy staircase up from the prehistoric pit of war.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              182 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 23, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

COSMOPOLITAN CITY OF SMALL WORLDS

SECTION: Section 10; Page 14, Column 1; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 3274 words


DAVID HARRIS is a writer who lives in San Francisco. His latest book, ''Dreams
Die Hard: Three Men's Journey through the Sixties,'' is forthcoming from St.
Martin's/ Marek.

By DAVID HARRIS

W hen visiting San Francisco with Manhattan as a reference point, it must be
remembered that the city's size hardly comes close to matching its notoriety.
Both its newspapers and government stand out as ironic and occasionally
embarrassing small-town counterpoints to what is otherwise an intensely
cosmopolitan place. Having myself arrived here 20 years ago after an
All-American adolescence in California's agricultural provinces, I must confess
that those provincialisms did not meet my eye right away. I was taken by San
Francisco's beauty, as is everyone, but more than anything else I was taken by
its attitude.

To describe this city as ''tolerant'' only scratches the surface.  America's
principal port to the Pacific, San Francisco has always been both the last
touchstone for journeys to the unknown and a refuge for people seeking to be
more different than they could have been anywhere else. Traditional mores here
have always prescribed that peoples' civic value be calculated not so much on
their activity as on the style with which they do it, and so San Francisco has a
long history of lionizing eccentrics, being kind to drunks, tolerating tourists,
nurturing aberrants and giving serious consideration to even the most wacko of
world views.

There is a strong case to be made that San Francisco could not live with itself
without such an open-ended approach to reality. As is quickly apparent to anyone
who visits, there is much differentness here. San Francisco has more Chinese,
more homosexuals, and possibly more aspiring writers as a percentage of its
population than any other city in the United States. It may also have more
Nicaraguans, psychoanalysts, lawyers, Guatemalans, Filipinos, masseurs, M.D.'s,
free-lance philosophers and natives of Samoa. Added to that are significant
pockets of Irish, Italians, Pakistanis, Palestinians, Peruvians, Vietnamese,
Greeks, Cambodians, Japanese, Russians, Koreans, Salvadorans and Eskimos. As
anyone from New York City is well aware, the consequent electricity is what
gives urban life a good name. That it happens in such a small and pretty place
is remarkable. That it happens with as much relative peace and mutual
appreciation as it does is doubly so. For the tourist, that attitude makes San
Francisco an easy place to see. It also explains why those of us who live here
find it hard to leave.  A Place To Begin

San Francisco is a succession of hills and valleys occupying the northern tip of
the peninsula that forms the southern headland of San Francisco Bay. Each peak,
slope and gulch has a name and a distinct None of them is by itself San
Francisco, but you have to start somewhere. My favorite is the neighborhood
where Telegraph Hill and North Beach flow into each other in the city's
northeast corner.  Telegraph Hill was settled in the 1860's and North Beach
really used to be a beach until that indentation in the shoreline was filled in
and San Francisco's financial district built on the fill. This neighborhood is
north of Chinatown, west of the Embarcadero, east of Russian Hill and south of
Fisherman's Wharf. Its best known intersection is Broadway and Columbus but that
particular corner has been given over for the last 20 years or so to tourists
who are interested in ''he and she love acts'' and should not be taken
seriously.

The true heart of the neighborhood is Washington Square, a small, grassy park
bounded by Columbus, Union, Stockton and Filbert Streets. Late on a Sunday
morning, representatives of all the neighborhood's various strands usually put
in an appearance in the square. Once a solidly blue-collar Italian place, the
Filbert side of Washington Square is still dominated by the Peter and Paul
Cathedral and the Union Street side by the Fior D'Italia restaurant (dinner
about $7 to $15 a person without wine). The smoke shop next door to the Fior
serves excellent espresso and cappucino. The latest ethnic addition to this part
of town is overflow from Chinatown.

Sandwiched between the waves of Chinese and Italians is a history of bohemianism
kicked off by North Beach's Beatnik era in the late 1950's. Today's incarnation
of that tradition has drawn a population of young professional and literary
types who use the square to walk their dogs or lie in the sun and read. Several
times a year, the San Francisco Mime Troup and the Pickle Family Circus, two of
the city's best outdoor entertainments, perform in Washington Square and, in
September, the square houses the reviewing stands for the Columbus Day Parade.

The nicest recent addition to the park's periphery is the Washington Square Inn,
a former apartment house on the corner of Stockton and Filbert that has been
made over into an exceedingly pleasant and fashionable bed and breakfast
(croissants, coffee, fruit juice) establishment running $60 to $115 a day. My
favorite restaurant in this part of town is the Washington Square Bar and Grill
across Columbus. It is like a transplanted P. J. Clark's and the crowd is
usually sprinkled with journalists and writers of all stripes (lunch about $5 to
$15 a person, dinner slightly more). The best Italian food is either the Cafe
Sport on Green (lunch $4 to $6 each, dinner $8 to $16), the North Beach
Restaurant on Stockton (lunch $4 to $9, dinner $12 to $22), or Amelio's on
Powell, where a full dinner of appetizer, salad, entree, desert and coffee, but
not including wine, is about $32 to $35 a person.

Grant Avenue is the spine of the neighborhood's street life and the best place
to watch it from is either the veranda of the Savoy Tivoli or behind the window
of the Cafe Trieste. If you are looking for something to do after dinner, walk
down Columbus past Broadway to the City Lights Bookstore, the center of
beatnikism while it lasted and something of a historical landmark that still
evokes memories of Ginsberg and Kerouac.

If it is before 9 P.M., walk back up to Broadway and have a drink at Enrico's.
Its outdoor tables afford a good view of tourists going next door to
Finnochio's, the nation's oldest continuous transvestite floor show. If after 9
P.M., proceed across the street from City Lights to Tosca's. The juke box there
plays nothing but opera. Its ambiance has been somewhat diminished since a disco
moved into the building's basement, but if you sit at the bar, it is still worth
going. If after all this, you want some exercise, walk back past Washington
Square to Lombard and climb the hill to Coit Tower. It is as good a single view
as exists in this city. The climb is arduous but the top of Telegraph Hill is an
exhilarating place to catch your breath.  Four Excursions

Wherever you begin, San Francisco is a city made for excursions.  Here are four
I recommend.  1. Stockton Street From Sacramento north. Grant, one street east,
is Chinatown's principal tourist thoroughfare, but on Stockton it is possible to
get a sense of the Chinese as more than knick-knack salesmen. Chinatown is far
and away the city's most densely populated region and the crush inundates
Stockton every morning as residents jam the fish and vegetable markets. Crates
of live frogs are stacked on the curb. At the Canton and Lee Sang fish markets,
buyers stand four deep examining the day's catch and it is doubtful you'll hear
any English spoken. In such an atmosphere, even the fish seem interesting.

If you get hungry, buy a box of dim sum to go ($1.50 to $3) at the Asia Gardens
just down from Stockton on Pacific and proceed across Broadway to Washington
Square and eat them on one of the benches. If you prefer Italian pastry, stop at
the Victoria Bakery and do the same thing. If you've developed an appetite for a
standard American breakfast, the U.S. Cafe near Stockton's corner with Columbus
is good, relatively cheap at $2.50 to $4, and will give you another look at the
denizens of North Beach and Telegraph Hill. Mama's, on Washington Square next to
the Cathedral, is cuter, but lacks the U.S. Cafe's character. A breakfast there
will run from $3 to $8.

From Washington Square, keep following Stockton through the lower reaches of
Telegraph Hill and on down the slope to the waterfront. At the end of Stockton
Street, you will encounter Pier 39, the city's latest development to siphon off
tourist money. An old shipping pier that has been transformed into two levels of
shops, boutiques, fast food stands, and restaurants, Pier 39 contains a plethora
of options surrounded on three sides by water but, from a local's point of view,
as is the case with most enterprises in this city targeted exclusively on
tourists, almost everything at Pier 39 is overpriced and overdone. The fun house
is the only permanent part of Pier 39 I can recommend, and that largely because
the city's once great carnival, Playland at the Beach, has been long since torn
down in a classic example of civic idiocy. If you walk as far as Pier 39,
however, you will at least stand a chance of finding a cab for the ride back.

2. The Hyde Street Cable Car to Aquatic Park. I have not ridden a cable car in
15 years, but you will probably want to. If you do, take the Hyde line that ends
at a strip of grass on the city's northern shoreline. But be warned: the whole
cable car system is going out of service Sept. 22 for much-needed renovation and
won't return until June 1984 at the earliest.

To the east is the Cannery and Fisherman's Wharf. To the west is Ghirardelli
Square. Go along Ghirardelli's lower edge and by the time you reach the end,
you're at Aquatic Park, a strip of beach that curves around an inlet whose mouth
is half-spanned by the Muni Pier.  Take the stairs between the grandstand and
the Maritime Museum and, once down on the sand, take a good look at the museum.
It is small and the exhibits uninspired, but the building itself has the
cleanest of 1930's lines and is totally appropriate to its setting, so much so
that my mind has almost ceased to distinguish it from the beach it borders.
Following the walkway toward the pier, you may see swimmers training for the
annual swim around Alcatraz. Don't be fooled into thinking about swimming
yourself. The water is numbing, even on the warmest of San Francisco days.

The Muni Pier begins right after the Sea Scout clubhouse. You'll find no
amusements here. This is an amateur fisherman's pier and a wide cross-section of
the city's residents spend their weekends on Muni trying to beach a meal or two.
The persistent succeed and, from my observation, the Chinese and the Samoans
usually end up with the most fish. A walk out the pier provides a magnificent
view of the bay and the Golden Gate. On any weekend, sailboats are racing and
from 2 P.M. until the sun goes down beat their way back upwind toward the Marin
County yacht harbors.

As you leave the pier, a paved trail leads up the hill to the right. If you take
it, you're in Fort Mason, a former Army base now incorporated in the Golden Gate
National Recreation Area. Its former warehouses and barracks have been given
over to nonprofit groups and the courtyards between them host events ranging
from exhibitions of historic farm machinery to Vietnam Veterans fairs. The
westernmost row of buildings also houses Greens, one of the city's best
restaurants. Run by San Francisco's Zen Center, its breads and vegetarian
cuisine are among the finest in the country, its views of the bay extraordinary,
and it encourages diners to sit and talk long after they've finished eating.
Greens is also the hardest table in town to get and currently is taking
reservations with a two-month lead time. A lunch at Greens is $3 to $7 and
dinner, from a set menu on Friday and Saturday only, $18. If you can't secure a
table, return to Ghirardelli Square.

Ghirardelli is a shopping and restaurant complex built on three levels in and
around an enormous old brick chocolate factory on the side of the slope
bordering the beach. It is an example of commercial restoration at its best. The
options are abundant and they are by and large of high quality. Evidence can be
seen in the large number of San Francisco residents who frequent it. If you are
at Ghirardelli and hungry, Modesto Lanzone's on the main plaza has excellent
Italian food at $12 to $15 a person at lunch, $15 to $20 at dinner. If you'd
like to see the city's latest Manhattan transplant, try Maxwell's Plum, if you
can get a table by the windows overlooking Aquatic Park. (Lunch $8 to $14,
dinner $15 to $25.)

3. Polk Street from Geary north. San Francisco's tolerance of open homosexuality
is in the foreground of its current national image.  South of Geary, where Polk
abuts the Tenderloin, is better to avoid, but northward is a pleasant walk. As
with the Castro district, Polk's street life is constant and uninhibited. You
will pass a couple of excellent small bookstores and a melange of restaurants,
bars, and clothing stores. If you want to eat on this stretch of Polk, try
Swann's Oyster Bar for seafood in an informal setting at $2 to $5 apiece.

I like to keep walking north across Broadway where Lower Polk gives way to Upper
Polk. Upper Polk provides the shopping and restaurant district for the western
slope of Russian Hill. It has several fine bars and a selection of French,
Chinese and Vietnamese restaurants.  In the 2300 block, you'll find Casablanca,
in my opinion the best dinner spot on either end of Polk. Both the poached
salmon and pepper steak are as good as can be had anywhere in town. It serves
dinner only ($8 to $16).

4. Rent a car for at least a day. It is the best way to experience the full
sweep of San Francisco's natural setting. Be sure you have a good map and don't
be intimidated by the hills. They are easier to navigate than you might imagine.

I would begin by driving through Golden Gate Park. Though more run down than it
once was, it is still one of the world's premier urban green spaces. If you want
to stop, go to the Academy of Sciences. It is tiny by international standards,
but its exhibits are well done.  Traveling national exhibits like Tut and
Tiffany are shown at the De Young Museum, which faces the Academy across an open
area crowned with a band shell at its west end. During the weekend, there are
regular musical performances that make a pleasant background for a picnic.

From Golden Gate Park, follow 19th Avenue north toward the Golden Gate Bridge,
take the last exit before the bridge itself, and wind down through the Presidio,
following the signs to Fort Point. Part of the Golden Gate National Recreation
Area, three-story brick Fort Point was the main American defensive installation
at the bay's mouth for the last half of the 19th century. It is now completely
restored and a historical monument that hosts both permanent and visiting
military history exhibitions. Once you've seen the fort itself, walk around its
base to the westernmost edge of the rock plateau it sits on. This is an
inevitably windy spot and the waves crashing below will give you strong hints
about the power of the ocean opening up to the windward. Then look up at the
bridge. This is still one of the world's loveliest spans. Driving across, it is
easy to forget what it took to build and the perspective from Fort Point is the
best reminder I know.

From Fort Point, get back on Highway 101 North, cross the bridge, take the first
exit on the other side and follow the signs to the Golden Gate National
Recreation Area. This piece of the G.G.N.R.A.  was once a military reservation
known as Fort Cronkhite and is entered through a long one-way tunnel controlled
by a stop light.  When you emerge from the tunnel, you will be in a valley that
wriggles toward the ocean and is flanked by a high ridge on its left. Take one
of the roads that climbs the ridge and explore. This is the bay's northern
headland and the view from almost anywhere along it is panoramic. My favorite
spot in this high ground is the abandoned concrete bunker complex and artillery
emplacement designed to fend off the expected Japanese invasion during the first
six months of World War II. The road that winds along the bay side of the ridge
will take you back to the bridge and along it are vantage points commanding the
entire north end of San Francisco, as well as the Golden Gate.  If You Have Time

Mission Street within four blocks either way of 24th was formerly working-class
Irish and is now solidly Central and South American.  The street life is
continuous and the Mission District offers a wide variety of Latin American
food.

The homes in Pacific Heights (Washington between Webster and the Presidio) are
among the most imposing - and expensive - in the country.

The bay is truly impressive and any of the blue or red cruise ships or ferry
lines from Fisherman's Wharf or the Ferry Building will do.  Perhaps the best of
the tours is the one of Alcatraz, but it is often booked up weeks ahead. Call
415-546-2805. If you have time on your hands afterward, tour the Balclutha, an
old square-rigger turned museum on Fisherman's Wharf.

Haight Street between Masonic and Golden Gate Park gave birth to the hippies and
was the scene of the Summer of Love in 1967. By 1970, the hippies had left and
the neighborhood was buried under an onslaught of lowriders and methedrine
addicts. It has revived itself over the last few years and seems destined to be
the next new shopping and eating thoroughfare.  Inside Tips

If you don't want to sound like a tourist, don't call it ''Frisco.'' If you say
''the City,'' natives will know what you mean and may even mistake you for one
of them.

Don't buy sourdough bread at the airport. It's a dead giveaway.  Give San
Francisco its due. Those of us who live here are used to being dismissed at
points east as no more than an outpost of oddities. Though being seen through
the prism of our latest outrageous fringe is obviously something San Franciscans
have come to expect, we resent it on our home turf. Being tolerant and being
serious about what you do are by no means antithetical. Among the area's more
recent contributions to the culture at large are the bank card, the space
shuttle, the microprocessor industry, the artificial memory revolution, the
physical fitness craze, Godfathers I and II, Star Wars, Mork, the heart-lung
transplant, the human potential movement, the T-Formation, the video game, and
the Sierra Club. We like to think the rest of the country would be lost without
us.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Telegraph Hill (page 16) Photo of Transamerica
Pyramid

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              183 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

SALVADOR BLOCKS THE ENFORCEMENT OF LAND PROGRAM

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR, May 23


In less than one month as a legislative body, El Salvador's Constituent Assembly
has blocked most of the country's land redistribution effort from being carried
out.

In its first session, the Assembly enacted legislation that effectively annulled
the plan of the previous Government to make peasant cooperatives out of 1,700 of
the country's large farms.

And last Thursday, the rightist-dominated Assembly suspended the ''land to the
tiller law,'' which permitted peasants to buy the small plots they were working
as tenant farmers or sharecroppers. The suspension was for one crop year, which
for sugar cane, one of El Salvador's main crops, is four calendar years.

Suspension 'a Political Maneuver'

In his homily today, the Acting Archbishop of San Salvador, Arturo Rivera Damas,
indicated that the legislators had wanted to repeal the land to the tiller law.
He called the suspension a ''political maneuver'' designed ''to leave open the
possibility of North American aid, which is conditioned on the reforms not being
halted.''

In Washington on Thursday, the Foreign Relations Committee was told by Senator
Charles H. Percy, its chairman, that ''not one cent of funds shall go to the
Government of El Salvador'' if it suspended the land redistribution program. The
Reagan Administration has proposed $128 million in economic aid for El Salvador
through its plan to assist countries in the Caribbean region as well as $60
million in military aid.

Five right-wing parties won 36 of the 60 Assembly seats in elections March 28,
while the centrist Christian Democratic Party won the rest. The Assembly later
elected Alvaro Alfredo Magana, a centrist with no formal party affiliation, to
be provisional President of the country. He succeeded Jose Napoleon Duarte of
the Christian Democrats, who had headed a military-civilian junta for the last
two years.

El Salvador's land redistribution program was begun two years ago in an effort
to persuade peasants not to support the leftist-led revolution. Before the
enactment of the program, fewer than 2 percent of the population controlled more
than half of this tiny nation's fertile farm land.

Program Acclaimed by Reagan

The program was hailed as ''unprecedented'' by President Reagan recently and as
''the most revolutionary land reform in Latin American history'' by the American
Ambassador, Deane R. Hinton.

Under the first phase of the program all farms larger than 1,235 acres were
expropriated, with compensation, and converted to peasant cooperatives. The
second phase, which was announced but never carried out, provided for similar
expropriatiion and conversion of farms larger than 247 acres. And the third
phase, which is known as the land to the tiller law, decreed that peasants could
buy up to 17 acres of the land they had been working as tenant farmers or
sharecroppers.

The second and third phases have been affected by the Assembly's actions.
Eighty-five percent of the peasant families who were to benefit from the
agrarian program as originally announced live or work on the phase 2 and phase 3
properties. These farms contain 70 percent of the land included in the original
redistribution plan.

As explained by an agrarian analyst and a lawyer, the Assembly acted against the
second phase when it repealed a law enacted by the previous Government that
permitted expropriations. Since phase 2 had not been carried out, it is no
longer constitutionally possible to expropriate those lands for conversion to
peasant cooperatives.

In terms of a more equitable distribution of the country's wealth and income,
the second phase was the most important element of the agrarian program. In El
Salvador's agricultural-based economy, wealth has long been measured primarily
by the amount of land one owns. Coffee, cotton and sugar bring in about 75
percent of the country's export earnings and phase 2 farms accounted for about
threefourths of these crops.

Phase Lacked U.S. Support

The demise of the second phase was expected, in large part because it did not
have the support of the Reagan Administration. Most of the properties that would
have been expropriated under the program are owned by people that ''constitute a
considerable element of the country's political power structure,'' according to
a study prepared for the United States Agency for International Development by
Checchi & Company, a Washington consulting concern.

But the suspension of the land to the tiller program was more of a shock. This
program would have benefited more peasants than phases 1 and 2 combined.

Most of these peasants are subsistence farmers, struggling to grow corn, beans
and vegetables, often on tiny, sometimes seemingly vertical hillside plots. More
than half of the country's corn, beans and sorghum, a key crop in this country,
which grows no wheat, is cultivated by these peasants on parcels whose average
size is about three acres.

The prototype for the land to the tiller law was carried out by the United
States in Vietnam. The principle architect there and in El Salvador was Roy L.
Prosterman, a law professor at the University of Washington.

'Left Fears Land Reform'

''The left fears land reform,'' Mr. Prosterman told a hostile audience of
Salvadoran businessmen after the law was enacted. ''It deprives them of their
most valuable weapon in implementing revolution because they can no longer
appeal to the landless.''

Although the land to the tiller law has technically been suspended for only one
crop year, there is considerable doubt that it will ever be reactivated.

The Checchi report noted that while the army supported the first phase of the
agrarian program, ''there appears to be no similar military commitment'' to the
land to the tiller law.

''It is not very clear until when the suspension is going to last since it could
be like the state of siege that keeps being prolonged by the will of the
legislators,'' Bishop Rivera Damas said today. The state of siege, first enacted
in March 1980 for 30 days, has been continually re-enacted for 30-day periods
and is still in effect.

'Victory for Landowners'

Responding to protests by peasant organizations, the Assembly added a proviso to
the suspension legislation that protects the rights of tenant farmers who had
already received provisional titles, had applied for them or were entitled to
apply for them under the original law.

Roberto Viera, a Christian Democratic Party legislator, called the protections
''fine on paper.'' But he said that ''in practice'' the legislation was a
''victory for landowners.'' Landowners, bolstered by the legislation, will now
begin to evict tenant farmers, he said.

According to the Popular Democratic Union, a federation of labor and peasant
organizations that is aligned with the Christian Democrats, 9,600 peasant
families have been evicted from land they were renting since the Assembly began
to chip away at the land redistribution program. Some 60,000 families have been
threatened with eviction, the group said.

The threat of eviction could discourage more renters from filing claims or
perfecting their titles.  Since the land to the tiller law was enacted early in
1980, no peasant has received a clear title. Out of the potential 150,000
beneficiaries, provisional titles have been issued to 29,000 peasants and 7,000
more have filed claims.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 31, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, a dis- patch from San Salvador last Monday
incorrectly reported the number of political parties that won seats in El
Salvador's new Constitutent Assem- bly. Four rightist parties won 36 of the 60
assembly seats.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: chart (page A12)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              184 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
Poisoning The Well

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 878 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, May 23


Last October President Reagan telephoned Morton I. Abramowitz, one of this
country's top professional diplomats, and said: You're my man for Indonesia.
Last week the State Department announced that the appointment was being
withdrawn - because the Indonesian Government would not accept Mr. Abramowitz as
Ambassador.

What happened between those two events throws some unhappy light on the workings
of the Reagan Administration. People who supposedly support the President
produced a critique of Mr. Abramowitz spun from right-wing fantasy. They got
this document into the White House, and then sent it to the Indonesian
Government. The Administration, knowing about the poisonous process for six
months, took no effective action to stop it.

That Morton Abramowitz should be the target of such internecine political
warfare is grotesque. He is the archetype of the nonpolitical foreign service
officer. He has done significant work as an Asian policy expert under both
Democratic and Republican administrations, in the State and Defense Departments
as well as abroad.

He has not hesitated to disagree with political superiors on tough issues. After
the fall of Vietnam in 1975 Henry Kissinger was ready to write off Thailand; Mr.
Abramowitz argued successfully against such self-fulfilling gloom. He fought
President Carter and Zbigniew Brzezinski on their plan, eventually abandoned, to
withdraw American ground forces from South Korea.

From 1978 to the middle of 1981 he was Ambassador to Thailand, and there he had
a personal impact unusual for ambassadors in an age of overseas telephones and
flying foreign ministers. He was largely responsible for persuading a reluctant
Thailand to accept hundreds of thousands of desperate Cambodians as refugees,
and he also gave critical help to the Vietnamese boat people. These actions
figured in his winning the President's Award for Distinguished Federal Service
last year.

What, then, went wrong with the appointment to Indonesia? The answer appears to
lie in extremist ideology and personal resentment.  The document that led to
rejection of the appointment is headed ''Point Paper on Morton Abramowitz'' and
is stamped Confidential.  ''Was the architect for U.S. troop withdrawal from
Korea in 1977,'' it says in one passage: an indication of its accuracy and
character.  The paper says Mr. Abramowitz's wife, Sheppie, ''worked on the staff
of Muskie, McGovern and Carter;'' she worked for about a year for Edmund Muskie
when he was a Senator. In a ludicrous invention, it says Mr. Abramowitz told
someone in Thailand, ''I am a McGovernite.'' It says correctly that he is a
friend of Richard Holbrooke, who as President Carter's able Assistant Secretary
of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs was a bete noir of the extreme
right.

This collection of garbage and guilt-by-association was slipped into the files
of the White House personnel office last fall. Then a copy was somehow got to
President Suharto of Indonesia, who was told that it was a White House
memorandum indicating President Reagan's real views on Mr. Abramowitz.

President Suharto then sent word that he did not want Mr.  Abramowitz. Secretary
of State Haig twice told the Indonesian Foreign Minister that the Administration
really liked Mr. Abramowitz, but he was told in reply that ''the well has been
poisoned.'' The Indonesians evidently decided that they were in the middle of an
American Government dispute. No one - specifically not President Reagan - acted
forcefully enough to disabuse them of that impression.

Who was responsible for the poison-pen attack? No one signed it, and no one has
taken responsibility. But a number of persons have been publicly identified as
critics of Mr. Abramowitz.

One is Daniel C. Arnold, who was the C.I.A. station chief in Thailand while Mr.
Abramowitz was Ambassador. When he retired and then came back to Bangkok as an
agent of the Thai Government, Mr.  Abramowitz reportedly told him that was not a
good idea. Another critic is said to be Gen. Richard G. Stillwell, once
commander of United States forces in South Korea, now a Deputy Under Secretary
of Defense.

Who produced the document, who brought it to the White House and who got it to
President Suharto are questions that should still be explored, perhaps by a
Congressional committee. To carry internal political or personal differences
secretly to a foreign government is not just venomous but subversive of the
appointment process.

President Reagan recently had to tell one of his Texas backers to stop attacking
his chief of staff, James Baker. The Abramowitz episode shows that the same
zealotry in the ranks of his supposed supporters hurts the President in foreign
affairs. The purveyors of hate and envy destroy professionalism.

Morton Abramowitz was the immediate victim, but nothing can stain his record as
a fighter for American interests and a diplomat who saved thousands of lives.
The losers in this affair are the President, the U.S. Foreign Service and the
public.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              185 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NO TIME YET TO NORMALIZE TIES WITH VIETNAM

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 544 words


To the Editor:

Richard Walden and Garry Larsen (''For Normalizing Relations With Hanoi,'' Op-Ed
April 29) miss the point when they call for a lifting of the American economic
blockade of Vietnam ''in order to achieve regional stability.''

Instead of promoting stability in Southeast Asia, an American move toward
normalization at this time may irreparably damage the prospects for long-term
stability by evidencing an American acceptance of the Vietnamese invasion and
occupation of Cambodia.

The present conflict in Indochina is an extremely intricate one, involving an
array of regional actors in a struggle which will likely shape the future
political configuration of Southeast Asia. In this array are: the three
anti-Vietnamese Cambodian guerrilla groups, including the ousted Khmer Rouge;
the pro-Vietnam Government of Cambodia; the five members of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (Asean); Vietnam and China.

Vietnam and China are the principal antagonists in the conflict, however, each
aspiring to regional predominance. It is important to realize that the United
States is at best only a secondary actor in this conflict.

Walden and Larsen argue that an American failure to normalize relations with
Hanoi compromises our national interest by providing de facto support for
Chinese objectives in the region. All things being equal, it indeed is not in
our interest to support the regional goals of one nation against those of
another. But in this instance, all things are not equal.

Hanoi has indicated that it considers military invasion and occupation as a
valid instrument with which to carry out its new role in Southeast Asia. It is
this issue - with its crucial implications for the prospect of offensive
military power in international relations -that is the bench mark of U.S.
national interests in the present conflict.

In a real sense, then, American interests coincide with those of China in
counterbalancing aggressive Vietnam policies as manifested by its continuing
occupation of Cambodia.

U.S. support for China's policy on Cambodia does not commit us to an eventual
reinstallation of the Pol Pot regime. The Chinese Government has long been a
proponent of a tripartite coalition of the three Cambodian guerrilla groups, and
discussions of this contingency are under way, sponsored by Asean.

In addition, it is by no means clear that the Chinese would actually want a
return to power of the Khmer Rouge.  Peking is on record as having tried to
distance itself from the Pol Pot regime during the latter years of its reign,
and to have urged the Khmer Rouge to form an earnest united front against
Vietnam. China's backing for the Khmer Rouge since its ouster in 1979 rests
primarily on the former regime's larger military capability (relative to the
other anti-Vietnamese guerrilla groups) and, therefore, on its ability to apply
sustained pressure on the Vietnamese occupation forces.

Until there is some resolution of the status of Cambodia, the impetus for a
normalization of U.S.-Vietnamese relations must come from a change in Vietnamese
policy. Although the present U.S. policy should not become etched in stone, the
circumstances for a change clearly have not yet arisen.
PETER T. ALLEN, Chicago, May 5, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              186 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

RULING RESTRICTS ACCESS TO F.B.I. DATA, EVEN IF PUT TO POLITICAL USE

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 7, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 834 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 24


The Supreme Court ruled today that the Federal Government may shield from public
disclosure information that it originally compiled for law-enforcement purposes,
even if the information was later used for political purposes.

The 5-to-4 decision interpreted an important section of the Freedom of
Information Act. The law mandates disclosure of Government records that do not
fall within nine specific exemptions, including one that permits the
withholding, under certain circumstances, of ''investigatory records compiled
for law-enforcement purposes.''

The Court considered whether that exemption applied only to the ''investigatory
record'' or whether it also covered the information in that record when it was
rearranged in a new form and used for purposes that would ordinarily make it
subject to disclosure.

The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, in ordering
disclosure to a journalist of summaries from Federal Bureau of Investigation
files, adopted the more narrow interpretation of the exemption.

The summaries, prepared at the request of the Nixon Administration, contained
information on 11 liberals and opponents of the Vietnam War. The appeals court
said the F.B.I. could not invoke the exemption because the summaries, admittedly
prepared for political purposes, were not the ''investigatory records'' to which
the exemption attached.

Appeals Court Reversed

The Justice Department appealed to the Supreme Court. In an opinion by Associate
Justice Byron R. White, the Court overturned the appeals court's ruling. Justice
White said Congress had intended the exemption to apply not just to particular
physical documents, but to the information contained in them.

In a dissenting opinion, Associate Justice Sandra Day O'Connor said that
ambiguities in the Freedom of Information Act should ''be resolved in favor of
disclosure.''

Associate Justice Harry A. Blackmun also dissented, saying, ''The Court has
simply substituted the word 'information' for the word 'records' '' in the law.

The majority opinion, F.B.I. v. Abramson (No. 80-1735), was joined by Chief
Justice Warren E. Burger and Associate Justices William H.  Rehnquist, Lewis F.
Powell Jr. and John Paul Stevens. Associate Justices William J. Brennan Jr. and
Thurgood Marshall joined the dissenting opinions.

Other Supreme Court actions today included these:

Death Sentence

The Court ruled that an Alabama man sentenced to death for murder was not
entitled to a new trial to permit the jury to consider whether he might have
been guilty of a lesser, noncapital offense.  The decision, reversing a ruling
by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, held that the
''lesser included offense'' instruction to the jury was required only when there
was evidence to support the lesser verdict.

The convicted man, John Louis Evans 3d, had confessed to the jury and vowed, ''I
have no intention whatsoever of reforming in any way.''

Writing for the Court, Chief Justice Burger said that Mr. Evans ''made it
crystal clear that he killed the victim, that he intended to kill him and that
he would do the same thing again in similar circumstances.'' There was ''no
plausible claim'' he could have made' to support a lesser verdict, the Chief
Justice said.

All nine Justices joined in the legal analysis of the opinion, Hopper v. Evans
(No. 80-1714), but Justices Brennan and Marshall wrote separately to say that
they refused to support the death penalty.

Double Jeopardy

The Court ruled, 5 to 4, that a defendant who moves successfully for a mistrial
on the ground of misbehavior by the prosecutor may be tried again on the same
charge unless he can prove that the prosecutor intentionally aborted the trial.
The opinion, Oregon v. Kennedy (No. 80-1991), reversed a ruling by the Oregon
Court of Appeals, which held that prosecutorial ''overreaching'' short of
intentional misconduct could be sufficient to trigger a defendant's
constitutional protection against double jeopardy.

Justice Rehnquist wrote the opinion, joined by the Chief Justice and Justices
White, Powell and O'Connor. Justice Stevens filed a dissenting opinion joined by
Justices Brennan, Marshall and Blackmun.

Open Fields

The Court agreed to hear an appeal by the State of Florida from a state court
ruling that police officers needed a warrant to enter a private airfield and
seize a shipment of marijuana. The case, Florida v. Brady (No. 81-1636),
involves the ''open fields'' doctrine, which derives from a 1924 Supreme Court
opinion and holds that a warrant is not required for a police search of an open
field.  The field in this case was open to view but had a locked, barbed-wire
fence.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              187 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

20 YEARS AFTER: 'SILENT SPRING': A TROUBLED LANDSCAPE

BYLINE: By PHILIP M. BOFFEY

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Science Desk

LENGTH: 2178 words


IT is 20 years since Rachel Carson's ''Silent Spring'' first warned against the
environmental and health damage caused by chemical pesticides. In the years
since, her book has often been cited as perhaps the most influential single
factor in creating public concern about the future of the world's ecology. It
was Rachel Carson, many people agree, who initiated the modern environmental
movement.

And the practical impact in some important areas was enormous as well. Her
concerns about the deadly effects on animals of DDT and other so-called
persistent pesticides, for example, became public concerns. And this public
attitude eventually led the Federal Government to establish the Environmental
Protection Agency and stricter governmental regulation of pesticides, including
partial bans on some of the most controversial chemicals, Among the positive
results have been a shift away from persistent chemicals, which remain in the
environment for years, a reduction in pesticide residues found in the human
body, the recovery of some endangered species and a lessening of pesticide
residues in air, water and soil.

Nevertheless, environmentalists and pesticide advocates alike now believe that
''Silent Spring,'' despite its broad importance to the environmental movement,
has on balance, had only limited influence in the area of its chief concern -
pesticides, which include insecticides, herbicides and other chemical pest
killers. Although there have been important changes in the kinds of chemicals
used, the total volume of pesticides used in this country has continued to soar,
unabated.

''We're treating more acres and using more pesticides than ever before,'' says
David Pimentel, professor of entomology and agricultural sciences at Cornell
University, a longtime foe of the overuse of chemicals. ''Even after Rachel
Carson, we haven't gained a whole lot.''

''Agriculture goes on being increasingly chemicalized,'' agrees Boisie E. Day,
professor emeritus of plant physiology at the University of California's
Berkeley campus and a leading proponent of herbicides, ''because fundamentally
agriculture is a chemical business and no diatribe will change it. That's just
the way it is.''

Miss Carson's book caused a sensation when major excerpts first appeared in the
New Yorker magazine in June 1962 and the full text was published the next fall.
It was warmly praised for its sensitive portrayal of the capacity of man to
disrupt nature, and it was bitterly attacked as an emotional tirade against
beneficial chemicals.

Miss Carson's major theme was that pests must be treated as part of a natural
balance in which various life forms help keep each other in check. By
indiscriminately spraying chemicals hither and yon, she warned, the pest
controllers were inadvertently destroying beneficial insects and, as the poisons
concentrated and magnified in the food chain, many were killing birds and fish
and other wildlife as well.

Often the result was worse, she said, than the original problem - the target
pests developed resistance to the chemicals and, with their natural enemies
wiped out, returned to proliferate out of control. Miss Carson concentrated her
fire primarily on insecticides, the predominant pesticides of her day, but also
expressed concern about herbicides, the weed killers that were coming into
increasing use. She was particularly worried about the socalled ''persistent''
or ''hard'' pesticides that remain active in the environment for years and that
were already invading the tissues of virtually all Americans, with health
consequences that could not be foreseen. She especially favored biological
controls - the use of predators, diseases and sterilizers to attack insect pests
- on the grounds that such controls are often more effective and more selective
in their action than are chemicals.

Some scientists believe her book, a deliberately one-sided polemic that had few
good words for pesticides, has had a destructive impact. They believe ''Silent
Spring'' raised exaggerated fears about chemicals that are crucial in producing
food and fiber for a hungry world and whose side effects are not all that
drastic. Norman E.  Borlaug, winner of the Nobel Peace Prize for his work in
developing new strains of wheat, once blamed the ''best-selling, half-science,
half-fiction novel 'Silent Spring' '' for instigating a ''vicious, hysterical
propaganda campaign against the use of agricultural chemicals.''

However, other pest control experts consider Miss Carson clairvoyant. ''I don't
see much she said that hasn't come to pass in one way or another,'' said Robert
L. Metcalf, professor of entomology at the University of Illinois, a past
president of the Entomological Society of America.

Warnings in 1962

''She was very much concerned about the lack of selectivity in pesticides,'' he
said, ''and that's just about as great a problem today as in 1962. She talked
about the need for biological controls and about better ways of sharing the
earth with natural creatures, and that problem persists today. She warned about
insects becoming resistant to chemicals, and now more than 400 species of pests
are resistant to one or more pesticides.''

If Miss Carson was upset at the volume of pesticides spread over the American
landscape in the early 1960's, she would be appalled at the quantities used
today. Production of synthetic organic pesticides in the United States has
doubled in the last two decades - from 730 million pounds of active ingredients
in 1962 to almost 1.5 billion pounds in 1980 - reflecting increases in both
domestic use and exports.

Within that total, the quantity of insecticides, Miss Carson's chief concern,
has grown only slightly, and fungicide production has leveled off, too. But
there has been an explosive growth in production and use of herbicides. Farmers
and land managers have found that chemicals are the cheapest and easiest way to
get rid of unwanted vegetation. And the widespread adoption of ''no till''
farming to halt erosion has required herbicides to kill weeds that would
otherwise be eliminated by plowing.

By one count, the area doused with herbicides in this country jumped to 250
million acres in 1977 from 71 million acres in 1962.  Herbicides now comprise
the bulk of all pesticides used in this country, and experts expect the
quantities to keep growing.

Insecticides vs. Herbicides

Opinions differ on whether herbicides pose a greater or lesser danger than the
insecticides that predominated in Miss Carson's day.  Some environmentalists
expect herbicides to become as big a health and environmental issue in the 80's
as insecticides were in the 60's and 70's. They view the controversy over Agent
Orange, a mixture of chemicals used to defoliate jungles in Vietnam, as a
harbinger of future battles over herbicides.

But others consider herbicides more benign than insecticides because most
dissipate quickly and, while lethal to plants, are often harmless to humans, who
have an entirely different biochemical mechanism. Boric acid, for example, kills
vegetation but soothes the human eye. The effect seems to be random. Some
herbicides are toxic to animals, others are not. The long-term health hazards of
herbicides remain in dispute.

One trend that would please Miss Carson is a shift away from the use of
long-lasting chemicals toward those that dissipate more quickly in the
environment. The shift has come about partly because the persistent pesticides
were running into problems of insect resistance, and partly because of
regulatory crackdowns and court actions. Many of the chemical ''elixirs of
death'' that Miss Carson most deplored - such as DDT, chlordane, heptachlor,
dieldrin and aldrin -have been banned

Signs of Reduced Contamination

These changing pesticide patterns have led to a perceptible improvement in
various indicators of environmental contamination and human health hazard.

Frederick W. Kutz, who heads pesticide monitoring programs for the Environmental
Protection Agency, said that pesticide residues found in shell and fin fish,
air, water, soil and food all showed signs of diminishing during the 1970's.
Even Dr. Pimentel, the Cornell critic of chemical abuses, considers the
environmental gains ''a real accomplishment'' and a boon to wildlife that was
threatened with extinction. ''It looks like the peregrine falcon, the eagle and
the osprey are doing better than in the past,'' he says.

Shirley A. Briggs, a friend and colleague of Miss Carson who is executive
director of the Rachel Carson Council, also rejoices that the banning of DDT
from agricultural uses ''has already enabled highly susceptible species,
including the brown pelican and the bald eagle, to make some gains back from
threatened extinction.''

The most important health indicator - the body burden of pesticides found in the
average American - has also registered improvement.  Traces of pesticide are
still found in the fatty tissue of virtually all Americans tested, but the
average amount found has been decreasing, largely because the younger age groups
have experienced less exposure to the persistent pesticides that are being
phased out. The biggest decline has been registered by DDT, but E.P.A. officials
report a perceptible drop during the 1970's in essentially all other pesticides
measured in human fatty tissue as well.

Debate Over Health Effects

The health significance of this body burden remains in dispute. The view
espoused by Rachel Carson and by many environmentalists today is that the
pesticide residues are bound to be harmful.

Lewis Regenstein, vice president of the Fund for Animals and author of a new
book on chemical hazards, said in an interview: ''On the 20th anniversary of
'Silent Spring,' pesticides and other deadly chemicals remain a greater threat
than ever. We're in the midst of a cancer epidemic, a lot of it associated with
toxic chemicals.  Pesticides are certainly a major factor.''

But an emerging consensus of cancer experts holds that there is, in fact,
nothing approaching a cancer epidemic yet visible and little evidence that the
explosive growth in synthetic organic chemicals is a major factor in causing
cancer.

Environmental scientists still find two health trends worrisome.  Pesticide
residues continue to show up in wells at various points around the nation,
suggesting to some that there may be a long-term hazard from contamination of
drinking water. And the environmental improvement from curbing persistent
pesticides has been gained at the expense of introducing a more immediate
hazard. The nonpersistent pesticides that have been substituted are more acutely
toxic and pose a greater immediate health risk to the farmworkers and others who
apply them.

Moves to Ease Regulations

The regulatory crackdown that Miss Carson helped stimulate appears to have lost
momentum in recent months. The Reagan Administration has drastically cut back on
environmental regulation, and pesticide amendments now pending in Congress would
further ease the regulatory burden on the pesticide industry.

Maureen K. Hinkle, a pesticide specialist for the National Audubon Society,
fears it may be time to ''write the obituary for pesticide regulation.'' But
Jack D. Early, president of the National Agricultural Chemicals Association, is
relieved that ''after a period of overkill and overreaction'' in which ''highly
scientific issues were decided in the public arena rather than the scientific
arena, I now think we are seeing a shift back.''

Thus the use of pesticides is apt to increase. They are often cheaper and more
prompt in yielding results than are alternative approaches. And they are
sometimes essential. The Office of Technology Assessment, an arm of Congress,
concluded that ''there are many insect, disease, nematode, and weed problems for
which there are no alternative control techniques to pesticides,'' adding that
potential alternatives ''may take years to develop.''

And such alternatives will have to overcome the psychological appeal provided by
chemical pesticides. ''People like to see their enemies drop to the ground
squirming,'' says Professor Pimentel. ''It gives them a real psychological lift.
They can see it happening. But if you release a few thousand natural enemies,
it's quiet, you can't see or hear what happens. There's no sex appeal to that
kind of control.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rachel Carson photo of a falcon Photo of a
helicpoter 3 graphs on the state on the environment

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              188 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 25, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

THE DOCTOR'S WORLD

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN, M.D.

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 4; Science Desk

LENGTH: 967 words


WHEN President Reagan was on the operating table after his attempted
assassination last year, the surgeon, Dr. Benjamin L.  Aaron, had difficulty
feeling the bullet in the spongy lung tissue.  Thinking it might have traveled
to some other area, he ordered an Xray, which showed that the bullet was still
in the lung.

Dr. Aaron passed a thin tube along the bullet track and spent about five minutes
probing before he could locate and remove the flattened .22-caliber bullet that
is now believed to have ricocheted off the President's limousine before hitting
him.

Experts at the Federal Bureau of Investigation later identified it as an
explosive bullet called a Devastator. It is a standard .22-caliber long rifle
bullet in which the tip has been drilled out and replaced with a canister
containing a charge of a toxic and explosive chemical, lead azide. The
modification is supposed to expand the bullet, causing it to deliver its energy
more rapidly to the target, thus giving it greater stopping power, and reducing
the risk to others from a bullet that passes through its target or ricochets.

Whether Devastator bullets actually cause greater damage than nonexploding
bullets is a matter of debate among experts. But they agree that such bullets
often fail to detonate.

Dr. Aaron said in an interview that F.B.I. agents had told him they had
determined that the canister in the bullet remained intact despite hitting the
car and Mr. Reagan's rib. He also said that during the President's operation, he
had no idea he was dealing with an explosive missile.

Before locating the bullet, Dr. Aaron considered calling for a metal detector to
find it. Some experts now say such a device could have caused the bullet to
explode in the President's body, further injuring him, or, once removed,
injuring others in the operating room.

For those reasons, surgeons at Washington Hospital Center operated on Thomas K.
Delahanty, a District of Columbia policeman, to remove a bullet, fired from the
same gun, that was lodged in the back of his neck and had also failed to
detonate.

The chances of an explosion in Officer Delahanty's body were considered small,
inasmuch as it had struck a bone without detonating, according to Dr. William J.
Fouty, one of his surgeons.

Nevertheless, Dr. Fouty said, the surgical team took ''due care getting to and
removing the bullet.'' They avoided any heat or shock that might have set it
off. They did not use electrocautery, a widely used technique that uses heat to
stop bleeding. They located the bullet precisely by placing needles in the area
and taking X-rays at different angles. The operation went off without a hitch.

But on April 9, 1981, 10 days after Mr. Reagan was shot, a Devastator bullet
exploded when an F.B.I. agent removed its explosive canister in a laboratory
test. The agent was using tweezers and a scalpel to handle the bullet under a
microscope when it exploded unexpectedly. It blew off the tips of the tweezers
and shattered a half-inch-thick glass plate as well as a lens on the microscope.
The agent, who was not wearing goggles, suffered only minor injuries. A
spokesman said that it was the only such accident at the F.B.I.

Doctors have been treating casualties from ammunition that explodes on impact
ever since it was developed more than a century ago. More recently, in the
Vietnam War for example, soldiers and civilians have been struck with mortar
bombs, grenades and other highly explosive ammunition that failed to detonate.
Because such missiles, unlike Devastator bullets, can have time-delay fuses,
they can explode at any time, even in the absence of heat, mechanical force or
other factors. In operations to remove such projectiles, sandboxes have been put
around the operating table to protect the surgeon.

Now, in the aftermath of the attack on President Reagan, scientific journals are
calling to doctors' attention the potential hazards of unexploded bullets to
gunshot victims and to the medical personnel caring for them.

The bullets in Mr. Reagan or Officer Delahanty ''might have been detonated if
ultrasound or microwave techniques had been used for diagnosis,'' Dr. Bernard
Knight, a professor of forensic pathology at the Welsh National School of
Medicine in Cardiff, said in the March 13 issue of the British Medical Journal.
His article reviewed the findings of medical examiners in Maryland, Minnesota,
Texas and Florida who had reported their experiences with exploding bullets.

One of the problems for doctors treating such patients is that they cannot
reliably determine if the bullet is an exploding type by examining the size of
the entry wound. Some clues might come from an X-ray, which might show a tiny
canister in the bullet tip. But an Xray picture is not reliable in every case.

To safeguard the fingers and eyes of people caring for suspected victims of
unexploded bullets, surgeons have been advised to wear goggles and to operate
with long-handled instruments. Further and similar precautions are advised for
handling the bullet after it is removed from the body.

Dr. Knight said that since the publication of his article, a physicist had
called to agree that microwaves, heat or slight percussion could trigger the
explosion of a Devastator or similar bullet. But the physicist and others
challenged the thesis that ultrasound could set the bullet off. However, Dr.
Knight said, chuckling, that he ''wouldn't like to be the guinea pig they try it
on.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of a bullet

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              189 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

AIDE SAYS INTERNAL FORCES STILL THREATEN HANOI

BYLINE: By HENRY KAMM, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: WARSAW, May 25


A senior Vietnamese official interviewed in a Polish newspaper has depicted his
country with unusual candor as one troubled by grave military, economic and
political problems.

The official, Hoang Tung, a secretary of the Vietnamese Communist Party's
Central Committee, told a correspondent of the Communist daily, Trybuna Ludu, in
an interview published here on Monday that Vietnam was threatened directly by
China, which he said is supported by the United States. The external threat, Mr.
Tung said, is matched inside the country by supporters of the South Vietnamese
regime that was defeated seven years ago.

Mr. Tung said ''classes'' connected with the former Saigon Government, though
overthrown, had not yet been completely destroyed. He also said the existence of
''more than a million people formerly closely connected'' with the old regime
''complicates the social situation.''

''To a large extent we have liquidated the burgeoisie as a class, but former
property owners continue to live among us and even now still have a sense of
their own strength,'' the party official said.

Ethnic Chinese Attacked

He added that many of the former entrepreneurs were members of the ethnic
Chinese minority and charged that they were linked to a global ''network'' that
was conducting economic war against Vietnam. He referred to alleged smuggling of
goods into Vietnam from Bangkok, Hong Kong and Singapore.

Foreign residents and visitors tend to believe that the goods sent into Vietnam
from abroad and traded largely on the black market have provided the people of
Vietnam's cities with the margin of survival while the official, Government-run
sector is unable to meet basic needs.

Mr. Tung accused China and other enemies of Vietnam of conducting what he
characterized as ''small war'' against his country. He described this as
consisting of ''continuous tension'' created by Chinese military strength on
Vietnam's northern border and the fomenting of partisan movements in Cambodia
and Laos.

Vietnamese troops are stationed in both of those neighboring countries, whose
weak regimes are considered dependent on Hanoi. Mr.  Tung's assertion that
partisan movements in Laos and Cambodia are part of a war against Vietnam
appeared to be an admission of his country's predominance over the two
countries.

Economically, the Vietnamese official said, ''small war'' consists of the
creating of ''economic confusion and disorganization'' of the Vietnamese market
by the overseas Chinese.

'Economic Blockade' Charged

Furthermore, Mr. Tung charged, an ''economic blockade'' is being carried out
against Vietnam. Presumably, he meant the suspension of various Western and
Japanese economic aid programs in retaliation for Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia
in 1979 and its continuing occupation of that country.

The Vietnamese official said the three principal tasks facing the Hanoi
Government were defense, feeding the population and laying the foundations of a
socialist system. While southern Vietnam has been Communist for only seven
years, the northern half of the country has been Communist since 1954 and
governed by a socialist system that even Eastern European Communists consider of
excessively doctrinaire rigor.

Referring to Vietnam's serious food shortages, Mr. Tung said that balancing
defense requirements against food needs ''has influenced the standard of
living.'' But he added, ''When even the United States has the dilemma of cannons
versus butter, why shouldn't we have a dilemma, arms versus rice?''

Acknowledging ''serious difficulties in everyday life,'' Mr. Tung asserted that
the Vietnamese were not meat eaters and accepted an annual consumption level of
22 pounds a person. The assertion, which is not supported by knowledge of
Vietnamese eating habits, caused a Pole to remark that the only purpose of
publishing the interview was to persuade Poles that some countries were even
worse off than Poland.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              190 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. VETERANS AGENCY REVISES ITS AGENT ORANGE PAMPHLET

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 560 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 25


At one time veterans who asked the Government about Agent Orange, a defoliant
used in the Vietnam War, received a pamphlet listing the diseases that have been
associated with exposure to dioxin, a toxic contaminant in the substance.

The pamphlet discussed reports linking dioxin with a variety of health
disorders: headaches, liver and blood disorders, nerve damage, cancer.

Now veterans asking about Agent Orange get a pamphlet that says worries about
dioxin are based only on ''a theory'' that it may have caused ''delayed health
effects.'' The publication does not name any of them.

The Veterans Administration said that in revising the pamphlet no effort was
made to tone down what veterans were told about the possible health effects of
Agent Orange.

Old Pamphlet Termed Outdated

''It's a different pamphlet done by different people and a different
Administration,'' said Larry R. Moen, who runs the Veterans Administration's
public information and education program on Agent Orange. He termed the old
pamphlet ''somewhat outdated.'' It bore a photograph of Max Cleland, the wounded
Vietnam veteran who headed the V.A. in the Carter Administration.

Both the old and the new publications assert that facts about possible health
damage have not been established, but the old one was more detailed about what
was suspected.

The old, orange-colored, pamphlet said: ''We do know that humans who have been
exposed to dioxin during industrial accidents have developed a specific skin
condition known as chloracne which closely resembles the common forms of acne.

''In addition, headaches, blood disorders, nausea, alterations in liver function
and nerve damage have been reported. Some reports have suggested that people
exposed to dioxin have a higher incidence of some forms of cancer. There are
also reports that dioxin can cause enlargement of the liver and a decrease in
the speed of transmission of nerve impulses.''

The new, blue-covered, publication says that in 1978 a theory was publicized
that veterans who were exposed to Agent Orange ''might be subject to delayed
health effects from the exposure.'' It continues:

''The theory was based on the fact that one of the chemicals, 2,4,5-T, contained
minute traces of a toxic chemical, dioxin (TCDD) which contaminated the
herbicide during the manufacturing process.  The contaminant dioxin is of
concern because animal studies have shown it to be toxic to certain species.
Like other toxic substances, dioxin has produced a number of serious conditions
among laboratory animals.''

Another Pamphlet to Be Published

In an interview, Mr. Moen said that not many copies of the orange pamphlet were
left and that the remaining ones had been taken off the shelves. He said another
pamphlet would be issued soon that would answer frequently asked questions on
the subject.

An estimated 84,000 American Vietnam veterans have sought and taken a special
medical examination at V.A. hospitals to see if they suffer from effects of
exposure. The V.A.'s position has been that no link has been established between
Agent Orange and any disorder except chloracne, a severe skin rash, but research
is needed to establish definitively whether a link exists.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              191 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

3 WOMEN AND THE CAMPAIGN FOR A NUCLEAR FREEZE

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 26, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 25


Helen M. Caldicott became terrified by the prospect of nuclear holocaust as she
sat by the sea in Australia as as 14-year-old and read ''On the Beach,'' a novel
about the aftermath of nuclear war.

Randall Forsberg was 24 and a typist at the Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute in Sweden when the material she was typing forced her to
concentrate on the cost of military expenditures and the power of the few
individuals who determine what to buy and when to use it.

Frances Farley, a state senator in Salt Lake City, decided in 1980 to open a
campaign against the MX missile when she concluded that the ''racetrack'' basing
system being contemplated would mean that almost every flat space in the
mountains of western Utah and Nevada would be covered by concrete loops, on
which the big missiles would be shifted from silo to silo.

Today the three American women have become prominent figures in the nationwide
campaign to stop the nuclear arms race and reduce the risk of atomic war, a
movement that has stirred women in this country as have few others in recent
years. They will be in Washington June 13-16 for the Women's Leadership
Conference on National Security, one of the first assemblies ever called by
women to discuss national security, a topic traditionally dominated by men.

Polls Reflect Concern

Officials of the Reagan Administration are beginning to express concern about
polls that indicate a growing resentment among women over President Reagan's
policies, particularly in military affairs.  In fact, women have always been
more concerned about Mr. Reagan's military program than have men, according to
poll takers.

For example, in October, 1980, according to The New York Times/CBS News Poll, 36
percent of the women polled, as opposed to 26 percent of men, said they were
afraid that Mr. Reagan, if elected, would involve the country in war. By March
this year, 52 percent of the women polled said they thought the President might
do so, as against 44 percent of the men.

In April, 1981, 63 percent of women surveyed said that they approved of Mr.
Reagan's stewardship, as against 71 percent of men.  By March, 1982, only 39
percent of the women approved, against 48 percent of the men.

Anne H. Cahn, executive director of the Committee for National Security, a
liberal nonprofit defense and arms control group, said that there have been so
many applications for the June women's conference that attendance has been
limited to 300 persons, and that two more regional conferences are planned.

Physicians' Group Revived

''We've heard from women who said that they had never before been involved in
politics, let alone the national security debate,'' said Mrs. Cahn, who headed
the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency's economics bureau in the Carter
Administration.

Dr. Caldicott, who revived the Boston-based Physicians for Social Responsibility
four years ago and has helped attract more than 14,000 physician-members to the
antiwar group, said she was not suprised that women have been leaders in many
local campaigns for a freeze in Soviet and American nuclear arsenals.

''We're closer to the sources of life than men are,'' asserted the 43-year-old
Dr. Caldicott, a pediatrician who specializes in cystic fibrosis. She has
traveled across the country to convince fellow physicians that there is no
adequate medical response to nuclear war and to practice what she terms ''the
only real preventative pediatrics I know.''

Women prominent in the antinuclear campaign say that the women's liberation
movement has provided their cause with experience and confidence gained in the
struggle to stop the war in Vietnam.

Devised Freeze Proposal

The 38-year-old Miss Forsberg, who got her doctorate in military policy and arms
control at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, prides herself on being
expert. ''I've made it my business to know more about worldwide armaments and
use of military power than most people outside of established military
circles,'' she said.

She is widely credited with devising the freeze proposal that has been approved
by dozens of town meetings, city and county councils and state legisltures
throughout the country. Her estimates of world nuclear stockpiles appear in the
most recent United Nations report on this topic. Two years ago, in Brookline,
Mass., she established the Institute for Defense and Disarmament, a small
liberal study group.

''Many women have gotten involved because of their fear of a nuclear
holocaust,'' Miss Forsberg said. ''But I was initially interested in ending war
in general. Only over time did I start to concentrate on nuclear war.''

Mrs. Farley, a 54-year old grandmother, health services administrator, and
Democratic candidate for Congress in Utah, founded the MX Information Center, a
group that mobilized residents against the missile-basing scheme. Intense public
opposition to the MX plan in the West, where Republican support has been strong,
was a key factor in the Administration's decision to abandon the basing
proposal, acording to White House officials.

''My fight against the MX made me run for Congress,'' said Mrs.  Farley. ''I
used to say: 'I'm not an defense expert,' but I don't say that anymore.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of women against nuclear arms

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              192 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 26, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WASHINGTON;
THE CLASS OF 1982

BYLINE: By James Reston

SECTION: Section A; Page 31, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 816 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 25


One of this year's graduates at the University of Illinois, obviously a student
of ancient history, notes that it is now just 50 years since I was in his place,
and he implies that I must have learned something since then and asks for a
comparison between the Depression class of 1932 and the depression class of
1982.

My first impulse was to brush him off as a cheeky young man and remind him that
even Conrad Hilton, the hotelkeeper, concluded at the end of a long and
successful life that the main lesson he had learned was that it was a good idea
to keep the shower curtain inside the tub. But even a frivolous question
sometimes invites a serious answer.

I think one difference between the Depressions of '32 and '82 is that the old
one was real and simple and that this new one is comparatively phony and
complicated. Another is that in '32 we were as ignorant as swans about
economics, and therefore weren't so depressed.

Comparisons are interesting but not very helpful. Since '32 this has been a
different country and a different world. In 1932, my outof-state tuition at
Illinois was $25 a semester. The enrollment at that university in 1932 was
10,650; now it is 35,150. The budget for the University of Illinois then was
$6.54 million; now it is $384.3 million.

We were a nation of 124.8 million in 1932; now we are 230.5 million. The per
capita income then was $404 a year; now it is $10,484, which, even making
allowance for five-cent cigars, is still quite a difference. And unemployment in
'32 was 23.6 percent, whereas now it is 9.4 percent.

So what? So in '32, we not only had about a quarter of our work force without
jobs, but were on the verge of a World War in Europe, the Japanese attack on
Pearl Harbor and eventually a military draft.

The problems today are serious but obviously quite different, and not hopeless.
As Felix G. Rohatyn of New York observed recently to the graduates at Middlebury
College in Vermont, they are very complicated. He defined them as follows:

* The rapid growth of a permanent underclass in America: the residents of
inner-city ghettos, black and Hispanic, undereducated, underskilled, without
real hope of participating in the future of the country.

* The regional split between Sun Belt and Frost Belt, which is accelerating and
will leave the northern half of the United States in serious difficulty.

* The decline of our traditional manufacturing sectors (autos, steel, glass,
rubber), and automation, which will create long-term unemployment in the
hardest-hit part of the country.

* Illegal immigration in great numbers, especially from Mexico, which will
create additional social tensions unless we produce enough jobs to absorb our
own unemployed along with the new arrivals.

* Nuclear proliferation and the need to control and reduce the level of nuclear
weapons while being realistic about Soviet power.

* The decline of the written press and the dominance of television in the
political dialogue of the nation.

* The roller-coaster of an economy that knows only inflation or recession, or
both, but cannot produce stable non-inflationary growth.

These are daunting and even alarming problems, which are going to force us to do
hard things with our minds. But it would probably be a mistake to assume that
the Russians are the same as the Nazis, or that the menace to the Republic is
another Pearl Harbor.

Meanwhile, if my young graduate at Illinois is really serious, I will tell him
what I think I have learned:

* Things are seldom quite as good or as bad as they appear in the headlines or
on the evening television news.

* There were only 20 years between the end of World War I and the beginning of
World War II. These two clumsy nuclear giants in Washington and Moscow are
reckless talkers but they are cautious and have avoided a third world war for
over two generations, or considering the popularity of sex these days, maybe
three.

* Many of the things we have feared the most in the last 20 years -a dominant
Sino-Soviet alliance, a collapse of American authority after the defeat in
Vietnam, uncontrollable inflation as a result of automation, computers and
industrial robots -have not really happened; at least not yet.

So everything is in peril, but so far nothing has collapsed. What I have
learned, I think, is that maybe progress is made not necessarily by conflict
between the political parties, between management and labor, the regions and the
races, but maybe better by cooperation.

On a more personal level, maybe the most important question for my young friend
in Urbana, as I learned, is not where he's going, but who's going with him.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              193 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 27, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

WEST POINT CLASS WARNED BY TOWER

BYLINE: By JAMES FERON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: WEST POINT, N.Y., May 26


John G. Tower, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, warned the
graduating class of the United States Military Academy today that ''a decade of
complacency'' had significantly eroded the nation's military posture in
comparison with against that of the Soviet Union.

The Texas Republican, addressing a class of 863, of whom 63 were women, under a
bright sun in Michie Stadium, called for support of military priorities in the
debate over a national budget, saying that ''the first responsibility of our
Government to its people is to protect them from external threat.''

Speaking from the same platform used last year by President Reagan to promise a
continuing defense buildup, Senator Tower acknowledged that the ''tradition of
the America people is anti-militaristic.'' But he said that ''in today's world,
absent the will to prepare, the time to fight for a cause may well have come and
gone before we are ready.''

Spending on Social Programs

''Social programs are important, indeed necessary,'' he said, referring to the
debate over budget priorities, ''but we cannot divert to them disproportionate
resources at the expense of national security.'' He said that between 1970 and
1982, ''spending for social programs increased by 97 percent in real terms,''
while defense spending fell by 8 percent, also ''in real terms.''

At the Naval Aacademy in Annapolis, Md., Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger
said he hoped that the graduates might never have to use the military lessons
they had learned. Commencement at the Air Force Academy in Colorado Springs is
scheduled for next Wednesday, with Vice President Bush the speaker.

The ceremony at West Point, the oldest of the nation's military academies, began
with the swelling of applause as the graduates marched into the stadium before
16,000 family members and friends. It ended with a roar as the members of the
class, now second lieutenants, tossed their dress white caps in the air.

First in the class was Cadet Peter R. Mansoor, 22 years old, of Sacramento,
Calif., who won seven major awards, including that of Distinguished Cadet.
Ranked last, a category no longer recognized by academy officials but honored by
fellow cadets, was Jeffery L.  Risher, 22, of Aiken, S.C., who got a standing
ovation and, traditionally, a dollar from every other graduate.

Fourth Brother Since 1969

Among the graduates was Timothy Morris, the last of four brothers who have been
at West Point since 1969. William, who will become a major on Friday, graduated
in 1973 and is a neurosurgeon at Walter Reed Hospital in Washington. Michael, a
first lieutenant, graduated in 1976 and is in medical school at the University
of Miami.

Frank, a captain, graduated in 1978 and is studying law at Duke University.
Their father, Joseph Morris, fought as an enlisted man in Europe during World
War II and was a brigade sergeant major in Vietnam.  He said that ''I never
brought the Army home'' but that he felt ''lucky'' that his sons had been drawn
to the service. Now retired, the 55-year-old Mr. Morris lives with his wife,
Theresa, in St.  Petersburg, Fla.

The graduates also included Robert Bruce Abrams, son of the late Gen. Creighton
Abrams, former Chief of Staff, and Dennis O'Brien, whose two brothers and father
also were West Point graduates. Among those watching the ceremonies was Brig.
Gen. James L. Dozier, class of 1956, who was freed earlier this year in Italy as
a prisoner of the Red Brigades.

----

Dangers of Freeze Cited

ANNAPOLIS, Md., May 26 (UPI) -Defense Secretary Weinberger told the largest
single graduating class in the Naval Academy's history today that a nuclear
weapons freeze would not remove the risk of war.

Mr. Weinberger told the 1,030 graduates, of whom 60 were women: ''A nuclear
freeze would not reduce the probability of war. It would go against the first
and foremost aim of arms control because it would back the United States and our
allies into a position of permanent military disadvantage.''

Mr. Weinberger stressed preparedness in his speech at Navy-Marine Corps Memorial
Stadium on a hot and humid morning.  ''The greatest paradox of all,'' he said,
''is that military strength is most successful if it is never used. But if we
are never to use force, we must be prepared to use it and use it successfully.''

Midshipman Jeffrey W. Campbell of Eatontown, N.J., received the first diploma.
Mr. Campbell, who will attend flight school in Pensacola, Fla., scored a perfect
4.0 grade point average in his oceanography major.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              194 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 27, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

R.O.T.C. ROLE IN HIGH SCHOOLS DEBATED

BYLINE: By MICHAEL GOODWIN

SECTION: Section B; Page 9, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 698 words


The science classes that met on the fourth floor of Julia Richman High School
yesterday morning were like any other in New York City's public school system,
except for a few things - most of the students wore Navy uniforms and they
addressed the teacher as ''commander.'' And the science was military.

The students are cadets in the Manhattan school's Naval Junior Reserve Officers
Training Corps, and the teacher, Michael Hardesty, is a retired lieutenant
commander in the Navy.

The program, now in its third year, is sponsored by the Navy and the city's
Board of Education. A similar program aligned with the Air Force started at
DeWitt Clinton High School in the Bronx last February, and a third is planned
for Curtis High School on Staten Island. About 230 students in Grades 9 through
12 participate, 140 of them at Julia Richman. All are volunteers.

Despite contentions by school officials that the programs do not spend much city
money - $44,000 this year -and have positive effects on the students, the
programs have recently encountered some resistance. Critics, including several
parents' groups and elected officials, have charged that spending any money on
such efforts is improper at a time when the Board of Education is contemplating
layoffs of teachers because of a budget squeeze.

Presence Termed 'Inappropriate'

And the critics, reflecting both an international concern about nuclear war and
a distrust of the military, especially the role of R.O.T.C. programs on college
campuses during the Vietnam War, say it is improper to have an active military
presence in the high schools.

''It's inappropriate as an educational matter,'' said Edward C.  Wallace, a
Democratic City Councilman from Manhattan. ''And it's wasteful as a budget
matter.'' Noting that Federal funds for the program this year amounted to
$26,000, he added, ''The city is spending more on this boondoggle than the
Pentagon.''

Education officials, noting the programs were approved in public meetings of the
board, say they have not tried to hide them.  ''It's up to the majority of the
board to decide how the money is spent,'' said Carol Brownell, a board
spokesman. She said most of the city money being used paid half of the salaries
of the three instructors, who are retired military personnel with city teachers'
licenses. The armed services pays the other half.

Miss Brownell and other officials said that the programs showed career options
to the students, but that there was no attempt to steer students toward a
military career.

'We're Not Warmongers Here'

''We're not warmongers here,'' said Andrew Jones, the principal of Julia
Richman, on East 67th Street. ''What I'm concerned about is that these kids
finish school.''

He said the cadets had an average attendance rate of 90 percent, compared with
74 or 75 percent for the school as a whole. He attributed much of the difference
to the program's stress on responsibility and cooperation.

His sentiments were repeated by the students, who eagerly recited the benefits
of being a junior cadet. Reflecting the school's ratio, 60 percent of the cadets
are girls, including the student commanding officer. Mr. Jones asked that
students' names not be used because parental permission is required for entry
into the program.

''I want to sign up in the military anyway, so this helps me,'' said one boy.
''I used to cut a lot of classes,'' said one girl. ''This gives me a reason to
come to school.'' Most of the 30 students in one class, which meets daily, said
they hoped to go to college, while about 10 said they planned to enlist.  Those
who enlist can start as a seaman instead of a seaman recruit if they finish
three years of junior R.O.T.C.

''There's always an emphasis on character development, citizenship, leadership,
loyalty,'' said Mr. Hardesty. He said there were about 235 similar units in high
schools around the country.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              195 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 27, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NOTES ON PEOPLE;
Papp, Vietnam-Bound, to Aid Veterans

BYLINE: By Albin Krebs and Robert McG. Thomas Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 192 words


He is on his way to Vietnam with a special veterans delegation that will try to
trace missing American servicemen and study the effects of the defoliant Agent
Orange. But wherever he is and whatever he is doing, Joseph Papp is always an
impresario.

The 59-year-old New York producer sounded like one during a stopover in Bangkok
yesterday. While in Vietnam, he said, he hopes to arrange an American concert
tour for Dang Thai Son, an acclaimed Vietnamese pianist.

That may not be easy. The United States has no diplomatic relations with
Vietnam, and, according to Mr. Papp, when he broached the idea recently with a
State Department official, he was told such a tour would be ''inappropriate.''

Mr. Papp, who was once told it would be inappropriate to stage Shakespeare
productions in Central Park - for many years now, a home of his New York
Shakespeare Festival - said he would press for a tour anyway.

He said he had already talked with orchestra officials in New York and Boston
about presenting benefit concerts, the proceeds of which would go to ''children
victimized by Agent Orange.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              196 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 27, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

82 Vietnamese Saved in Sea

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section B; Page 15, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 55 words

DATELINE: MANILA, May 26


The United States Navy frigate Brewton rescued 82 Vietnamese refugees aboard a
leaky 30-foot boat 390 miles south of Ho Chi Minh City, a Navy spokesman said
today. The Navy said the 29 men, 22 women and 31 children were rescued Monday
after crewmen on the Brewton spotted flares from the wooden boat.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              197 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 27, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

Father of a Vietnam Casualty Found Not Guilty in Shooting

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 156 words

DATELINE: BATON ROUGE, La., May 26


A man whose only son died in Vietnam was found not guilty today of killing a
13-year-old boy who came to his door trick-or-treating on Halloween wearing Army
fatigues and carrying a toy machine gun.

Robert J. Bouton sat quietly as the clerk read the verdict of District Judge
Doug Moreau, then started to sob softly. ''I have no comment now, please,'' he
told reporters as he left the courtroom with his wife and a cluster of friends.
Mr. Bouton, 58 years old, was charged with second-degree murder in the shooting
of Daniel Breaux. He had pleaded not guilty and not guilty by reason of
insanity.

He waived trial by jury and left the decision up to the judge, who deliberated
two hours before rendering his verdict.  Mr. Bouton testified in his own
defense, saying he was frightened by the costume and toy gun.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              198 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 27, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

DOCUMENTARY BY CBS ON VIETNAM QUESTIONED

BYLINE: By TONY SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 15, Column 3; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 804 words


At least two key figures in a recent CBS News documentary that said there had
been a conspiracy by the United States military to cover up critical
intelligence about the size of enemy forces during the Vietnam War said
yesterday that considerable evidence contradicting the program's thesis had been
excluded or ignored by CBS News.

Attention was refocused on the documentary this week when TV Guide reported the
results of an investigation into the making of the 90-minute documentary, ''The
Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception,'' which was shown Jan. 23. The magazine,
which had access to unedited transcripts of interviews made for the documentary,
concluded that CBS had distorted accounts of events to support the program's
conclusion; had rehearsed an interview with a sympathetic witness, contrary to
network policy; had failed to interview several key figures, and had excluded
portions of interviews with people who contradicted the film's conclusion.

But although the magazine took issue with CBS's jouranlistic practices, it did
not specifically attempt to refute the program's conclusion that there was a
conspiracy to suppress certain intelligence during the Vietnam War.

The documentary was produced by George Crile and narrated by Mike Wallace. Two
of its chief targets -Gen. William C. Westmoreland and Lieut. Gen. Daniel O.
Graham, who has retired from the Air Force - had a news conference several days
after the broadcast and took sharp issue with several of its conclusions.

'Being Reviewed by CBS'

CBS News has chosen not to respond specifically to the charges, but is
reportedly preparing a detailed response. In a statement this week, CBS News
said, ''The TV Guide article raises serious questions that are being reviewed by
CBS.''

The documentary said that a high-level conspiracy led by General Westmoreland,
former commander of American forces in Vietnam, had succeeded in concealing the
true size and strength of enemy forces in the year leading up to the 1968 Tet
offensive.

General Westmoreland denied any such conspiracy at his news conference in
January. He was traveling yesterday. However, General Graham, who worked on the
intelligence staff during the war, said yesterday in a telephone interview that
his rebuttal of the conspiracy thesis was not accurately reflected in the
documentary.

''I had an agreement with Mike Wallace,'' he said, ''that I wouldn't be
interviewed unless he included my assertion that we had actually overestimated
the number of enemy troops in the Tet offensive rather than underestimated them.
I also sent him documentary evidence before the program was aired that there was
no arbitrary lid imposed on our estimates of the enemy's size. Neither of those
things got onto the program.''

Issue of Tet Offensive

Mr. Wallace was out of the country yesterday.  However Sam Adams, a former
Central Intelligence Agency analyst and a key source for the documentary,
defended the decision to exclude some of the rebuttals of Generals Westmoreland
and Graham. ''I think they've manipulated the figures to make it seem that there
were fewer in the Tet offensive than there actually were,'' he said. ''The
figures they gave either lacked internal logic or were flatly wrong.''

Mr. Adams was not only interviewed for the documentary as a witness for the
conspiracy theory, but he was also a consultant, for a fee of $25,000. Mr. Adams
denied that his on-camera interview with Mr.  Wallace was rehearsed - a practice
strictly forbidden by the network's policy -but acknowledged that he did have
the benefit of considerable preparation.

Denial by Rostow

''I was never shown the specific questions I was going to be asked,'' he said.
''But obviously, after working on it day by day for five months, an awful lot of
the ground we covered was familiar to me.''

The documentary also argued that critical intelligence about enemy size was kept
from President Lyndon B. Johnson. However Walt W.  Rostow, the adviser charged
with funneling such information to the President, said yesterday in a telephone
interview that he denied that charge repeatedly to CBS. Mr. Rostow was
interviewed for three hours by Mr. Wallace, but none of the interview was used
on the program.

''President Johnson was fully informed of the intelligence that General
Westmoreland and others provided about size of the enemy forces,'' Mr. Rostow
said. ''I said that to Mr. Wallace in my interview, and I provided evidence for
it in writing to George Crile well in advance of the program, but none of it was
used.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              199 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 28, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. Veterans' Group On Its Way to Vietnam

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 220 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, May 27


A group of seven American veterans of the Vietnam War arrived here this morning
en route to Hanoi and described its hopes of promoting reconciliation between
the United States and Vietnam.

Thomas A. Bird of New York City, the leader of the group, said its members
planned to talk with Vietnamese officials about American soldiers still missing
in action as well as about possible cooperation between Washington and Hanoi in
studying the long-term effects of the defoliant Agent Orange.

Mr. Bird said the group, which is scheduled to fly to Hanoi Friday, also hoped
to discuss the future of thousands of Vietnamese children fathered by Americans
during the war. A fourth topic on the veterans' agenda is their desire to see
cultural exchanges between Vietnam and the United States.

Joseph Papp, the New York theatrical producer, has joined the group. He
described himself today as the veterans' cultural consultant.

Most of the veterans are members of Vietnam Veterans of America, which organized
a similar delegation to Vietnam last December. Mr.  Bird, vice president of the
veterans' group, which reports having 10,000 members nationwide, was also a
member of last year's delegation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              200 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 29, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

GANG STRIFE ON RISE AMONG CALIFORNIA VIETNAMESE

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 932 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


The Anh Dao Vietnamese restaurant on a busy street in San Jose was nearly filled
with 40 to 50 people on a clear day last January when two men, one slender and
quick, the other stocky and muscular, walked in the door.

One posted himself at the entrance while the other strode to a table where eight
Vietnamese were eating lunch. As he neared the table, the police account
continues, the muscular young man pulled a pistol from his pocket, aimed at a
man at the table, fired twice, turned and walked out the restaurant with his
partner at the door.  They stepped into a waiting car and sped away. The victim
was dead in his chair.

Although the police have identified two suspects, both 22-year-old Vietnamese,
neither has been captured.  The slaying is one of a series of similar outbreaks
among Vietnamese in Southern and Central California that point to widespread
gang activity based on extortion. Law-enforcement officials now say that
extortion has become a way of life in the growing Vietnamese communities in
California and elsewhere in the United States.

Usually Physical Threats

The extortion, generally aimed at small merchants, most often takes the form of
physical threats, but sometimes political blackmail is involved, such as
labeling the victim a Communist sympathizer, a serious matter among the often
violently anti-Communist Vietnamese who have settled here.

''It is extremely serious,'' said a police intelligence source in Garden Grove
in Southern California. In that town, a pair of gunmen in ski masks invaded a
Vietnamese restaurant, the Hoang-My, last September and opened fire with a
shotgun at a table of diners, killing a Vietnamese woman and wounding six others
in what was described by the police as ''a classic gangland incident.''

Among those at the table who escaped without injury was a man whom the police
said was under investigation for activity across southern California, a man said
to have at one time been an ''enforcer'' for the Saigon police.

Two days after the Garden Grove killing, the body of a young Vietnamese who had
been shot in the head and bound in a blanket was found in a canyon in San Diego.
There have been others of a similar nature.

'Still in Its Infancy'

''We're dealing with something that is still in its infancy,'' said the Garden
Grove police intelligence officer, ''but within five years it will be extremely
serious.''

There are indications, he said, that a criminal network involving Vietnamese
operates in other parts of the Western United States, but he offered no details.

''Understand that the Vietnamese culture is mobile,'' said Lieut.  Wyatt Hart of
the Orange County Sheriff's Department, discussing the hiring of people for
killings. ''You have some in Texas, you have some in San Jose, San Francisco,
L.A., Orange County, recently in San Diego. There is a place in Texas you can go
to get someone to come down here and hit someone and go back and hide out. Maybe
Houston, San Antonio. We have people come down from San Jose to Orange County
make hits, we have people in Orange County go to L.A. to make hits.''

''We are used to some pretty rough gangs in the United States,'' he said. ''They
would all look like little choirboys compared with the Vietnamese gangs.''

Because of almost universal fear of police authority among Vietnamese,
apparently based on experiences with corrupt and violent police and military
officials in Vietnam, the police here have been largely stalemated in efforts to
fight the problem. The extortion, they say, almost never results in an official
complaint.

Role of Politics Unclear

In some cases, police and other sources report, some gang leaders have military
backgrounds in Vietnam and adopt military names such as the Frogmen or the
Paratroopers. Some purportedly strike a militantly anti-Communist pose, although
police officials say they have no firm idea of what role, if any, politics might
play in gang activity.

The problem with extortion gangs was essentially imported from Vietnam, where it
''is almost a way of life,'' said Lieutenant Hart, and it is widespread in the
Vietnamese merchant community.

He said, ''We ran a survey not too long ago in which we went down one street in
the Vietnamese area, eight or 10 blocks on both sides, 20 to 30 businesses, and
there were only two on that entire street that were not paying protection. But
you don't hear about it because of their experience with the uniform; they don't
trust uniforms because of their experience in Vietnam.''

'Someone Is Going to Pay a Visit'

''And even if they did trust us, they are told the gang has 20 members,'' he
said, ''and 'The police can't protect you; you can rest assured that someone is
going to pay you a visit.' And they know damn well that is going to happen.''

In San Jose, which has a sizable Vietnamese community, the Police Department has
begun a radio program in Vietnamese to explain that the police in the United
States are there to help them, not exploit them.

Victims of extortion, said the San Jose Police Chief, Joseph McNamara, may feel
that some of the people involved in the extortion ''are tied into the government
and are therefore outside the law.'' ''Some of them may not make the distinction
between people in the United States and the Vietnamese Government,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              201 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                May 29, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT NEW YORK

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section 2; Page 27, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 990 words


Memorial Day is the time to remember what those who survived can never forget:
near misses, the whistle of the shell, the wound, the heartbeat, the cessation
of same, the noises, the colors, the casualties of combat.

Memory thrives in the hallways and the television lounges of the Veterans
Administration Hospital in Brooklyn, amid the empty sleeves, the scars snaking
along skin like long white caterpillars and the pale pajamas with ''Government
Property'' stamped over the heart.

Here, war stories are told and retold, and some of them are even true. Ordinary
men recount the moments that made them feel something more than that, talking as
though the invasion of Normandy was last month and it were the Pacific, and not
Lower New York Bay, glittering like sequins outside the hospital windows.

There are, however, two types of veterans among the 800 patients who seem rarely
to regale their fellows with such stories. One type thinks it unseemly to do so.
The others fought in Vietnam.

Philip Solomon is one of the first sort. He was with the Eighth Air Force during
World War II, his outfit stationed near Oxford, England, for missions over
Germany. The plate in his skull was put in by a feisty surgeon who found a pulse
after the staff sergeant had been given up for dead. Now 67 years old, he is in
the hospital recovering from a broken hip.

''It seems like forever ago,'' Mr. Solomon said, sitting tall in a wheelchair.
''But I can remember the airstrip, the airfield, my commanding officer. The
saddest recollection I have is of watching the planes come back and seeing the
flares which told how many were missing or dead.

''The Eighth Air Force was almost wiped out. We were replaced by the Ninth Air
Force. We won the war thanks to fellows like the Cohens and the Kellys and all
the others. I had to keep track of all their names when they went out. Remember,
we were supposed to be fighting the war to end all wars.

''That seems ironic now. Somehow, the glory is lost in the passage of time.
We're not as flag-waving a people as we were and so it's all lost, the whole
essence of Memorial Day. Now it's just a name.''

Down the hall from Mr. Solomon, John A. Canizio shares a room with Vincent J.
Longo, and neither minds telling war stories. Those were, in some ways, the best
years of their lives.

Mr. Canizio was in the Navy, an Italian immigrant boy who lied about his age,
joined up at 16 and served in both World Wars as well as Korea. He was never
wounded, and he remembers not so much how he felt, but the names of ships and
the ports where they docked.

''I remember every bit of it from beginning to end,'' said Mr.  Canizio, who is
81. ''I loved the Navy. I wanted to do my bit for my country. Every once in a
while, I blow this bosun's whistle I got here, got it in Australia. I wake up
the boys, have some fun, bring back memories. The people really appreciated the
servicemen. One time, we put in at Santos, Brazil, they gave us a big affair.
They loved us. After the Second World War, they changed their tune about
servicemen. In Europe, we were idolized. Not like now.''

''That's right,'' said Mr. Longo, a parapaplegic who has been in and out of V.A.
hospitals since 1947. ''I can remember it like tomorrow. Soldiers were soldiers
in World War II. They don't make soldiers like they used to. We went from one
battlefield to another.  I fought in five campaigns, five invasions. I got hit
with a shell in the Ardennes on the 13th of April, and on May 25, the war was
over.

''Eighteen guys got killed, me and another guy got out. It screamed like
screaming meemies, that shell. I didn't know what hit me. I just saw the
upstairs turning around. But I made it. Greatest country in the world.''

Across the hall from those two is Jeffrey W. Scott. When the veterans of the
world wars swap stories, they often say that they do not really remember fear,
that life at the front was too busy or too intense to allow room for it, and
that life not at the front was too mundane. Mr. Scott admits to fear. He was in
the Army in Vietnam in 1965. He is 37 now.

''I think about it all the time,'' he said. ''It wasn't nothing like I imagined
it. There was no way of being prepared for 'Nam mentally.

''From the time we left Georgia, when they said, 'Bag and baggage,' but didn't
tell nobody where we were going, I was scared. I didn't see a lot of combat -
sniper fire, hostile villagers, but not tooth and nail. But there are still a
lot of things you don't like to remember. Like at this little airstrip once, we
were packing bodies on planes. They were wrapped up in something, and you
couldn't believe how many.

''The reasons why we were there - you still don't comprehend them.  I wonder all
the time what it's like there now. I don't like to tell people I served in
Vietnam unless it's absolutely necessary. If you were in 'Nam, they think you're
either a nut job or an addict, and I'm neither one.

''It was different than a lot of other wars the U.S. fought in.  They had the
consent of the American people. Everyone else came home to ticker-tape parades.
We didn't. When the guys start talking war stories, we might talk among
ourselves, not in terms of having a bull session, but some of us who were in
'Nam will talk among ourselves for comfort.''

Mr. Scott says he does not observe Memorial Day, the day set aside for
remembering the war dead. He says he would like to forget. But each man
remembers in his own way. Mr. Longo is angry that there is not more public
respect, that Memorial Day has become just another holiday. Mr. Scott talks
about the men he loaded onto that plane.

''You had to think about them, going home like that,'' he said. ''I think about
them all the time, who they were, you know?''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              202 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PENTAGON DRAWS UP FIRST STRATEGY FOR FIGHTING A LONG NUCLEAR WAR

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2833 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 29


Defense Department policy-makers, in a new five-year defense plan, have accepted
the premise that nuclear conflict with the Soviet Union could be protracted and
have drawn up their first strategy for fighting such a war.

In what Pentagon officials term the ''first complete defense guidance of this
Administration,'' drafted for Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger's
signature, the armed forces are ordered to prepare for nuclear counterattacks
against the Soviet Union ''over a protracted period.''

The guidance document, drawn up in the Pentagon and reflecting its views, will
form the basis for the Defense Department's budget requests for the next five
fiscal years. The document was also a basic source for a recent strategic study
done by the National Security Council, according to Defense Department
officials. That study is the foundation of the Administration's overall
strategic position.

Debate on Nuclear War

The nature of nuclear war has been a subject of intense debate among political
leaders, defense specialists and military officers.  Some assert that there
would be only one all-out mutually destructive exchange. Others argue that a
nuclear war with many exchanges could be fought over days and weeks.

The outcome of the debate will shape the weapons, communications and strategy
for nuclear forces. The civilian and military planners, having decided that
protracted war is possible, say that American nuclear forces ''must prevail and
be able to force the Soviet Union to seek earliest termination of hostilities on
terms favorable to the United States.'' The Pentagon considers a ''protracted''
war anything beyond a single exchange of nuclear weapons.

Those views on nuclear war are expressed in a 125-page unpublished document that
outlines the Pentagon's military strategy in detail for the next five years and
generally for the next decade. Providing the most authoritative insight to date
into the military thinking of the Reagan Administration's senior defense
strategists, it instructs the armed forces to devise plans for defeating the
Soviet Union at any level of conflict from insurgencies to nuclear war.

Other Main Points

The document makes explicit a strategy under which the military forces would be
prepared to strike the Soviet homeland and Soviet allies such as Cuba, Vietnam
and North Korea in the event of a long conventional war with the Soviet Union.

The guidance document makes these other main points:

- Nuclear war strategy would be based on what is known as decapitation, meaning
strikes at Soviet political and military leadership and communications lines.

- Conventional war strategy would give priority to defense of the American
homeland, then to Western Europe and the oil resources of the Persian Gulf.
Defense of Asia ranks lower, and forces may be shifted from the Western Pacific
to other regions if needed.

- In peacetime competition with the Soviet Union, the West's trade policies
would put as much pressure as possible on a Soviet economy already burdened with
military spending.

- Measured military assistance would be given to China in an effort to keep
Soviet forces along the Chinese border tied down.

- Special operations, meaning guerrilla warfare, sabotage and psychological
warfare, would have to be improved. Space would have to be exploited for
American military needs.

- Readiness of existing forces and building ammunition and other stockpiles to
sustain those forces in battle would be given priority over buying new weapons
and equipment. The American defense industry would have to be modernized.

- A lack of funds means that the five-year goal will probably not be reached, so
strategy and forces would have to be as flexible as possible to meet a wide
range of threats.

Plans for Simultaneous Operations

In a conventional war, the document says, ''United States forces might be
required simultaneously in geographically separated theaters,'' such as Europe,
Southwest Asia, and Korea. In particular, the document says, ''it is essential
that the Soviet Union be confronted with the prospect of a major conflict should
it seek to reach the oil resources of the Persian Gulf.''

It emphasizes the threat of simultaneous war in different parts of the world.
President Reagan's national security adviser, William P.  Clark, said last week
that highly mobile American forces would not strike everywhere at once but in
sequence from one target to another.

As a peacetime complement to military strategy, the guidance document asserts
that the United States and its allies should, in effect, declare economic and
technical war on the Soviet Union.

It says that the United States should develop weapons that ''are difficult for
the Soviets to counter, impose disproportionate costs, open up new areas of
major military competition and obsolesce previous Soviet investment.''

A More Detailed Plan

Despite its sometimes arcane language, the document, called ''Fiscal Year
1984-1988 Defense Guidance,'' provides a better understanding of the thinking of
military planners in the Reagan Administration than earlier documents, which
were either routine public statements or revisions of the Carter
Administration's strategy.

In many parts of this document, the Reagan military planners started with a
blank sheet of paper. Their views on the possibility of protracted nuclear war
differ from those of the Carter Administration's military thinkers, as do their
views on global conventional war and particularly on putting economic pressure
on the Soviet Union.

The guidance paper represents the basic views of Mr. Weinberger and his deputy,
Frank C. Carlucci, as well as those of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, senior field
commanders, civilian policy planners and technical specialists.

The document was a basic source for the recent strategic study done by the
National Security Council, according to Defense Department officials. The study
was the foundation of the Administration's overall strategy as described by Mr.
Clark in a speech May 21. But the tone of his address was more restrained than
the guidance document.

How Paper Will Be Used

In the Defense Department, the document will provide the overall strategy for
proposed programs in the military budget, such as procurement of weapons,
operations and maintenance and the size of the armed services for the five years
beginning Oct. 1, 1984.

Those programs will be scrutinized by the Office of Management and Budget, then
by the President before they are sent to Congress for debate and appropriation
of funds. The President, of course, could reduce any of them if the United
States negotiated an arms reduction agreement with the Soviet Union.

The wide-ranging document directs the armed forces to open up new areas of
weaponry, particularly in space, where it proposes the ''prototype development
of space-based weapons systems,'' including weapons to destroy Soviet
satellites.

At the other end of the scale, the plan says that ''we must revitalize and
enhance special-operations forces to project United States power where the use
of conventional forces would be premature, inappropriate or infeasible,''
particularly in Eastern Europe. Special operations is a euphemism for
guerrillas, saboteurs, commandos and similar unconventional forces.

Priorities in the Document

The paper asserts that American forces need better communications and
intelligence. It prepares for Mr. Weinberger orders for a variety of new
communications systems and says ''the services should program resources to
insure that intelligence support is adequate.''

The document says that ''meeting our planning goal during this five-year program
period is probably infeasible'' because of overall budget restraints, the long
time it takes to produce weapons and the urgent need to improve the readiness of
current forces.

It therefore sets priority on recruiting and training, acquiring arms for
existing forces and building stocks of ammunition and other expendable items to
a minimum of a 60-day supply. There is now less than 20 days' supply of many
items.

Beyond the concepts, the document is laced with new directives on specific
items:

- Deployment of the advanced Trident II, or D5, ballistics missile to be
launched from submarines would be moved up a year to 1988. That could bring into
question the development of the MX missile, since it would become available at
best only two years earlier.

- The Rapid Deployment Force, whose mission would be to defend United States oil
sources around the Persian Gulf, would have up to five Army divisions, two
Marine divisions and air wings, 10 Air Force tactical fighter wings and two B-52
wings, and three Navy aircraft carriers and escorts, a force considerably larger
than previously contemplated.

- United States forces would improve their ''capability to assist friendly
oil-producing nations in the repair, restoration or defense of their oilfields
and producing facilities.''

- The Navy and Air Force would work together in new operations to defend sea
lanes and to fight Soviet ships, with the Air Force providing intelligence from
Awacs radar aircraft and flying bombers armed with antiship missiles.

- The Marine Corps would experiment with arming Harriers, the planes that are
the aerial mainstay of the British forces around the Falklands, with nuclear
weapons.

- A new emphasis would be placed on military aid to friendly nations. A Special
Defense Acquisition Fund would be established to order and stock weapons,
including aircraft, that could be sent to troubled allies or other friendly
nations in an emergency.

A Long Nuclear War

In developing a strategy for fighting a protracted nuclear war, Mr. Weinberger's
policy planners went beyond President Carter's Presidential Directive 59, which
focused American nuclear strategy on attacks on specific military and political
targets.

The new nuclear strategy calls on American forces to be able to ''render
ineffective the total Soviet (and Soviet-allied) military and political power
structure.'' But it goes on to require the assured destruction of ''nuclear and
conventional military forces and industry critical to military power.'' Those
forces must be able to maintain, ''through a protracted conflict period and
afterward, the capability to inflict very high levels of damage'' on Soviet
industry.

The nuclear strategy emphasizes communications, so the President and his senior
military advisers could control a nuclear exchange and not be limited to one
all-out response to Soviet attack.

Communications systems ''must provide the capability to execute ad hoc plans,
even subsequent to repeated attacks,'' the document says.  ''In particular,
these systems should support the reconstitution and execution of strategic
reserve forces, specifically full communications with our strategic
submarines.'' Communications with submarines today are considered slow and
cumbersome.

Concerns About the Sea

The guidance plan provides refinements in nuclear doctrine. It says that nuclear
weapons intended for strategic strikes at the Soviet homeland might be used for
attacking targets, such as military bases, in areas such as Eastern Europe. That
appears to be an allusion to cruise missiles launched from submarines.

Moreover, the document says, the Soviet Union might be tempted to start a
nuclear attack on the United States Navy in the belief that the conflict could
be limited to the sea. ''Therefore,'' it says, ''it will be United States policy
that a nuclear war beginning with Soviet attacks at sea will not necessarily
remain limited to the sea.''

The military plan says that development of ballistic missile defense systems to
defend the United States against Soviet nuclear attack would be accelerated. It
also says that the United States might seek a revision in the antiballistic
missile treaty if deployment of the MX intercontinental missile required it.

In conventional arms, the document says that ''United States conventional
forces, in conjunction with those of our allies, should be capable of putting at
risk Soviet interests, including the Soviet homeland.''

Strategies in Facing Aggression

''Counteroffensives will be directed at places where we can affect the outcome
of the war,'' the document says. ''If it is to offset the enemy's attack, it
should be launched against territory or assets that are of importance to him
comparable to the ones he is attacking.''

The armed forces are directed to prepare specific strategies for meeting Soviet
aggression. In Western Europe, it says, ''First priority will be to stop the
initial Warsaw Pact thrust with minimal loss of territory.'' That rejects a
strategy of trading space for time to permit allied forces to build up for a
counterattack.

The paper calls for sea and air transport capable of lifting six Army divisions,
half of a Marine division and air wing and 60 Air Force tactical fighter
squadrons to Europe within 10 days. That would be impossible with current
transport.

Moreover, the document says, ''emphasis will be given to offensive moves against
Warsaw Pact flanks to force diversion of Pact resources from the central
front.'' The northern flank rests on Norway, the southern on Turkey.

Further, ''to exploit political, economic and military weaknesses within the
Warsaw Pact and to disrupt enemy rear operations, specialoperations forces will
conduct operations in Eastern Europe and in the northern and southern NATO
regions,'' the document says.  Particular attention would be given to eroding
support within the Soviet sphere of Eastern Europe.

Persian Gulf Strategy

As outlined in the paper, the strategy for Southwest Asia, including the Persian
Gulf, directs American forces to be ready to force their way in, if necessary,
and not to wait for an invitation from a friendly government, which has been the
publicly stated policy.

It also shows that the primary objective of American military power in that
region would be to stop Soviet infiltration or invasion, and not necessarily to
head off the invasion of one nation by another in the region, as has
occasionally been officially suggested.

The document further discloses that special operations would be among the first
undertaken in case of a Soviet threat to oil sources. ''Special operations,
naval and air forces will assist regional states in impeding a Soviet advance
into the region until United States ground forces can be introduced,'' the paper
says.

It sets a schedule for deploying American forces to that region. It says that
sufficient air and sea transport must be obtained to move the Rapid Deployment
Force with ''initial tactical air and light ground forces arriving within one
week, additional air and ground forces arriving within three weeks and the
remaining forces closing in four to five weeks.''

Lower Priority for West Pacific

It is clear that the Reagan Administration's priority for the defense of the
Western Pacific is lower than that for Western Europe and the Persian Gulf. The
document says some American forces in Asia ''could be redeployed to augment
forces in Europe.'' That sounds similar to the ''swing strategy'' of the Carter
Administration.

Those American forces remaining in the Western Pacific would ''conduct offensive
operations designed to exploit Soviet vulnerabilities critical to the
prosecution of the global conflict and tie up Soviet forces in defensive
roles.''

''Opportunities for counteroffensives against North Korea, Vietnam, and Soviet
coastal areas will be exploited,'' the document says.  Reducing Soviet access to
technology from the United States and other non-Communist countries has long
been among Mr. Weinberger's keenest objectives and the Pentagon plan reflects
that. It also reflects an intention to execute a technical strategy designed to
erode Soviet economic strength.

That strategy, the plan says, should focus ''investment on weapons systems that
render the accumulated Soviet equipment stocks obsolescent.'' It should impose
''costs on the Soviets by raising uncertainty regarding their ability to
accomplish some of their higher-priority missions.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: table of Pentagon proposal for military forces photo of
Caspar W. Weinberger

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              203 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
SUNDAY, MAY 30, 1982

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 575 words


International
900 Argentine prisoners were taken by Britain during its recapture of Darwin and
Goose Green on the Falkland Islands, the Ministry of Defense announced in
London. The British reportedly advanced on two fronts toward Stanley, the
Argentine-held capital of the Falklands.  (Page 1, Column 6.)
Help from ''other latitudes'' may be sought by Argentina in its war with Britain
over the Falkland, President Leopoldo Galtieri said in a speech in Buenos Aires
on Argentina's Army Day. (16:1.)
Latin American foreign ministers condemned Britain's attack on the Falklands and
urged the United States to halt its aid to the British. The vote to place the
Organization of American States on the side of Argentina was taken after 17
hours of debate in Washington. The United States was among the four nations that
abstained in the 17 to 0 vote. (1:5.)
The Pope was welcomed joyfully in Canterbury, England, home of the Anglican
Church, where, on the second day of his historic ''pilgrimage for peace'' to
Britain, he participated in an emotional service at Canterbury Cathedral with
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Most Rev. Robert Runcie. (1:-3-4.)
A protracted U.S.-Soviet nuclear war is possible, Pentagon policymakers have
decided, and they have drawn up their first strategy for fighting such a war.
(1:1-2.)
U.S. encouragement of democracy in developing countries and where possible in
Communist countries will be the aim of a new quasigovernmental organization that
President Reagan is expected to announce soon. (1:1.)
Vietnam released information about four American soldiers who were believed
killed in the Vietnam War to a group of six Vietnam veterans and three other
Americans who are visiting Hanoi. (3:3-6.)
U.S. and European economic goals are expected to be wide apart when the leaders
of the seven major industrialized democracies meet this week for an economic
summit conference in Versailles, France. The United States's principal concern
with fighting inflation is expected to clash with the Western European aim of
stimulating employment.  (1:4-6.)
National
A Soviet-U.S. nuclear arms freeze is favored by Americans, but only if it does
not give the Soviet Union an advantage, according to a New York Times-CBS News
Poll. (1:1-2.)
A gunman invaded a TV station in Phoenix, held a news anchorman and three others
of the staff hostage and forced the anchorman to broadcast over KOOL-TV a
statement saying that World War III would begin in 1984 and that Argentina would
destroy London with an atom bomb. After the statement was read, the gunman
surrendered. (24:5-6.)
Metropolitan
Private voluntary hospitals in New York City are increasingly restricting clinic
care to patients who either are medically insured or can afford to pay fees,
according to city health officials and the hospitals themselves. The rejected
patients, all of them poor, are generally encouraged to seek care at the nearest
municipal hospital. (1:1.)
Two restaurant patrons were shot in Old Westbury, L.I., by six gunmen, who
forced 75 other patrons to undress. The gunmen left after 45 minutes with an
undetermined amount of cash and jewelry. Three suspects were taken into custody
nine hours later after exchanging gunshots with New York City police. (26:1-3.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              204 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

VIETNAM RELEASES INFORMATION ON MISSING AMERICANS

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 29


Vietnam released information today about four American soldiers who were
believed killed in the Vietnam War and said more bodies of dead soldiers would
be returned to the United States.

The information was given to a group of six Vietnam veterans and three other
Americans who arrived in the capital Friday.  The Hanoi Government also
announced that in the future it would deal with the veterans' group, and not
with the United States Government, on questions involving 2,500 American
servicemen whose fates in the Vietnam War are still unresolved.

Names Listed for 4

A Vietnamese spokesman gave the names of four Americans who had been listed as
missing in action in Vietnam and said that the bodies of four or five other
Americans had been found.

Only one of the eight or nine reported sets of physical evidence included both a
body and an identity card. The body was said to be that of Lieut. (j.g.) Donald
Patrick Frye.

The Vietnamese Government said Lieutenant Frye was believed killed on July 19,
1967, in the province now known as Ha Nam Ninh, south of Hanoi. The province is
the product of a merger of the former provinces of Ha Nam and Ninh Binh.

Three other American servicemen, whose identification cards but not bodies were
turned over to the veterans, were listed as Joe R.  Mossman, Hestle Roosevelt
and Knapp Fredrick Woodrow.

No Information Provided

The Vietnamese provided no other information except to say that the three name
tags were found in the three provinces of Ngha Tinh, Bac Thai and Binh Tri
Thien.

Bac Thai Province is north of Hanoi. Ngha Tinh and Binh Tri Thien Provinces are
along a central strip of Vietnam, from north of the city of Vinh to a few miles
below the former South Vietnamese city of Hue.

A Vietnamese spokesman said that ''three or four'' other unidentified bodies had
been discovered in Ha Nam Ninh Province and that another body believed to be
that of an American had been found in Quang Ninh Province, which stretches
northeast from Haiphong to the Chinese border.

It was not clear when the bodies would be turned over to the veterans.

Vietnamese Cites Ingratitude

The last bodies of American soldiers to have been turned over by the Vietnamese
were three that were returned to the United States last July. Vietnam's chief
negotiator with the veterans, Viet Ngo Minh, said today that the ingratitude
shown then by Washington had helped persuade Hanoi to deal with the veterans
rather than with Washington.

The veterans were invited by the Vietnamese Government on a weeklong visit after
a similar trip last December. The announcement about the return of the bodies
was made to a small number of Western newspaper and television reporters after a
closed three-hour meeting between the veterans and the Vietnamese.

The reporters were granted visas to cover the veterans' trip.  Mr. Minh said the
bodies were discovered in the last few months, after a United States Defense
Department team left Hanoi last February. The team, led by Deputy Assistant
Secretary of Defense Richard L. Armitage, came to Hanoi to inquire about
Americans missing in action. It left with an agreement that the Vietnamese would
send experts to Hawaii to study the technical aspects of identification.

Mr. Minh said today that the experts might still go to Hawaii in August.  The
American veterans and their lawyer and the theatrical producer Joseph Papp, who
joined the trip to promote cultural exchanges between Vietnam and the United
States, were later received by Vietnam's Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach.

Mr. Armitage's mission was not received by Mr. Thach.

----

U.S. Accepts Hanoi's Move

Special to the New York Times

WASHINGTON, May 29 - The Defense Department issued a statement today in reaction
to the report that the Hanoi Government planned to deal with the veterans' group
on matters concerning the fate of missing American servicemen.

''We believe the resolution of the M.I.A. accounting issue depends on
Government-to-Government cooperation, but the U.S. Government is willing to
accept remains from whatever source,'' the statement said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 11, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition and June 12,
1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A dispatch from Hanoi on May 30 transposed the names of two American servicemen
whose identification cards were given to a group of Vietnam veterans by the
Vietnamese Government. The correct names are Roosevelt Hestle Jr. and Woodrow
Frederick Knapp.

A correction yesterday, referring to a dispatch from Hanoi published on May 30
about missing American servicemen, incorrectly gave one name. It is Fredric
Woodrow Knapp.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              205 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE TWO FACES OF SPIELBERG-HORROR VS. HOPE

BYLINE: By MICHIKO KAKUTANI

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 3; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2754 words


As a child growing up in the 50's, Steven Spielberg knew, just knew, that
another magical and somehow terrifying world lay just beyond the placid surface
of his family's suburban life. Even the tiny crack in his bedroom wall,
illuminated by the hallway light, promised all sorts of awful marvels. ''I
remember lying there, trying to go to sleep,'' he says, ''and I used to always
imagine little Hieronymus Bosch-like creatures inside, peeking out and
whispering to me to come into the playground of the crack and be drawn into the
unknown there, inside the wall of my home in New Jersey.''

To this day, Mr. Spielberg says he continues to be fascinated by ''what I think
is there but cannot see,'' and that capacity for wonder, combined with a
prodigal imagination, has informed nearly all his films from ''Jaws'' to ''Close
Encounters of the Third Kind'' to ''Raiders of the Lost Ark.''

In his latest pictures, Mr. Spielberg returns to the suburban milieu of his own
childhood, but invests that world with two dramatic and highly disparate visions
of the supernatural: ''Poltergeist,'' (opening Friday) which he produced and
co-wrote, is a darkly imagined horror movie, portraying a family threatened by
the vengeful spirits of the dead; while ''E.T.,'' (opening June 11) the story of
a 10-year old boy who befriends an extraterrestrial stranded on earth, is, in
effect, a contemporary fairy tale, offering a vision of innocence and hope.

'' 'Poltergeist' is what I fear and 'E.T.' is what I love,'' explains Mr.
Spielberg. ''One is about suburban evil and the other is about suburban good. I
had different motivations in both instances: in 'Poltergeist,' I wanted to
terrify and I also wanted to amuse - I tried to mix the laughs and screams
together. 'Poltergeist' is the darker side of my nature - it's me when I was
scaring my younger sisters half to death when we were growing up - and 'E.T.' is
my optimism about the future and my optimism about what it was like to grow up
in Arizona and New Jersey.''

A romantic and an idealist when it comes to making movies, Mr.  Spielberg is not
so much interested in depicting life as it is, so much as life as it might be -
heightened and idealized on the screen. Ghosts (''Poltergeist''),
extraterrestrials (''E.T.''), U.F.O.'s (''Close Encounters'') and vengeful
killer sharks (''Jaws'') help animate his pictures, and in others, a single
incident - a young outlaw couple's decision to retrieve their child in ''The
Sugarland Express,'' for instance, or the appearance of a Japanese submarine off
the coast of California in ''1941'' - triggers an accelerating sequence of
events, the sort of wonderfully improbable events that happen only in the
movies.

''I have a real chemical imbalance between what's real and what's not,'' says
Mr. Spielberg. ''I tend to side with what isn't real in picking a subject, more
than I do with what's really happening out there in the street -enough directors
make movies that reflect life as we see it every day. There's no proof U.F.O.'s
exist or that ghosts exist, but it's always nice to imagine what you think could
be there, and the best movies I've ever seen are movies that are slightly above
one's normal eye level - something you have to reach up to and suspend your
disbelief.''

Indeed, the sort of movies Mr. Spielberg likes to make have the same effect on
audiences that the pictures he saw as a young boy had on his youthful
imagination: they enthrall and entertain and they ''take people out of their
seats to get them involved - through showmanship - in a kind of emotional
dialogue'' with the film. As a child, in fact, Mr. Spielberg says he never
dreamed of becoming a director; he dreamed of becoming ''all those heroic people
up there on the screen.'' And as far as he is concerned, making movies still
provides a certain vicarious pleasure, a kind of celluloid substitute for all
his Walter Mitty dreams.

''In the past,'' he says, ''I've made movies about experiences that I've never
had because that way I can explore all those 'what ifs.' You see, I'm all the
characters in my movies. I was as much Indiana Jones as Harrison Ford was in
'Raiders,' and in 'E.T.,' I was E.T.'s eyes. Through the movie, I had to imagine
what it would be like to be a creature visiting earth and what life would be
like from his perspective.''

The real heroes in most of Mr. Spielberg's pictures, however, are not such
anomalous characters as E.T., but people who represent his version of
Hitchcock's innocent bystanders. They are ''ordinary people,'' as Dr. Lacombe
says in ''Close Encounters,'' ''under extraordinary circumstances'' - people
like the suburban families in ''Close Encounters,'' ''E.T.'' and
''Poltergeist,'' who live in pleasant ranch houses filled with appliances and
television sets and refrigerators stocked with beer and Cokes and potato salad.

''They're common, everyday types of people to whom nothing really happens until
I come along,'' says Mr. Spielberg. ''In the movies I've made, I've tried very,
very hard to take the bystander, toughen him up, thereby robbing him of his
innocence, in order to combat the forces that are against him. I love movies
where there are opposing forces and they're stronger than the hero and the hero
must succeed either by finding a way around or straight through.''

In the case of ''E.T.,'' Mr. Spielberg points out, the opposing force is not a
tangible enemy like the shark in ''Jaws,'' but the intrusion of the grown-up
world. Whereas 10-year-old Elliott wants only to love and be loved by his
extraterrestrial friend, this grownup world, represented by corps of doctors and
technicians, wants to preserve E.T. as a specimen of alien life. ''I always
thought of the adult world as being symbolized by tall people who cast giant
shadows,'' says Mr. Spielberg, ''people who don't think like kids, but think
like professionals. That's dangerous - they might understand E.T. biologically
and scientifically, but they'd never ever understand that he had a heart.''

A similar message, of course, has long been a favorite theme in children's
literature - from J.M. Barrie's ''Peter Pan'' to Antoine de Saint-Exupery's
''The Little Prince'' - and ''E.T.'' is filled with references to well-known
books and films. During one scene, for instance, John Williams's score recalls
the music used in ''The Wizard of Oz'' to accompany the Wicked Witch, Miss
Gulch; and in the movie's penultimate scene, Elliott and his friends soar into
the sky on their bicycles, in much the same way that Peter Pan and Wendy flew
off to Never Never Land. Certainly Mr. Spielberg and the writer of the film,
Melissa Mathison, were well aware of the genre they were working in - before
starting, they screened such movies as ''Night of the Hunter,'' ''Bambi,'' ''The
Blue Bird'' and ''Our Mother's House'' - but the film also grew out of
preoccupations that have animated Mr. Spielberg's work from the beginning.

Most of his movies, after all, have featured children in important or emblematic
roles. ''Sugarland,'' ''Close Encounters'' and ''Poltergeist,'' for instance,
all involve the attempt of a mother to regain custody of her child. And in both
''Close Encounters'' and ''E.T.,'' it is a child - and those adults who maintain
a childlike innocence and openness to the possibility of miracles - who is
granted communion with these visitors from outer space and a vision of a more
lovely world.

''I've always wanted to do something about kids because I'm still a kid,'' says
Mr. Spielberg, who at 34 still radiates a boyish enthusiasm and ingenuous charm.
''I'm still waiting to get out of my Peter Pan shoes and into my loafers. I
think it's easier for me to have a complete conversation from Pac-Man to
exobiology with an 11-year-old than it is to sit down with an adult and discuss
Nietzsche and the Falklands. Why? I guess because I'm probably socially
irresponsible and way down deep I don't want to look the world in the eye.
Actually, I don't mind looking the world in the eye, as long as there's a movie
camera between us.''

That, of course, is exactly what Mr. Spielberg has been doing since he made his
first home movie at the age of 12. The son of a computer specialist and a
concert-pianist mother who were divorced when he was a teen-ager, Mr. Spielberg
says he was an awkward child - ''the weird, skinny kid with the acne'' - who
didn't have a lot of friends. His parents moved several times, from Ohio to New
Jersey to Arizona to California, uprooting Steven and his three younger sisters,
and leaving him with a lasting sense of dislocation.

Movies, the young boy discovered, opened up a new world of possiblities - an
exciting world wonderfully different from the suburbs his parents always lived
in - and he soon learned that he could express himself more easily with a movie
camera than by talking in school or writing papers or having grown-up
conversations with his parents. ''Movies took the place of crayons and
charcoal,'' he says, ''and I was able to represent my life at 24 frames a
second.'' At 12, he filmed a collision between his Lionel train sets. At 13, he
earned a Boy Scout merit badge by making a three-minute eight-millimeter film
that featured one of his friends robbing a stagecoach and counting the money.
And at 16, he made ''Firelight,'' a two-and-ahalf-hour science fiction movie
that anticipated ''Close Encounters.''

And when the young Mr. Spielberg was not making movies, he was watching them or
watching such television shows as ''The Honeymooners,'' ''Captain Midnight'' and
''Sky King.'' Such Disney films as ''Bambi,'' ''Fantasia'' and ''Snow White''
imparted a moralistic sense of good and evil, as well as a well-developed sense
of terror, and he says he also learned important lessons about characterization
and story-telling from Frank Capra movies like ''A Pocketful of Miracles,''
''Meet John Doe'' and ''It's a Wonderful Life.''

While enrolled at California State College in Long Beach, Mr.  Spielberg spent
most of his free time sneaking onto the Universal lot and making his own
16-millimeter films. In 1969, having gotten little response to his work, he
decided to shoot something that would prove to industry executives that he
''could move a camera and compose nicely and deal with lighting and
performances.'' The result was ''Amblin','' a 24-minute short about a pair of
hitchhikers, which won awards at both the Venice and Atlanta film festivals.

The movie, he later recalled, represented ''an attack of crass commercialism.''
''When I look back at the film,'' he said once, ''I can easily say, 'No wonder I
didn't go to Kent State' or 'No wonder I didn't go to Vietnam or I wasn't
protesting when all my friends were carrying signs and getting clubbed in
Century City.' I was off making movies, and 'Amblin' ' is the slick byproduct of
a kid immersed up to his nose in film.''

Still,''Amblin' '' fulfilled its young director's purpose - it won him a
contract with Universal, and Mr. Spielberg was soon directing television
episodes of ''Night Gallery,'' ''Marcus Welby'' and ''Columbo.'' ''Duel,'' a
television movie about a motorist pursued by a malevolent, phantom truck, won
him critical acclaim, and at 25, Mr. Spielberg was directing his first feature
film, ''The Sugarland Express.''

As critics duly noted, craft and technique came easily to Mr.  Spielberg: he had
an instinctive ability to manipulate suspense and expectation, and a rare sense
of graphic dynamics that enabled him to tell a story through striking visual
images and well-timed cuts. If choreographing large-scale effects came easily,
however, Mr.  Spielberg says he found characterization and the examination of
personal relationships more problematic. ''The hard thing for me,'' he says of
his earlier films, ''was answering questions like 'Who is this person?' 'Why do
we like this guy?' 'Why should we spend two hours watching these people?' So I
always used to make the story or the event almost as important as the
characters.''

Up until ''E.T.,'' in fact, Mr. Spielberg's films have been very much the work
of someone who has felt more comfortable employing a sophisticated cinematic
vocabulary than exposing deeply personal concerns. Created by a director who has
spent hundreds of hours watching movies and discussing them with friends -Mr.
Spielberg belongs to that closely-knit community of young filmmakers including
Francis Coppola, George Lucas and John Milius - his pictures are not only
technically innovative but also replete with allusions to other movies.
''Jaws,'' for instance, recalls old science fiction pictures; ''Close
Encounters'' makes references to works by Disney and Hitchcock; and ''Raiders''
pays homage to, even as it reinvents, the old Saturday matinee serials.

He never believed in anything, Mr. Spielberg once said, until he discovered
film, and it is only recently that exposure to friends outside the business -
including his girlfriend, Kathleen Carey, who works in music publishing - has
made him realize that all those hours spent in dark theaters as a kid left
certain ''emotional and intellectual gaps.''

''I'm still filling them in,'' he says now. ''But you just can't pick up 20
years of lost weekends. Movies are my life, but I see now that for some people
movies are only a twice a year experience and that in the rest of their lives,
there are great decisions to be made: when to have children, where to send them
to school, are they growing up O.K., and how to make enough money to provide for
everyone. It's sort of made me realize that there's more to life than making
movies -though it's still easier to say then to demonstrate.''

While Mr. Spielberg notes that he has recently given more attention to his
private life than ever before, he remains ''a workaholic,'' incapable of taking
a vacation for more than a couple days. In addition to helping out young,
aspiring filmmakers by serving as executive producer on their pictures - he was
executive producer of such films as ''Used Cars,'' ''Continental Divide'' and
''I Want to Hold Your Hand'' - he has several projects of his own lined up. He
is currently co-writing a backstage Hollywood musical called ''Reel to Reel,''
and plans to direct the sequel to ''Raiders'' next summer. This fall, if all
goes well, he will also direct ''Always,'' a reworking of the old 1943 film ''A
Guy Named Joe,'' which he describes as ''a love story with a slightly other
worldly twist.''

For Mr. Spielberg, that project, like ''E.T.,'' reflects his new determination
to make films more concerned with characters and their personal lives, and it
also reflects a new openness, on his own part, toward emotions. ''I think I've
opened up more in the last three or four years than I had ever before,'' he
says. ''I allowed myself to be hurt. I'd never really allowed anything to reach
me before - I was always over-rationalizing just in order not to deal with it -
and I think that now that I'm starting to deal with just basic things in a
relationship with Kathleen, I'm able to turn around and be a little more open
through movies about how I feel.''

''E.T.,'' he goes on, ''really expresses how I feel this year about a lot of
things. Five years ago, I think I would probably have been too embarrassed about
what people might think of me to make 'E.T.' or even respond to an idea like
this. I had to essentially get over my fear of running through the world naked
and say, 'take me or leave me.' I guess my priorities have shifted over the last
half a decade, and in a nice way I think it's come back around through my
films.That's what I mean about running around naked for the first time - I'm
saying I'm going to deal with people, with what makes them happy and what makes
them cry.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of E.T. (page 30) photo of Steven Spielberg

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              206 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

The Editorial Notebook Remembering the NOK

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 386 words


The following passage is from ''Neverlight,'' a new novel about Vietnam by
Donald Pfarrer.  He was Lieutenant Commander something.  She hardly saw his
uniform and did not see his face at all, but she caught the rank. Richard had
said all lieutenant commanders were soft in the head. She forgot the reason, but
Richard declared that even good men went bad on promotion to that rank.

Inside she took off her jacket, and the officer could not but see her
excellence.  She said: ''You have to be gone before my daughter comes.'' Every
repetitious governmental event has a form and this is the form of this event.
The Casualty Assistance Call Officer (CACO) does not speculate. He tells the
primary next of kin (NOK) only what is known of the death, that a telegram will
confirm his verbally

'The CACO Does Not Leave The NOK Alone'
furnished information, and that a letter from the commanding officer of the
deceased service member may amplify upon it... After the initial notification
the CACO does not leave the NOK alone. He assists her in telephoning a friend or
relative and remains with her until the arrival of the friend or relative...

In the full performance of his duty the CACO will thoroughly cover the rights,
privileges, and options of the NOK in these areas: burial
allowance/reimbursements, government headstone, memorial flag, military honors,
military funeral with firing squad and/or bugler, arrears of pay, death
gratuity, personal effects of the deceased service member, decorations and
awards, transportation for dependents and household goods, insurance, social
security, uniformed services identification and privilege card, hospital and
medical care, exchange and commissary privileges, Navy Relief Society aid, and
other appropriate assistance...

She imagined that the lieutenant commander still sat at the table and said: ''He
was going to the assistance of a wounded man....'' (T)hen came a series of
sharp, hard contractions in her throat. She gave voice for the first time, to
release the pain, but the sounds she made were mere inarticulate cries. She
couldn't say ''Richard'' until much later, when she sat quietly staring out the
window at the green leaves of the maples.

She prepared herself, because she wanted to speak. Very carefully she said:
''Richard. My beloved.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              207 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ROW, ROW, ROW YOUR BOAT;
by Roy Blount Jr.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 6, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words


THE SHELL GAME Reflections on Rowing and the Pursuit of Excellence.  By Stephen
Kiesling.  200 pp. New York: William Morrow & Co. $10.50.

I am one of those people who don't care whether Yale does or does not beat
Harvard, or anyone else, in anything. Especially crew. Nor do I care whether
Harvard has painted a scarlet, or a crimson, "H" on Yale's rock. Or maybe it
isn't Yale's rock; it's the rock of whoever painted it last. I don't care.

No American, however, can afford to be aloof from the competitive drive. "The
Shell Game," by a 1980 Yale graduate who was a member of not only the Eli but
also the United States National and Olympic rowing teams - and who cared deeply
about whose letter was on the rock - is a report from along that drive's very
shaft.

When in recent years a young American wrote a book of any note about of any note
about how he bent his will to a fiercely competitive team sport, he was usually
alienated, and his title was something like "Meat on the Hoof." Even "Ball
Four," Jim bouton's wonderfully celebrative baseball memoir, was a misfit's
account.  Mr. Bouton had earlier been a fully immersed smoke baller, but by the
time he started taking notes he was trying to pass as a big-league athlete, with
the help of that detached gadfly of a pitch, the knuckle ball. His experience
teetered poignantly, comically, on the cusp between direct and vicarious. Mr.
Kiesling has somewhat more detachment toward rowing-for-victory than George
Gilder has toward capitalism, but he admits to being a true believer in whatever
it takes to row "through" opponents' boats.  And he has little interest in what
his sport looks like form the outside: "As an athlete, I see the fan - not the
loser - as the victim. The fan submerges himself in the spectacle but he can no
more affect it than he can alter the lines of a play."

"The Shell Game" is actually a misleading title, insofar as it hints of roguery
and exploitation. Eye rolling and head shaking are staples of many a good sports
book, but Mr. Kiesling is neither tickled nor appalled by obsessive,
sinew-abusing, friendship-disrupting competition. He is into it: "The Spartan
way of life: living with men in isolated camps ordered by a rigid hierarchy of
age and strenght; waking early to train all day in an uproductive enterprise
while others provide subsistence; a rigorous, demanding life without culture,
art or love, but with fraternity, dignity, pretige and most of all a goal."

It is nice to see the word "Spartan" used advisedly. Gales Ferry, where rowing
Yalies train, "is a Spartan camp," Mr. Kiesling says, "and there I spent some of
the most rewarding and pleasant moments of my life" - rowing himself nowhere but
"from what seems to be the limit of physical endurance to what is the limit,"
time and time again.

I had always thought of rowing, vaguely, as a strenuous but I-say-old-man sport,
and indeed Mr. Kiesling sometimes evokes Bertie Wooster: "Lounging on the
retaining wall with a sketchbook was Chris Choa, the French-Chinese New Yorker
from Exeter wearing his blue silk smoking jacker and white scarf over a
fluorescent orange bowling shirt. I could understand why the Fascist Four
considered him a bit odd, but by his senior year his own blend of fanciful
intellect and obsessive determinatin would propel him, tinsel-speckled scarf and
all, into the bow seat of the varsity, the captaincy and the crypt of Bones."

It would seem however, that the oarsman's aimis to put the coonskin on the wall.
A victorios crew traditionally takes the shirts from the backs of the
vanquished: "By thetime we tied our boats back on the trailer for the return to
New Haven, fourteen shirts were slung, dripping with others' sweat, over my left
shoulder...  Every rowing power in the East had been reduced to the amorphous,
barebacked crowd before us." It will be recalled that several of the architects
ofour policy in Vietnam, for instance, were from Harvard and Yale.

Mr. Kiesling is not always fully baked, but he often knows what many a writer
never knows: exactly what he is doing. His rendering of the physical experience
of rowing is economically vivid: "Somewhere in that stretch the boat tipped to
starboard and I rolled up the slide and returned without ever setting my blade
in the water. The boat balanced again, but durig that brief absence of pain the
unconscious rhythm had been broken. For a moment it seemed whether the oar was
in the water or not made no difference, my legs did the same thing. In panic I
rushed up for the next few strokes to prove that I was still there, still
pulling." For the absence of pain to come as a shock is an earned eloquent
touch.

Maybe in the future - perhaps during a different Presidency - Mr. Kiesling will
worry more about whether extreme excellence in rowing, as in so many other
American pursuits, is a good thing.  He hints at that possibility himself. But
just as it is good that there was one serious riverboat pilot (his other
interests aside) who could write, it is good that there is one trueblue jock who
can.

AUTHOR'S QUERY

For the next two volumes of "The Vietnam Experience," our history of the war, we
would appreciate hearing from veterans who served in Vietnam from 1965-68. The
first of the two will deal close-up with the fighting from 1965 to the eve of
the Tet offensive, the second with Tet and its aftermath through 1968. We
welcome brief descriptions, with date of service, MOS, rank, unit and area
operations.  ROBERT MANNING Boston Publishing Co.  355 Commonwealth Ave.
Boston, Mass 02115

Roy Blount Jr. is the suthor of "Crackers" and "About Three Bricks Shy of a
Load."

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              208 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE FARE IN ABIDJAN

SECTION: Section 10; Page 20, Column 5; Travel Desk

LENGTH: 738 words


PRANAY B.GUPTE is a Times correspondent based in Nairobi.

BY PRANAY B.GUPTE

W hen South Vietnam was overrun by the North Vietnamese in 1974, Do Dac Loc,
South Vietnam's Ambassador to the Ivory Coast, his wife and their six children
stayed on in Abidjan, and thousands of Ivorians, Frenchmen and other nationals
are delighted that they did. For the Loc family operates a first-rate Vietnamese
restaurant in the bustling tropical capital in West Africa.

Abidjan, probably the most prosperous city in all of black Africa, has excellent
French, Ivorian and Chinese restaurants by the score and residents of the city
have fussy palates. Yet even the most demanding Abidjani food critic applauds
after a meal at Mr. Loc's establishment, Le Dalat.

Vietnam starts at the gate of the one-story bungalow that Mr. Loc has built at
12 Rue Paris in the Plateau section of Abidjan (telephone 327950; reservations
are advised because only about 25 diners can be accommodated at any one time).
There are Vietnamese motifs outside and displays of Vietnamese porcelain and
paintings inside. Each table, covered with crisp Ivorian linen, has a vase of
freshly cut flowers from Mr. Loc's garden. There is no piped-music and the
air-conditioning is correctly adjusted for the constant humidity.

The time it takes to serve dishes is calibrated differently for lunch and for
dinner: At lunchtime, service is so swift that it reminds one of fast-food
restaurants in the United States. Since the restaurant is situated in the heart
of Abidjan's busy commercial section, dozens of office workers and executives,
as well as diplomats, crowd Le Dalat at lunch.

Practically every dish on the menu is good, but here are some suggestions. To
start with, try the soupe d'abalone with transparent vermicelli. At lunchtime,
this soup, which is served in an enormous bowl, can be a meal in itself.

After the soup, nems are a favorite. They are Vietnamese egg rolls stuffed with
meat, usually pork. There is a special way to eat a nem: Take a small lettuce
leaf, place some mint shreds on it, then wrap the lettuce around the roll, dunk
it first in chili sauce and next in a sweetish relish and pop it into your
mouth.

The main course might be crevettes maison or crevettes sauce piquante, both
shrimps with sauce. Boeuf aux ananas (beef with pineapple) is sauted or
pan-fried, depending on your preference.  Poulet amande (chicken with almonds)
is another recommended dish. It comes with a sauce that contains mint and a dash
of curry. Porc a la citronnelle is shredded pork immersed in a hill of lemon
sauce and mint leaves.

The main courses should be eaten with rice, preferably simple boiled rice rather
than fried rice.  For the first-time visitor, it's a bit of a shock to see a
Vietnamese restaurant in Africa. Somehow, Chinese, Malagasy, Thai or Creole
restaurants - to name a few that grace this city of one million people - seem
not to draw sighs of surprise. But the Ivory Coast has been a haven for the
politically dispossessed for many years, as long as they are not Communist, and
it has been offering sanctuary to an increasing number of Vietnamese since 1974.
In that year, the Loc family was one of five Vietnamese families in Abidjan.
Now there are more than 3,000 Vietnamese men, women and children and a dozen
Vietnamese restaurants.

The children serve as waiters. Mr. Loc and his wife prepare the 70 dishes
offered daily on the menu, which is printed on beige ricepaper. A couple can
dine and wine well for about $20.

The Vietnamese have been drawn to the Ivory Coast, in part, because they share
the Ivorians's French heritage. Also, the climate is tropical and humid, much
like Vietnam's. And because of the economic boom - induced by the Ivory Coast's
new-found oil wealth and by vast amounts of French investment - opportunities
are increasingly available in service industries, such as catering. So these
days it is not uncommon to see Vietnamese faces behind counters in stores,
behind the wheels of taxis and behind the cash registers of such restaurants as
Le Dalat, which have prospered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Le Dalat

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              209 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PURPLE HEART: HOLDERS REMINISCE

BYLINE: By PATRICIA SQUIRES

SECTION: Section 11; New Jersey; Page 17, Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 945 words


WHEN John Guarracino of Hoboken was in an Army hospital during World War I - he
had been hit in the foot by shrapnel and, later, gassed - he neglected to
correct his misspelled name on hospital records.

The error led to a 63-year delay in the presentation of official citations to
Mr. Guarracino. In fact, it was not until he went to live at the New Jersey Home
for Disabled Soldiers in Menlo Park that the Army learned his correct identity.

There, in August 1980, Brig. Gen. V. O. Lang presented the Purple Heart medal to
Mr. Guarracino for being wounded in action, the Silver Star medal for valor and
the Victory medal for service in World War I.

Earlier this month, Mr. Guarracino, now 87 years old, stood with 59 other Purple
Heart veterans as heavy artillery roared a 10-gun salute at the Army Armament
Research and Development Command in Dover (known more familiarly as Picatinny
Arsenal).

Among those 59 others was Mr. Guarracino's son, Patrick, 62, of the Woodbridge
Township community of Avenel. The younger Mr. Guarracino was aboard the carrier
Salamau in the Pacific in 1945 when a Japanese kamikaze pilot hit the flight
deck.

''The cylinder from the plane's engine grazed the back of my head,'' the younger
Mr. Guarracino recalled. ''My main worry was that I did not know how to swim.

''The ship started to list, but life rafts were all around us and I figured I
wouldn't drown. The ship did stay afloat.'' A month later, on Feb. 13, 1945, Mr.
Guarracino received his Purple Heart aboard the Salamau in Pearl Harbor.
Because George Washington established the Purple Heart medal 200 years ago at
Newburgh, N.Y., it bears an embossed likeness of him.  The medal is awarded in
the name of the President to members of the armed forces or to civilians wounded
or killed in military action after April 5, 1917, or to those who die as a
result of wounds suffered in combat.

The Gilbert Islands, Tunisia, Sicily, Normandy, Korea and Vietnam seemed remote
in time and distance to the 60 veterans at the Army Command gathering, but many
expressed mixed sentiments of pride, sadness and nostalgia as they recalled
their days in military service.

Thomas J. Quinn, 62, of the Morris County community of Lake Winona, remembered
several ''near misses'' as an infantryman in World War II battles from North
Africa to France.

In 1943, four years after Mr. Quinn's initial Army training at Fort Lewis,
Wash., his commanding officer was Gen. Dwight D. Eisenhower.  ''Serving with Ike
was like a family affair,'' Mr. Quinn said, recalling that at age 18 he had been
assigned to drive Mrs.  Eisenhower on shopping trips to Tacoma. With the 50-cent
tip she always gave him, he recalled, he bought two pitchers of beer and had a
dime left over to go roller skating. Once a week, he said, the general ate meals
in the mess hall with his soldiers.

Mr. Quinn remembered volunteering for duty in the Kasserine Pass in Tunisia
after three Army divisions were nearly wiped out there in early 1943 and more
men were needed. Shortly after that, he was wounded.

''I recovered from my wounds and returned to duty,'' he said. ''I finally did
get hit, but I didn't consider myself brave. I was plenty scared, but war was
our job.''

Gasper H. Squitieri, 70, of Butler said he remembered how, on Oct.  23, 1944, as
his regiment advanced on the German border, he was hit by enemy fire. He lost
one leg and part of the other foot and was hospitalized for four years. He was
awarded both the Purple Heart and the Bronze Star.

A Kinnelon resident, Donald R. Peter, 60, now a vice commander of a Veterans of
Foreign Wars post, was a captain in the Army Reserve when World War II broke
out. He fought in the African and European theaters before being hit by
machinegun fire.

''I'm sorry for the lost patriotism in the United States today,'' he said.
Michael Brooks, 49, of Succasunna, a squad leader at an outpost in Korea,
suffered eye, face and shoulder wounds from enemy hand-grenade fragments, but
continued to defend his outpost. He received the Purple Heart and Bronze Star
for his heroism.

It was a foggy night in Quang Tri Province, Vietnam, when Jaime Vazquez threw a
hand grenade at three enemy soldiers approaching his outpost. Then, said Mr.
Vazquez, a 32-year-old Marine veteran from Jersey City, ''an enemy grenade
exploded in our bunker and ripped through me, but a flak jacket saved my life.''

Another Marine, he said, picked him up and carried him to the medics.  Mr.
Vazquez recalled that the helicopter that was to transport him to a hospital was
shot down while landing at the outpost. Two days later, his company was overrun
and suffered 100 casualties.

Mr. Vazquez is now a producer of a Hispanic program on WPIX.  Joseph Juchiewicz,
55, also of Jersey City, a radio operator and gunner on a B-29 bomber, escaped
injury in World War II, but attended the Purple Heart ceremony in memory of his
brother-in-law, Joseph J.  Badach, 66, also of Jersey City.

''I was in the Air Force squadron whose planes dropped the A-bomb on Hiroshima
and Nagasaki,'' Mr. Juchiewicz said. ''Frankly, we caused heartbreak that we
still feel bad about. I'd like to see nuclear warfare abolished, but I believe
we need it for a deterrent to strong enemy military forces.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              210 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Television Week

BYLINE: By C. Gerald Fraser

SECTION: Section 2A; Page 2, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 192 words


Immigrants' Plight
The misery faced by an uneducated, farming family who came to the United States
from a refugee camp in Thailand is the focus of ''Becoming American,'' a
presentation in the ''Non Fiction Television'' series on Channel 13, Friday at 9
P.M. Ken and Ivory Waterworth Levine made the documentary, assisted by Marhsall
Hurlich, an anthropologist at the University of Washington.

Ken Levine said that when he and his colleagues went off to Thailand for six
weeks to have a look at a refugee camp, his crew included an American refugee
worker who knew Thai agency officials and the camp setup. They went into Ban Nam
Yao camp, 700 miles north of Bangkok on the Laotian border. Housing 12,000
refugees, it burned down a month ago, he said.

According to Professor Hurlich, the Hmong (the H is silent), an ethnic group
from Laos, Vietnam, and southern China, as well as other immigrants who have
come here from Southeast Asia ''feel almost betrayed. They were told the U.S.
Government would take care of them. Now, Federal refugee aid has been cut.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              211 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 30, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SCHOOL AIDE SUING ON CENSORING ISSUE

BYLINE: By ELLEN MITCHELL

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 8, Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 862 words


CARLE PLACE THE former faculty adviser to the Carle Place High School newspaper,
the Crossroads, is charging that the principal set up censorship blockades.

Joan-Audrey Lyons Sulsky, an English teacher, who served as adviser to the paper
for 20 years, has filed a $50,000 lawsuit in United States District Court. She
contends that she was removed as the paper's adviser because she refused to
comply with the principal's censorship demands.

The principal and other school officials named in the suit would make no comment
pending litigation.  Such rebelliousness as Mrs. Sulsky's is rare these days at
the high school level, according to both civil liberty activists and teachers.
They say that the current trend is to ''knuckle under to the establishment,''
rather than to protest.

The suit, filed in Mrs. Sulsky's behalf by lawyers for the New York State United
Teachers, seeks $50,000 in damages for what are termed violations of the
55-year-old teacher's First Amendment rights. It also asks that she be
reinstated to the $600-a-year advisory post with back pay, and be granted a
court-ordered guarantee that her own and her students' rights to speak freely
will be respected in the future.

According to Mrs. Sulsky, she and the newspaper staff were not subjected to any
restraints save those of ethical judgment until the arrival in 1978 of a new
principal, Edward Leistman. Mr. Leistman immediately instituted a policy of
reviewing all articles before publication, Mrs. Sulsky said.

''He wanted changes and deletions, and for three years I tried to comply, so
long as it didn't alter the story, but I could never anticipate him,'' Mrs.
Sulsky said.

According to Mrs. Sulsky, the items Mr. Leistman wanted changed or omitted were
never of an inflammatory nature, but instead related to school matters, such as
the suspension of a student, the budget and the establishment of an informal
cheerleading squad for basketball games.

In the court papers, Mrs. Sulsky contends her removal as adviser in August 1981
amounted to a denial of her right to due process, because she was given neither
a reason for the dismissal nor prior notice.

The case has drawn the attention of the Long Island School Press Association,
which recently awarded Mrs. Sulsky its Distinguished Adviser of the Year award.
The group also voted to participate in her suit as a friend of the court.

''This is the most extreme case of its type we've seen, because it involves her
removal as adviser,'' said Marion Razler, president of the Long Island Press
Association.

Asked if the association recommends specific guidelines for high school
newspaper editors, Mrs. Razler said, ''We avoid obscenity, libel and yellow
journalism. The high school newspaper can and should handle anything of interest
to the student body.''

''No topic should be prohibited, but the way it's dealt with should be subject
to the rules of good journalism,'' agreed Alan Azzara, a lawyer with the Nassau
County chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union.

He noted that more than a decade ago, in the case of Tinker v. Des Moines, the
United States Supreme Court determined that ''students can no longer be
considered to have shed their First Amendment rights at the schoolhouse gate.''

At the same time, however, the high court ruled that school administrators may
prohibit the publication of material that they believe could cause substantial
disruption of school activities - a very nebulous guideline, which often times
leads to confusion of both school officials and lawyers, in Mr. Azzara's
opinion.

In recent years the American Civil Liberties Union has experienced a decline in
the number of censorship violations handled through its office. Although Mr.
Azzara feels that administrators still try to interject their philosophies into
school newspaper coverage, he also believes that today's student journalists
lack the gumption to complain.

''The kids aren't as gutsy as they used to be,'' Mr. Azzara said.  ''Just a few
years ago, high school papers were testing the limits - Vietnam, political
corruption, antinuclear stuff - they did it all.''

Mr. Azzara contends that Mrs. Sulsky has a strong case, because she has been
deprived of the advisory post and can thus prove loss of title and money. ''It's
a whole lot easier than trying to prove deprivation of rights to a jury,'' he
said.

The current staff of the Crossroads has not spoken out in support of Mrs.
Sulsky, but the 1976 editor of the newspaper, Lawrence Rubinstein, has written
letters to the local newspaper in her behalf and has offered to testify for her
in Federal Court.

''She was good,'' Mr. Rubinstein said. ''She coordinated things and helped us
put the paper together, but it was always completely student run. If anyone had
ever tried to change our stories or take them out, we would have gone crazy.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              212 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Around the World;
Americans in Hanoi Urge Defoliant Study

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 168 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, May 30


A group of American veterans proposed today that United States scientists come
to Vietnam to investigate the effects of Agent Orange, a highly toxic defoliant
used by American forces during the war.

Vietnamese officials said they would have to discuss the detailed, seven-page
proposal from the Vietnam Veterans of America before agreeing to the study. Dr.
Ton Buc Lang, a Vietnamese researcher, acknowledged that there was still lack of
scientific proof of the agent's harmful effects.

The nine-member group, headed by Tom Bird, arrived in Hanoi Friday for a week's
visit. The delegation included the theatrical producer Joseph Papp, who said in
a toast to Deputy Foreign Minister Ha Van Lau: ''Some of us will be criticized
when we return to the United States. Our extreme emotion might be misconstrued
as being brainwashed, but we are not fools. We understand real feelings, the
feelings of good will.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              213 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

V.A. AND CONGRESS CLASH ON AID PLAN

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 9, Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 30


While Congress wrestled over details of a budget of $780 billion last week, the
Veterans Administration and a handful of members of the House were engaged in a
dispute over two obscure programs that are to cost $77 million this year.

Conducted out of the viewing range of the galleries in both houses of Congress,
this dispute, which involves small-business and jobtraining opportunities for
Vietnam War veterans, is one of the scores of silent battles that are fought
each day in Washington and that only seldom percolate to the surface.

Like the other struggles that together make up the bureaucratic equivalent of a
guerrilla war, this battle is being fought in a series of quick skirmishes. One
side attempts to exert pressure, the other side resists. One side issues a
statement, the other dismisses it as irrelevant. One side attempts to embarrass
its adversary, the other becomes even more intransigent.

At the heart of this particular battle is legislation known as the Veterans'
Health Care, Training and Small Business Loan Act of 1981.  Five members of the
House are complaining that the Veterans Administration has failed to carry out a
small-business loan program for veterans of Vietnam and disabled veterans and
has unnecessarily restricted eligibility for employment assistance under the
G.I. Bill of Rights.

The V.A., for its part, argues that the economic climate is not right for
small-business aid and that its employment-assistance regulations follow the
intent of Congress.

''The public usually isn't very interested in these sorts of fights, but they
are the sort of things that determine whether the Congress has a voice in this
Government,'' said Representative Robert W. Edgar, Democrat of Pennsylvania, who
heads the House Veterans' Affairs Committee's Subcommittee on Education,
Training and Employment, which wrote the bill. ''When we do pass laws and set
direction,'' he added, ''the executive branch needs to abide by that direction
whether they like it or not.''

Problems From the Start

The legislation was troubled from the start. President Reagan reluctantly signed
the bill last November, singling out the provision calling for the V.A. to set
up a small-business program and to offer loans of as much as $200,000 to certain
Vietnam-era and disabled veterans. ''I intend to weigh carefully any efforts to
fund this program,'' Mr. Reagan said.

The V.A. was to have begun offering loans early this month.  However, the agency
has neither requested funds for the program nor written regulations for it.
Charles E. Lucas of the V.A.'s veterans' benefits department argues that the
Small Business Administration has similar programs and says that if Congress
insists on having the V.A. operate its own loan program, it will have to go
ahead and add the money to the budget.

''The V.A. doesn't have any expertise in the area, we have no people who know
the ins and outs of small business,'' said John Scholzen, a V.A. spokesman.
''Besides, this is not the time to entice veterans into the small-business
world. With the economy the way it is and with businesses already in existence
having problems, it is not the best of times to set up another program to go
into small business.''

Job-Training Program

Discussion of the job-training element of the bill has been equally contentious.
It began as an extension of the G.I. Bill's onthe-job training program, directed
toward Vietnam veterans who were encountering employment difficulties and toward
those who were underemployed or whose job histories were studded with
interruptions.

But, according to Mr. Edgar, the extension ''has been practically overregulated
out of existence by restrictive regulations which in no way follow either
legislative history or Congressional intent.''

While members of Congress trade charges with officials at the V.A., veterans'
groups have begun to join the fray. ''We're really upset about it,'' said John
F. Terzano, director of the Washington office of Vietnam Veterans of America.
''Congress passes legislation and we have an Administration that isn't going to
back it.''

The campaign to persuade the Reagan Administration to change direction began
when Representative David E. Bonior, a Michigan Democrat who is a Vietnam-era
veteran, recruited Mr. Edgar and three other Democrats, Representatives Don
Edwards and Leon E. Panetta of California and Thomas A. Daschle of South Dakota,
to the effort.

Letter to President

They began by expressing their concerns on the issue in a letter to President
Reagan. They then inserted their letter to Mr. Reagan into the Congressional
Record, along with a ''fact sheet'' outlining their position.

Then Mr. Edgar took the issue to the floor of the House. Mr.  Daschle, a member
of the Veterans' Affairs Committee, then submitted for the record remarks
accusing the V.A. of ''ineptitude and unwillingness'' to assist Vietnam War
veterans.

Mr. Edgar has scheduled hearings on the issue for next month. He has invited
V.A. officials to testify. They will be joined by representatives of the Vietnam
Veterans of America, the American Legion, the Disabled American Veterans and the
Veterans of Foreign Wars.

''We're trying to put as much pressure on the V.A. and the Administration as we
can,'' he said. ''But it's like a lot of things; you have to embarrass people,
and if you embarrass them enough they have to address your concerns.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              214 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

Think of Wars

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 310 words


If Memorial Day means anything, it is that martyrs to freedom can survive only
in the deeds and thoughts of the living. If the resolute residents of Warsaw did
not weekly clean up after the police to rebuild the memorial cross of flowers
and candles that has come to symbolize the Solidarity movement, there would soon
be nothing to memorialize. But as long as they do, feeble as may be their
political power, withered hopes and dreams are kept alive.

So, too, in America, which on most days ignores both its monuments and heroes.
Memorial Day is a holiday that first honored only the Union dead of the Civil
War. Now it honors Americans of all regions and generations who fell in a common
cause at the just and even unjust summons of a free people.

These heroes can live only in the deeds and minds of ordinary citizens who have
the obligation to protect and improve the common freedom for another time. The
statues and graves that we decorate today usually commemorate sacrifice and
daring. But the heroism of the past has no meaning unless it is thus evoked and
reflected upon.

Whether World War I was the innocent war to end all wars, or a wasteful carnage,
it was a cause in which Americans gave their lives. Whether World War II was an
inescapable contest against Satan or a conflict that established the American
imperium, it shaped our lives and redefined freedom. Whether Korea and Vietnam
were vital police actions or reckless efforts to contain aggression, they were
expressions of a free people.

Think of wars as you will, but think of them, at least on this day. Without
memorials, there can be no heroes and no values. The path to a world without war
runs past the graves and monuments on which we lay flowers this day.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              215 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

TO SOME, CALL TO ARMS IS BUT AN ECHO

BYLINE: By MICHAEL NORMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 2, Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1295 words


David Laskin came of age without the uniform or the gun. He made his passage to
maturity on a college campus instead of a parade ground. He has never heard a
first sergeant's bark, marched miles in the rain or sat in a foxhole at night
and watched on the blank screen of darkness the images of home.

At 28 years old, he is part of a generation that just missed national
conscription. To him, and many others like him, the Army, or any branch of the
service for that matter, is a concept from another time, a part of the lives of
30 million American men that seems to have gone out of fashion.

''I thought my generation rejected the whole male role, the expectations of
being a man in America,'' he said. ''We were going to end the conventional rites
of passage. The Army, marriage would no longer play a part in my life. Well,
I've just gotten married, but I don't plan to join the Army.''

Mr. Laskin, a book editor from Manhattan who grew up in Great Neck, L.I., is one
of 20 men from the New York area who were interviewed recently about the value
of military service and the role it has played in the lives of men from
different generations.

Life's Bench Mark

They ranged in age from 24 to 67. Less than half were veterans, men who had
served their country during the eras of World War II, Korea and Vietnam. The
others had won deferments, had drawn lucky numbers in the draft lottery or had
reached the age of conscription after 1972, when the draft was, in effect,
suspended.

For decades, the call to service had been a kind of national patrimony. Son,
father and grandfather have shared the common order to report. In a land of
clans and coteries, one of the largest brotherhoods is made up of veterans - one
half of the adult male population.

To many men, the time spent in uniform is a bench mark, for good or ill, against
which they measure everything that followed.  ''Getting into the service was the
biggest thing that ever happened in my life,'' said Harry Crane, a 55-year-old
service representative for an oil company. ''The biggest trauma was V.J. Day
when I realized the Japanese had surrendered and I didn't get a crack at them. I
was a gunner in a Navy dive bomber and I was in a replacement pool. We were
about to set out to sea. Now I realize, had I gotten out there I might not be
talking to you now. But I was 19 then and heartbroken.''

'Transition From Innocence'

Mr. Crane, of West Orange, N.J., and four fellow members of Post 6255, Veterans
of Foreign Wars, in Cedar Grove, N.J., gathered around a table recently to talk
about their military experiences. For the most part, they shared the same point
of view - that the service exposed them to the concepts of discipline, hard
work, responsibility and obligation.

There was also a sense that in their sameness they were somehow different from
other men. Their time in the ranks had left on them a certain stamp, a mark they
could easily recognize on others.

''There is a rapid transition from innocence to adulthood in the service,'' said
Bill Bailey, a 39-year-old Vietnam veteran from Newark who works as a regional
sales manager for an electric company. ''It's a premature transition. I was
drafted from a low-income family. A lot of the people I deal with now come from
different backgrounds and were never in the service. They were in college. I
have to admit, to a degree, that if I'm interviewing someone, two equal
candidates for a position, I would be inclined to go with the one who was in the
service. It adds points to his case. I do have that prejudice. I feel he would
be more dependable.''

Yet they realize that while a military background may make a man emeritus in one
generation, it may leave him wanting for title in the next.

Vietnam Reshaped Attitudes

''Today, you're an ogre if you've been in the military,'' Mr. Crane said. ''My
own son, I wanted him to go into the Navy in the worst way. The kids feel the
military is a bad word. Men who have been in the service are held in utter
disrespect. It's like it's not American anymore.''

The Vietnam War, in part, reshaped the way some men felt about military service
and it often made taking an oath to defend the country, or refusing to take it,
a political gesture. Even so, the statistics of the Selective Service Commission
show that, in every year from 1965 to 1973, the number of enlistees far outpaced
the number of conscripts. In 1969, for example, 262,646 men were drafted while
517,175 enlisted. Two years later, 153,631 were drafted and 367,111 volunteered.

No one, of course, can say with certainty what these figures reflect. There is,
however, a sense among some men of inexorable social change.

''The way society has been evolving, I think it's been recognized that women can
play a more assertive role and still be feminine, and men can still be masculine
without beating the hell out of people,'' said Joseph Mikulka, 31, of Ewing
Township, N.J. ''Vietnam played a part in that. It was just part of the
evolutionary process.''

'Always the Question Mark'

Mr. Mikulka was part of a another gathering of men - seven enviromental
engineers and specialists in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection - who discussed the issue one recent day on their lunch hour. They
ranged in age from 24 to 35 and, with one exception, had had no military
experience. But unlike the group of veterans, this panel could not reach a
consensus, and as the following portion of their group colloquy shows, they were
often at odds with one another.

Eugene Callahan, 24: ''I don't really see anything at all positive that I would
have gotten out of the service that you couldn't get out of going to college or
somewhere else.''

Steven Nieswand, 35: ''There's always at least in my mind a question of how I
would have reacted in Vietnam. I'm glad I didn't go, but there's always the
question mark. Could you have done it?''

James Hamiltion, 32: ''But you didn't want the experience.'' Mr. Nieswand: ''Oh,
no, I didn't want the experience.'' Mr. Hamilton: ''You don't feel you missed
anything?'' Mr. Nieswand: ''Everybody here says they don't think they missed
anything. I don't know. Let's say you went into the Army in Germany.  That might
have been beneficial.''

Lance Miller, 27: ''I agree. I spent two years at West Point. You never really
realize how much you can accomplish until you're pushed. We went on all-day
forced marches covering 25 or 30 miles. I haven't come across a situation since
the Academy where I've been pushed that hard.''

Mr. Mikulka: ''Anyone who has gone through two-a-day football workouts in full
equipment knows what you're talking about. A lot of people can push themselves
to tremendous heights if they believe in what they are doing. I grew up in
Jersey City and that was probably half as bad as Vietnam. I'm damn glad I wasn't
in the military.''

Finally, some men, like Mr. Laskin, the book editor from New York, are filled
with ambivalence and carry on the debate within themselves.

''I thought anyone who was in the Army was crazy,'' he said in a separate
interview. ''But now I have a dream about being in the Army and going to
Vietnam. I'm a soldier hanging out with other soldiers.  There is a sense of
fulfillment. I'm doing the things that men are expected to do and doing them
well.

''Men who have been in the service seem to have done more than me.  There's a
tinge of awe. But I don't feel jealous. I chose my lot.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              216 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

VETERANS' BURIAL COST PAID BY BUSINESSMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 137 words


'LOS ANGELES, May 30 (AP) - A concerned businessman is paying burial costs for
indigent veterans whose bodies began stacking up at the county morgue after
Federal spending cutbacks last year.

Henry Rushing, a Santa Paula businessman, donated $9,000 after county coroner's
officials said in January that the bodies of six veterans were awaiting burial.

"It's the least I can do," said Mr. Rushing, a 38-year-old veteran of the
Vietnam War. "These men fought for me when I was just a baby."

the problem developed after the Reagan Administration cut back funeral
allowances fro penniless veterans last Oct. 1, said Maj.  Robert Kingsbury,
director of the county Department of Military and Veterans Affair.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              217 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

A BLESSING IS INVOKED FOR PEACE

BYLINE: By DAVID BIRD

SECTION: Section B; Page 3, Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 624 words


Standing at the door of the Riverside Church after his sermon yesterday, the
Rev. Dr. William Sloane Coffin said he was pleased that ''so many nations
warring with each other had shown up.''

The occasion was a service to bless the United Nations special disarmament
session, which opens June 7. The church, at 122d Street and Riverside Drive, had
invited all 157 United Nations delegations to the service, and about 25 sent
representatives.

Among those sending representatives were Gambia, Vietnam, East and West Germany,
Zimbabwe, Bangladesh, Kampuchea, El Salvador, the Soviet Union, Madagascar,
Czechoslovakia and the United States.

''It shows that we have more in common than we have in conflict,'' Dr. Coffin
said, as he shook hands with some of the 1,500 people who had gathered for the
service.

Peace Sabbath

The service was part of a Peace Sabbath for nuclear disarmament that was marked
in cities across the country. Church leaders of many faiths used the occasion of
the Memorial Day holiday and the Christian celebration of Pentecost to focus
attention on nuclear disarmament.

In his sermon, Dr. Coffin said: ''All the explosives in all the wars of this
century amount to something like 16 megatons. The United States nuclear arsenal
has today something like 7,000 megatons, as does the arsenal of the Soviet
Union. You can't persuade me that anyone who not only knows but feels these
statistics would urge us to continue to build, plan, invent and buy such weapons
- and for the sake, mind you, of national security.''

Dr. Coffin said that many problems stemmed from ''national pride that is
intractable.'' He called for people to join the June 12 march for nuclear
disarmament in front of the United Nations ''so that you diplomats will feel our
full support, hundreds and thousands of us.''

''We will march,'' Dr. Coffin said, ''because the nuclear arms race is sheer
madness.''

Native Languages

Afterward, Dr. Coffin greeted many of the diplomats, sometimes in their native
languages. He spoke in Russian to Vladimir Viktorovich Shustov, deputy permanent
representative of the U.S.S.R.

Mr. Shustov later translated their conversation: ''He asked me where I came from
in Russia. I told him I was born in Leningrad and now lived in Moscow.''

Mr. Shustov said he was ''very impressed'' with Dr. Coffin's sermon and was
pleased that so many different people had come to the church ''all with good
feelings toward solving a common problem.''

Mr. Shustov said he had been to Riverside Church twice before, once on a tour
and once to a concert, but never to hear a sermon.  Another diplomat was Karl
Ndom Mounguen, commercial attache of Cameroon's delegation. Mr. Ndom brought his
wife, Charlotte, and their four children. The youngest, Richard, 4, was wearing
a green button that said ''I'm marching on June 12,'' in reference to the
anti-nuclear rally.

Explaining to His Son

''I explained to him,'' Mr. Ndom said, gesturing with a hand pointed like a
pistol, ''that this green button is for all who are against those who kill with
a gun, and he said he understood.''

Jan Martenson, the assistant secretary general in charge of the United Nations
Center for Disarmament, also spoke at the service. He said of the special
disarmament session, ''One basic issue before the session must be that of
finding some means by which the desire of mankind to avert the final catastrophe
can be translated into real, constructive, lasting action.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jan Martenson

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              218 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF PRESIDENT'S REMARKS

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1286 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's Memorial Day address yesterday
at Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington, Va., as recorded by The New York
Times through the facilities of Cable News Network:

Mr. President, General, the distinguished guests here with us today, my fellow
citizens: In America's cities and towns today flags will be placed on graves in
cemeteries. Public officials will speak of the sacrifice and the valor of those
whose memory we honor.

In 1863, when he dedicated a small cemetery in Pennsylvania marking a terrible
collision between the armies of North and South, Abraham Lincoln noted the swift
obscurity of such speeches.

Well, we know now that Lincoln was wrong about that particular occasion. His
remarks commemorating those who gave their last full measure of devotion were
long remembered.

But since that moment at Gettysburg, few other such addresses have become part
of our national heritage, not because of the inadequacy of the speakers but
because of the inadequacy of words. I have no illusions about what little I can
add now to the silent testimony of those who gave their lives willingly for
their country.

Words are even more feeble on this Memorial Day, for the sight before us is that
of a strong and good nation that stands in silence and remembers those who were
loved and who in return loved their countrymen enough to die for them.

Yet we must try to honor them, not for their sakes alone but for our own. And if
words cannot pay the debt we owe these men, surely with our actions we must
strive to keep faith with them and with the vision that led them to battle and a
final sacrifice.

U.S. and Freedom

Our first obligation to them and ourselves is plain enough: the United States
and the freedom for which it stands, the freedom for which they died, must
endure and prosper.

Their lives remind us that freedom is not bought cheaply; it has a cost, it
imposes a burden. And just as they who we commemorate were willing to sacrifice,
so too must we, in a less final, less heroic way, be willing to give of
ourselves. It is this, beyond the controversy and the Congressional debate,
beyond the blizzard of budget numbers and the complexity of modern weapons
systems, that motivates us in our search for security and peace.

War will not come again, other young men will not have to die, if we will speak
honestly of the dangers that confront us and remain strong enough to meet those
dangers.

It's not just strength or courage that we need, but understanding and a measure
of wisdom as well.

Value of Alliances

We must understand enough about our world to see the value of our alliances. We
must be wise enough about ourselves to listen to our allies, to work with them,
to build and strengthen the bonds between us.

Our understanding must also extend to potential adversaries. We must strive to
speak of them not belligerently but firmly and frankly. And that's why we must
never fail to note, as frequently as necessary, the true, the wide gulf between
our codes of morality.

And that's why we must never hesitate to acknowledge the irrefutable difference
between our view of man as master of the state and their view of man as servant
of the state.

Nor must we ever underestimate the seriousness of their aspirations to global
expansion. The risk is the very freedom that has been so dearly won.

It is this honesty of mind that can open paths to peace, that can lead to
fruitful negotiation, that can build a foundation upon which treaties between
our nations can stand and last; treaties that can someday bring about a
reduction in the terrible arms of destruction, arms that threaten us with war
even more terrible than those that have taken the lives of the Americans we
honor today.

Arms Reduction Talks

In the quest for peace, the United States has proposed to the Soviet Union that
we reduce the threat of nuclear weapons by negotiating a stable balance at far
lower levels of strategic forces.

This is a fitting occasion to announce that Start, as we call it - strategic
arms reductions - that the negotiations between our country and the Soviet Union
will begin on the 29th of June.

As for existing strategic arms agreements, we will refrain from actions which
undercut them so long as the Soviet Union shows equal restraint.

With good will and dedication on both sides, I pray that we will achieve a safer
world. Our goal is peace. We can gain that peace by strengthening our alliances,
by speaking candidly of the dangers before us, by assuring potential adversaries
of our seriousness, by actively pursuing every chance of honest and fruitful
negotiation.

It is with these goals in mind that I will depart Wednesday for Europe.  And
it's altogether fitting that we have this moment to reflect on the price of
freedom and those who have so willingly paid it. For however important the
matters of state before us this next week, they must not disturb the solemnity
of this occasion, nor must they delude our sense of reverence and the silent
gratitude we hold for those who are buried here.

The willingness of some to give their lives so that others might live never
fails to evoke in us a sense of wonder and mystery. One gets that feeling here
on this hallowed ground.

And I have known that same poignant feeling as I looked out across the rows of
white crosses and Stars of David in Europe, in the Philippines, in the military
cemeteries here in our land. Each one marks the resting place of an American
hero and, in my lifetime, the heroes of World War I, the doughboys, the GI's of
World War II or Korea or Vietnam.

They span several generations of young Americans - all different and yet all
alike, like the markers above their resting places, all alike in a truly
meaningful way.

Churchill and World War II

Winston Churchill said of those he knew in World War II, they seem to be the
only young men who could laugh and fight at the same time.  A great general in
that war called them our secret weapon, just the best darn kids in the world.

Each died for a cause he considered more important than his own life. Oh, they
didn't volunteer to die; they volunteered to defend values for which men have
always been willing to die if need be. The values which make up what we call
civilization.

And how they must have wished, in all the ugliness that war brings, that no
other generation of young men to follow would have to undergo that same
experience.

As we honor their memory today, let us pledge that their lives, their
sacrifices, their valor shall be justified and remembered for as long as God
gives life to this nation.

And let us also pledge to do our utmost to carry out what must have been their
wish: that no other generation of young men will ever have to share their
experience and repeat their sacrifice.

Earlier today, with the music that we have heard and that of our national anthem
- I can't claim to know the words of all the national anthems in the world, but
I don't know of any other that ends with a question and a challenge, as ours
does:

Does that flag still wave o'er the land of the free and the home of the brave?
That is what we must resolve.  Thank you.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              219 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

ABOUT EDUCATION

BYLINE: By FRED M. HECHINGER

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 1; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1103 words


THE Defense Language Institute, once considered a pioneer in the teaching of
foreign languages, has been reviewed by the General Accounting Office, the
investigative arm of Congress, and found deficient in management, priorities and
performance. It has, the report said, spent 159 man-years and $4.2 million on
efforts to improve the quality of its courses without producing the necessary
basic teaching materials. According to testimony taken, ''staffing priorities
were so erratic that realistic planning was meaningless.''

The review was initiated by Representative Leon E. Panetta, Democrat of
California, who had been a member of the President's Commission on Foreign
Language and International Studies.

The institute's resident courses are taught at Monterey, Calif., and at Lackland
Air Force Base in Texas, and nonresident instruction is given at many sites. The
institute had its modest start in 1941 as the outgrowth of an Army intelligence
course. By the mid-60's it was training as many as 2,500 people from all the
services on its main Monterey ''campus'' alone, and in those golden days its
faculty was producing textbooks, tapes and even films for use in sophisticated
language laboratories. At the height of the Vietnam War, it annually graduated
1,000 students of Vietnamese with a working vocabulary of at least 1,000 words.

Currently, the institute provides training in 37 major languages and dialects.
It serves all the armed services. The length and nature of instruction often is
determined by the specific demands of agencies or commands which sent them. The
institute's staff consists of 350 military personnel and a civilian force of
850, of whom about 600 are faculty members. It annually teaches about 3,500
students, the majority of whom are sent by the Army. The six largest departments
are Russian, German, Korean, Chinese, Arabic and Spanish, which together account
for over 90 percent of the faculty and students. Other languages taught run the
gamut from Albanian to Turkish.

What made Monterey the pride of the military and the envy of many civilian
school and college foreign language departments was its adoption of that then
still relatively new approach - total immersion in the new language. English was
outlawed, most instructors were natives of the country whose tongue they taught,
and instruction included local history and customs, and often even the native
cuisine.

It is not entirely clear what lead to the program's apparent decline. The fact
is that the accounting office found that ''weaknesses in the resident language
training system of D.L.I.  affect the quality of trained linguists.'' The report
might have given clearer indications of what went wrong, if it did not lapse
into a mixture of bureaucratic, educational and military jargon, such as
''development of criterium - referenced tests, which measure achievement of
user's terminal learning objectives, had not progressed.'' But even such murky
prose does not hide the conclusion that over the years the program has suffered
from the consequences of big bucks without big brains. For instance, an office
of academic dean has only recently been created.

The report's specific criticisms include findings of failure to set priorities
and to monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of courses; lack of attention to
the availabiity of commercially produced teaching materials at the same time as
few, if any, new texts were being produced by the faculty; ''erratic''
priorities in staffing, rendering ''realistic planning meaningless,'' while lack
of proper records made it impossible to determine ''the amount of slippage'' in
original plans; lack of ''an officially approved and accepted teaching
methodology.''

Since 1976, the report charges, the institute has ''not had a single cohesive
policy document'' to explain its objectives and standards. A 1979 report had
observed that course materials, some already 27 years old, ''desperately needed
attention'' but even though by 1980 a total of 177 man-years had been spent on
course development, not a single new course had been completed.

Though other Government agencies, such as the Foreign Service Institute, use
commercially available texts in language training, the defense institute staff
said available books were addressed to a different audience and lacked
''military flavor.'' A contract for $25,460 to adapt a German textbook by a West
German publisher produced no results. The report concludes that ''existing basic
courses have deteriorated to the point where there is a detrimental effect on
the quality of training.''

In commenting on the report, the Department of Defense said that many of the
G.A.O.'s critical findings were already on the way to being corrected. It said
that new course developments would begin to bear fruit this year, beginning with
completion of a new basic Russian course, and that new quality controls were
already being installed, as evidenced by increased attention to staff training
and the creation of the office of an academic dean.

Among the recommendations of the G.A.O. are the more effective and less costly
use of commercial texts; establishment of standard methodology and better
training for newly hired instructors; better supervision and greater
accountability; and the development of a defense language proficiency test.

The issue is more important than internal disagreements between Government
agencies. From a defense point of view, the importance of a military language
teaching program is heightened in a country whose civilian educational systems
have never produced adequate language training, either in quality or quantity.

Beyond the military, however, the decline of a language teaching program that
for many years was considered a guidepost to civilian foreign language
instruction constitutes the loss of an academic model. Unless the institute's
leadership can be revived, it might be difficult to justify the expenditure of
substantial amounts of money as part of defense appropriations. The question
then is likely to be raised whether equivalent funds could be used more
effectively for foreign language teaching by colleges which, in turn, could
offer their services on contract to the military.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon (Page C4)

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              220 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 1, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

Books Of The Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 13, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 937 words


By Susan Bolotin
AMERICA IN SEARCH OF ITSELF: The Making of the President 1956-80. By Theodore H.
White. 465 pages. A Corne- lia and Michael Bessie Book/Harper & Row. $15.95.

FOR more than 20 years Theodore H. White has worked devilishly hard to hold his
position as chief chronicler of America's national electoral process. More
recently, through a combination of experience, longevity and much public
exposure, his status has risen to that of quasi statesman. So one opens the
final book of his pentateuch of Presidential campaign examinations, ''America in
Search of Itself: The Making of the President 1956-80,'' with perhaps
unreasonable expectations.

Mr. White demurs, ''I could not present myself as a historian,'' but from the
start his tone is something other than reportorial. He tends to speak in
aphorisms (''Of the use of force it may be said that it should be wielded by the
brave but governed by the wise''), to categorize in terms of big themes (the
taking of American hostages in Iran was our ''national humiliation''), to look
back from a vantage point more opinionated than analytic. He tells a good story,
but readers in the not too distant future may need an annotated version to
comprehend his book; what matters here are the unspoken connotations of his
ideas, the weight that certain words, such as immigration, feminist, equal
opportunity and quota, have come to carry in the 1980's, not just for Mr. White
but for much of American society.

The political events of the era between 1945 (or the Year of Victory, as he puts
it) and the election of 1980 make up the bulk of Mr. White's book. Drawing upon
his own earlier work, he examines the administrations of Eisenhower, Kennedy
(''not only the last good President but a superior one''), Johnson (''among the
great Presidents of all American history'' or, alternately, the man who ''threw
young Americans into an undeclared war in Vietnam, thus erasing all his honor in
history''), Nixon and Carter. He barely discusses Ford the President as opposed
to the candidate, but then the Carter-Ford race was the only one since 1960 not
to rate a White book of its own.

What he concludes from all this, and how he explains President Reagan's victory,
is that during the last two decades Americans have called into question the very
nature of the Government's power. The responsibility for this crisis in
federalism lies finally not with inflation, oil shortages, the decay of the
cities, arms buildup, Vietnam and our other debacles, but with those Great
Society programs and political movements of the 1960's and 70's that substituted
liberation for equality, that suggested that groups of Americans, divided by
race, national origin and sex, were each entitled to special privileges.

Mr. White is, for instance, mildly obsessive about the Immigration Act of 1965.
Though he calls it a ''blow against racism,'' he finds it ''probably the most
thoughtless of the many acts of the Great Society,'' for it would ''reduce
dramatically the traditional European sources of American heritage.'' One has to
give Mr. White credit for calling the shots as he sees them; for a respected
public figure, himself the descendant of Jewish immigrants, to suggest that the
Statue of Liberty was meant to beckon only to Europe is, at the very least,
bold.

Women also get Mr. White's hackles up, and it shows: ''Nature has distributed
wisdom and resolution in equal proportions among both sexes - but has also
subjected women to the special burdens of motherhood, and to certain muscular
weaknesses.'' And in a critique of the school-lunch program: ''Time was, before
World War II, mothers had packed sandwiches in brown paper bags for children to
take to school. But now many mothers worked, and many more felt it was the
Government that should feed the children.''

Some blacks might wonder, too, at his statement that for black children growing
up in fatherless homes ''the street was school, the asphalt the jungle, the love
that must warm children as the sun does flowers was generally absent.'' Or at
his contention that ''the speeding breakup of black and minority families was
putting on the streets young people who were a danger to all.''

Despite this underlying bitterness, Mr. White deserves full credit for his
talent as a storyteller. His campaign remembrances are winning. (He was one of
only seven reporters covering the 1956 New Hampshire primary; after the
Minnesota primary of the same year, he listened to election results with the
victorious Estes Kefauver, ''a bottle of bourbon between us''). His awareness of
change is instructive. (The shift of power from the Northeast to the Southwest
was evident as early as 1952.) And his perspective on political patterns is
valuable. (Gov. Edmund G. Brown Jr.'s principles make ''more long-range sense
than I have heard from most candidates in 20 years.'')

During an interpretation of Jimmy Carter's character, Mr. White digresses to
concede that ''a writer must invent the outline of the man he fitfully
glimpses.'' Similarly, readers of ''America in Search of Itself'' must create
the deeper truths from the flashes of wisdom found within its covers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Theodore H. White

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              221 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

HANOI BY BIKE: DORIS DAY SONGS AND AN OLD MIG

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1178 words

DATELINE: HANOI, Vietnam, June 1


An old man was asked the population of his native city, ''One million people and
two million bicycles, '' he said.

In fact, an estimated two and a half million people now live in and around
Hanoi. But there is an undeniable sense of bicycles everywhere, dancing quietly
along the nearly carless boulevards and market streets of this former French
colonial city.

For the rare American visitor to hop on a bicycle and ride around this Communist
capital is a revelation of life here, a life that shows signs of becoming poorer
and more modish at the same time.

Starting out near the Temple of Literature with a Vietnamesespeaking companion,
a bicyclist made a wide circle past Lenin Park, Hoan Kiem Lake, the busy Nguyen
Hue commercial street and the old central market district.

Dollars Are in Demand

The rider learned that four small melons could be had for three dong -the
equivalent of 35 cents at the official rate of exchange or 4 1/2 cents at the
thriving and apparently condoned black market rate for American dollars.
Although officially nonnegotiable, dollars are demanded privately all over town.

There are too few dong around in any case, and fewer dollars. The salary of a
low-level, educated Government employee is just a hundred dong a month, plus
twice that much in food. It takes a day's pay to buy a bowl of soup.

From a bicycle one can see a fair part of the capital of one of the poorest
countries in the world. It is remarkable how many small, Western-style consumer
items some people have acquired.

These goods began appearing about a year ago, according to foreign residents.
Foreigners and Vietnamese say they come from an underground economy that
supplies, in minute quantities, a wide assortment of products, such as bricks
and light bulbs, food and fabric.

Jeans and T-Shirts

Blue jeans have materialized, and also a few T-shirts emblazoned with the face
of Farah Fawcett and advertisements for American vacation spots and various
English cigarettes.

One brand of cigarettes, 555, serves as a fourth form of currency, along with
the dong, a Government scrip known as the dollar A and the illegal United State
dollar. A pack of cigarettes is worth a dollar, about a week's wages.

The price of a new, high-status Peugeot bicycle has approached $2,000 in recent
weeks. Such luxuries have popped up despite the Government's near bankruptcy,
apartments that commonly pack six people into a room and an economy that even
the Communist Party hierarchy has called poorly managed.

Clusters of youthful, fashion-conscious consumers - boys with long hair, girls
in well-tailored pants and flowered dresses - lounge around with Peugeots if
they are lucky.

A Striking Impression

The modish fashions make a striking impression in such a poor city - poorer than
a couple of years ago and even poorer than during the war, according to foreign
residents. In the past, the poverty conspired with strict Marxist-Leninist
dourness to produce a widespread uniformity of black trousers, white shirts and
green pith helmets.

At Lenin Park, a group of 12-year-olds hammed it up for their class photograph.
Young lovers walked under flowering trees (the crush of people in the city's
indoor space is said to make the park very busy at night). The lake within the
park's main path offered sculls and a sailboat for rent.

Like the rest of the city, the park was mostly silent. Old men contemplated the
lake as a young man on a bench wrote furiously on a scarce pad of paper. Was he
doing schoolwork? Or producing a tract against Chinese hegemonism?

There is not much new in the park, said a relatively old hand, except for the
modishness. Only a visiting American seemed to find it startling to hear old
Doris Day songs crackling from a loudspeaker over a Soviet MIG fighter in a
children's corner of the park.

Delighted Surprise

Virtually no one displayed anything but delighted surprise to learn that someone
who looked vaguely Russian (there are an estimated 5,000 Soviet technicians in
Vietnam) was actually American.

The American bombings of Hanoi ended a decade ago. Despite rivers of official
oratory citing the Vienam War as one of the major causes of the country's
economic plight, the time will come when soldiers will have absolutely no memory
of it.

A teen-age soldier sat on the grass and strummed a guitar. With him were several
hundred other soldiers training for possible service on the Chinese border or in
Cambodia.

The people of Hanoi must feel a sense of freedom as they slowly pedal on a
sultry Sunday, leaving their crowded homes and low-paying jobs behind.

A Liberating Experience

The experience also liberates some foreigners. A bicycle means leaving behind an
approved hotel two miles from the heart of town. It spells escape from honking,
Soviet-supplied limousines hurtling toward the next official meeting. It also
means escape from the watchful eyes of men in neat, monochromatic shirts with
well-combed hair who seem to have no function but to watch some foreigners.

The city is amazingly tidy, even where the streets grow narrow around the old
central marketplace. The biggest department store is a cavern whose wide, glass
showcases present displays of 400 packets of razor blades, 300 bars of soap and
so on, most of it rationed.

The more traditional marketplaces are poor as well, but there is a slow bustle,
even on a Sunday, along Tin Street, Silk Street, Bamboo Street and Paper Street
(most of them misnamed).

And on Ha Trung, a winding lane that should have been called Leather Street, two
or three Vietnamese could be seen inspecting a narrow shop's displays of belts,
handbags, briefcases and bicycle seats.

An Architectural Jewel

Coffee shops are said to be making a comeback, although it was hard to find much
evidence. In the Abba Cafe, named after the Swedish rock group, music blared
until 10 o'clock at night.

The city is an architectural jewel, all green-shuttered plaster in a town too
poor to build anew.  Bicycling becomes dangerous for novices after nightfall.
Hanoi has few street lights, and not one bicycle in a thousand has even a
reflector, much less a headlight.

Despite the dangers, Hanoi is on two weels long after dark. A strong man can
earn a hundred dong, or about $11 dollars, a typical monthly official salary,
for a long night of loading the bulky necessities of life onto privately owned
oxcarts.

Some nighttime cyclists are visibly exhasted, and the streams of bicycles lose
their daytime grace. People bump into each other.  One straw-hatted old woman,
walking her bicycle across Long Bien Bridge, delayed the single, city-bound lane
of trucks, limousines and other vehicles for 10 to 15 minutes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of cyclists in Hanoi

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              222 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. VIETNAMESE RALLY FOR RESISTANCE

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO


Vietnamese refugees in California and other parts of the country are holding
rallies to raise money and recruit volunteers for guerrilla resistance to the
Communist government in Vietnam.

A recent rally in a convention center in San Jose, Calif., drew about 2,500
Vietnamese, including about 300 men whose khaki uniforms were described by a
rally organizer as belonging to ''overseas forces in the Bay area.''

On April 17, a similar rally in Anaheim, Calif., was attended by about 3,000
people, including Nguyen Cao Ky, the former South Vietnamese Premier and Vice
President who now operates liquor stores in Huntington Beach, Calif. Huntington
Beach is in Orange County, where an estimated 70,000 Vietnamese refugees live.

Other rallies have been held in Houston, Dallas, Denver and Washington, D.C.,
according to the San Jose organizers. Some 40,000 to 50,000 Vietnamese refugees
live in San Jose and surrounding Santa Clara County.

Aid to Resistance Movement

Behind the rallies is a group calling itself the Committee for Support of the
Resistance Movement in Vietnam.  At the San Jose rally, a man who gave his name
as Lieu Pham said he was coordinator of the overseas operation. He added that
the money collected would go ''to the front'' in Vietnam.

Tran Minh Cong, another organizer of the San Jose rally, said that the guerrilla
resistance in Vietnam was being led by 52-year-old Hoang Co Minh, a former
admiral in the Vietnamese navy who left the United States a year ago to return
to Vietnam. At the rally, the former admiral was referred to as the general of
the National United Front for the Liberation of Vietnam.

''We want to show our support for the resistance in Vietnam,'' he said, ''to
liberate our people from the tyrannical regime of Communist Vietnam. Refugees
here and all over the world would like to support the resistance forces one way
or another. It can be moral support; it can be physical support - and by that I
mean financial.''

Unwilling to Give Figures

Organizers of the San Jose rally would not say how many, if any, Vietnamese were
volunteering for service in the resistance movement, or whether any military
training was under way. ''We do not really want to disclose our strength right
now,'' said Mr. Cong, who is also president of the Vietnamese League of Orange
County.

There have been reports from Vietnam that there are about 200 guerrilla fighters
under the command of Hoang Co Minh in Vietnam. In addition, there has been
continued resistance in Vietnam's Mekong Delta to the Communist regime. The
dissidents have been led in part by an anti-Communist reform Buddhist sect
called Hoa Hao.

Regardless of their size, the fervor of the refugee rallies in California and
elsewhere in support of the resistance movement in Vietnam illustrates the depth
of anti-Communist feeling among Vietnamese here.

''Those who choose not to support the resistance movement, I think that number
would be very, very small,'' said Mr. Cong.  The ferment here comes on the eve
of a trial in the murder of Lam Trong Duong, a young leftist who was shot to
death on a busy street last July 21.

Although the police believe the motive for the slaying was personal and an
acquaintance of Mr. Lam'ssaid to have been seen talking with him has been
charged with the murder, sources familiar with the Vietnamese community say that
many believe politics was behind the shooting.

After the death, a group calling itself the Anti-Communist Viets
Organisation,claimed responsibility for the slaying.

Newsletter Challenged

A letter postmarked from Las Vegas accused Mr. Lam, who was editor of a
community newsletter published here, of ''odious crimes against Vietnamese
people'' in publishing the newslettter. it said that the newsletter existed ''to
bolster the image of the hated VN Communist regime.'' The letter, whose postmark
was indistinct, it appeared to have reached the post office eight hours after
the shooting.

''AVCO has decided,'' the letter, referring to the anti-Communist organization,
continued, ''to punish Lam Trong Duong. The punishment has been carried out by
AVCO's shock squad on July 21, 1981, in San Francisco, USA.''

A somewhat similar letter was received by a Vietnamese publication in Garden
Grove, Calif., the next week. Called ''Announcement 2,'' it reiterated the
charges and said that as a result ''the Vietnamese Organization for Communist
Extermination decided to declare the death penalty'' and that the ''sentence was
carried out by a member of VOCE in San Francisco.''

Seventeen days after the burial last July 24, according to a funeral home source
who asked not to named, Mr. Lam's father asked that the body be exhumed. The
next month a permit was issued to exhume the body and it was cremated. According
to the funeral home source, Mr. Lam's family stated that the ashes would be
scattered at sea, three miles west of Half Moon Bay in the Pacific Ocean.

A friend of the family told the police that the exhumation resulted from
pressure on the family to remove the body from a cemetery where other Vietnamese
were buried.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Tran Minh Cong

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              223 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AFFAIRS;
DOUBLE STANDARDS

BYLINE: By Flora Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 861 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 2


Even before what promises to be Britain's stunning military victory in the
Falklands war, the British have won as difficult and in the long run perhaps
more important a battle - for credibility.

This applies not only to national resolution, which was intense on both sides,
but to the crucial weapon for the defense of democracy: information. There have
also been casualties in the struggle to obtain and present the facts, which
merit reflection.

The BBC and other news media intend to press for a national inquiry on
information policy once the fighting ends, as Parliament will press for an
investigation of what went wrong at the start.

A lot of obvious failings developed on the information front, as on the
diplomatic and intelligence fronts. Britons are justifiably proud of the prowess
their well-trained forces have shown in military planning and execution.

But the military wasn't prepared, technically or in basic attitudes, for the
urgent modern need to keep the public well informed on actions it is asked to
support. British and foreign correspondents agree that London's releases have
been slow, incomplete and sometimes downright misleading.

Judgments differ on how much this was due to practical problems and how much was
deliberate. The BBC's Director General-designate, Alasdair Milne, points out a
unique aspect of this war on a distant, limited battlefield. It was the ability
of British correspondents to function virtually normally in the enemy's capital,
sending film, broadcasts and written reports. Few were with the troops, they
were pinned down, and there was censorship at both the sending and receiving
ends.

The big issue, however, is the proper role of national news media in wartime. It
can be summarized in the dispute over whether battle reports should be presented
about ''the British and the Argentines,'' or ''our boys and the enemy, us and
them.''

Since the Labor opposition taunted Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher early on to
produce ''deeds, not words,'' overwhelming support was assured for the campaign
once it began. The emotional climate was comparable to America's during the
Iranian hostage crisis. There was even an element of nostalgia and relief that
the nation could unite in outrage and wounded pride regardless of all its
prickly quarrels.

Feelings were stirred not only by the Government but also by much of the press.
The sensational papers fought a circulation war with rousing headlines such as
''Up Yours, Galtieri.'' Even the respectable Times proclaimed, ''We're All
Falklanders Now,'' which provoked a (strictly private) retort from a Member of
the House of Lords who said, ''Not me, I'm keeping my British passport.''

In this atmosphere, there were angry complaints that some, and especially the
publicly owned BBC, failed to give due support to the national effort, that they
were too ''evenhanded.'' There was even a charge of treason, and Mrs. Thatcher
joined the general attack.

This is a fundamental issue at a time of crisis in any country. It requires a
fundamental response, as successive U.S. Governments had trouble learning during
the Vietnam War, with the result that Washington lost credence for its
statements both at home and abroad, and American politics and foreign policy
still suffer, and will for a long time ahead, from self-inflicted wounds on the
expectations of truth-in-government.

What does a democratic state not actually threatened in its survival have to
defend more precious than the confidence of its citizens that they know the
facts about what is done in their name, that they are free to be honestly
informed?

There is a double standard for democracies and dictatorships, as BBC Chairman
George Howard suggested in a firm, dignified speech, and that is the reason for
defense efforts.

It may seem a handicap to beleaguered governments and an insult to superpatriots
to be judged this way, but it is the wage of selfrespect. Argentine claims
aren't believed until proven. Britain's word stands.

Mr. Milne calmly noted, when the attacks on the BBC were mounting, that the
service had referred to ''the British'' and ''the Germans'' or whatever in World
War II, and again, as appropriate, during the 1956 Suez crisis, and it wasn't
about to change now. That reflects the independent attitude that has won world
acceptance for its news.

This kind of reputation, like democracy itself, takes a long, difficult,
vigilant effort to build. It can easily be destroyed, even by small slippages,
but to restore it requires heroic new effort.

Attacks on the determination of responsible British news media to seek
objectivity were shockingly ill-considered. It is to the credit of the nation,
which gave 80 percent approval to the BBC in an independent survey, as well as
to those who resisted pressure to silence critics, that a greater value than the
Falklands has been saved.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              224 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 3, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AN ENVOY WHO SPECIALIZES IN SENSITIVE MISSIONS

BYLINE: By FRANCIS X. CLINES, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 10, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1310 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 2


Ambassador at Large Vernon A. Walters, the Army private who talked and worked
his way up to three stars and then to the top level of the Central Intelligence
Agency, is thriving now as the Administration's loner at large. Back in
Government from the lucrative world of consulting on oil and arms, he roams the
earth as Alexander M. Haig Jr.'s cat's-paw, portraying himself as an old soldier
intent on a final run at peace and dismissing criticism that he is a consummate
contract artist in pinstripes.

Fluent in seven foreign languages (French, Portuguese, Spanish, German, Italian,
Dutch and Russian) Mr. Walters surfaced in Havana in March for a four-hour
conversation with Cuban Premier Fidel Castro.  He popped into Saddle River,
N.J., in May for a private party with his old friends, Richard M. Nixon and King
Hassan II of Morocco. And, in between, this retired general, Presidential
translator, raconteur and natural gleaner of intelligence has logged untold
leagues on State Department missions to El Salvador, Argentina and a dozen other
troubled places.

One knowledgeable official says that Mr. Walters travels more than anyone else
in the Administration, that he has spent perhaps half his days on the road,
clocking more than 300,000 miles of air travel in behalf of Secretary of State
Haig. Today, for example, African diplomats reported him conferring in Tanzania,
with plans to move on to Zambia and Angola. Typically, the State Department
would neither confirm nor deny the reports.

Part of the 'Haig Junta'

In joining the Reagan team as an early member of what is lightly termed the
''Haig junta,'' Mr. Walters moved fast at the State Department in securing a
prized suite and his own photocopying machine and in quickly having fetched from
overseas duty the military man he preferred as an aide.

''That sort of clout impresses the bureaucracy where they live,'' said a State
Department veteran. ''Then he flies off on his missions, building the old
mystique.''

Though most of the Ambassador's travels go unannounced, there are a few
Walters-watchers who squint suspiciously at the occasional mentions of his
coming or going in foreign news dispatches. They recall his missions in the
Nixon Administration when he would drop from sight and deal secretly with China
and North Vietnam on sensitive matters.

Mr. Walters believes his credibility as an emissary is rooted in the social
contacts he has built with powerful figures around the world in four decades of
work in the public and private sectors.  Critics wonder whether he can easily
put aside his private endeavors. After leaving Government in 1976, Mr. Walters
became a consultant and included among his clients an American company
interested in the arms market in Morocco, where Mr. Walters has many friends
from his World War II days. He also worked for an international oil cartel
scouting the fields of Guatemala where he also has friends in government.

'Not Running a Shuttle'

To the critics, Mr. Walters replies: ''If I was a bad man, I couldn't keep doing
this.'' The son of an insurance executive, Mr. Walters was born in New York and
received a continental education that was cut short of a college degree by the
war. He rose rapidly in the Army, gaining a reputation as a smart aide-de-camp
who befriended foreign generals and diplomats.

With his quiet style and de-emphasis of the human rights issue he brings to his
ambassadorial post, Mr. Walters has won praise from such influential critics of
past policies as John Carbaugh, the conservative foreign affairs specialist on
the staff of Senator Jesse A. Helms, Republican of North Carolina.

''Dick Walters is not out there running a shuttle with his face in the
newspapers,'' said Mr. Carbaugh. ''He knows more world leaders than anyone else
except our ex-Presidents, and he not only speaks to them in their own language,
but their own dialects.''

But Lawrence Birns of the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, a private study group,
rates Mr. Walters as an ''absurd'' diplomat, a ''Jackin-the-box'' envoy who has
''aggressively courted'' Latin-American dictatorships and set back American
interests. ''My only comfort is that he is not a grand strategist, merely a
utility ballplayer,'' said Mr. Birns, who feels the $300,000 Mr. Walters made as
an international arms consultant before returning to Government compromises
diplomatic professionalism.

Message for Argentina

In dozens of recent world missions, Mr. Walters has hurried six times to
Argentina alone, most recently taking on the thankless task of telling his
friends in the junta that, with war beginning in the Falklands, Washington had
to side with Britain. Mr. Walters offers no complaints, even though he spent
considerable time lobbying the hemisphere for Mr. Reagan on the dangers of
Soviet-Cuban colonialism.

Asked for a precise intinerary of his recent travels, which in itself would be a
revealing map of the Administration's private priorities, the husky,
6-foot-3-inch bachelor laughed noncommitally, as if he were being asked about
the Maltese Falcon. Not surprising from the man who, as a military attache in
Paris in the Nixon Administration, is remembered for concocting cover stories of
secret trysts in order to ''smuggle'' Henry Kissinger into France 15 times for
secret meetings with the North Vietnamese.

''I can stand in an airport terminal and nobody notices me,'' the 65-year-old
Ambassador said proudly of his method of traveling light, often on commercial
aircraft under his own name.

In contrast to this anonymous blur is Mr. Walters behavior when he is out of
power, usually during a Democratic administration. He churns out books crammed
with anecdotes about his travels with Presidents and kings. He was with Truman
for the famous confrontation with MacArthur; with Eisenhower when the U-2 spy
plane went down, with Vice President Nixon for what the two now annually
commemorate as their ''rock 'n' roll day,'' May 13, 1958, when a Venezuelan mob
stoned their car.

Role in Watergate

As the C.I.A. deputy favored by Mr. Nixon, Mr. Walters carried out a White House
mission to caution the Federal Bureau of Investigation that the Watergate
investigation could compromise overseas intelligence operations. He emerged
unscathed, however, when, as he testified later, he soon discovered there was no
such impediment and he threatened to resign if further abuses of the C.I.A. were
attempted.

''His style is genuinely impressive,'' said one White House veteran who recalled
a terrible moment on President Nixon's 1968 visit to Germany. At the end of a
10-minute toast in German the official translator suddenly became incapacitated.
Mr. Walters, there as an observer, stepped in and delivered a 10-minute
translation that the Germans pronounced perfect.

Said William E. Colby, former Director of Central Intelligence: ''Dick could
make contact with a missing Eskimo and learn the language going in on the
plane.''

The closest Walters-watchers outside Government are suspicious that the
Ambassador is working on some dramatic move for Mr. Reagan, a public relations
coup or, detractors joke, maybe even a real one.

''I am no longer in the intelligence business,'' the Ambassador emphasizes these
days. But he does note, teasingly that, at best, only one out of every four of
his trips is known outside the department.

''This is not being secret,'' Mr. Walters said. ''It's being discreet.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vernon A. Walters

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              225 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 4, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

News Summary;
FRIDAY, JUNE 4, 1982

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 871 words


International
President Reagan was conciliatory in his comments to Francois Mitterrand about
the French President's Socialist Government. But by the end of Mr. Reagan's
first day of his Europe visit, several issues remained dividing the two
Presidents, among them France's objections to American policies in Central
America, and differing views on the Falkland Islands war. The two leaders also
discussed the war between Iran and Iraq. (Page A1, Col.6.)
The Soviets are aiding Argentina by working to help link Argentine radar sytems
into a nationwide net to guard against possible British air attacks, according
to Argentine official and industry sources and foreign diplomats. They reported
that more than 20 technicians were involved in the project under a secret accord
between the two nations. Their presence was said to be the first evidence of a
Soviet military role in the Falkland conflict. (A1:3-5.)
The final assault on the Argentine garrison at Stanley by British forces in the
Falkland Islands will take place as soon as they are ready, pursuant to an order
given by Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. (A1:4-5.)
Rejecting President Reagan's ideas for strategic arms reduction, Pravda, the
Communist Party newspaper, said that he was seeking to ''inflict considerable
damage on the defense capacity'' of the Soviet Union. (A1: 2.)
The Israeli Ambassador to Britain was shot and critically wounded as he left a
party at a luxury hotel in one of London's most fashionable neighborhoods.
Shlomo Argov, 52, was wounded at least three times. The universal belief among
British and Israeli officials was that the attack was politically motivated.
(A1:2-4.)
The Iranian victory over Iraqi forces in recapturing the port city of Khoramshar
confirmed that the Iranian army, which had been decimated and thrown into
confusion after the fall of the Shah, has re-emerged as an efficient fighting
force. (A1:1-3.)
The vote total in El Salvador may have been inflated in the March election, the
President of the Central Elections Council said. Dr.  Jorge Bustamante, head of
the council, said, ''there might have been a 10 percent error'' in the total
number of people who went to the polls. Others said that the total was doubled.
(A5:1.)
National
Exposing the identities of operatives working covertly for the United States
intelligence services could bring penalties of up to 10 years in prison and
fines of up to $50,000 on conviction under a bill approved by the House of
Representatives. The bill still must go before the Senate. (B7:1-4.)
President Reagan's original budget proposal for the fiscal year 1983 was sent to
the House floor by the House Budget Committee. But the fiscal plan, which
includes a deficit of about $122 billion and has virtually no support in
Congress, will be voted on only if alternative proposals, one offered by each
party, are defeated.  (B7:1.)
Allan Bakke will graduate from the University of California Medical School
today, four years after a decision by the United States Supreme Court agreed
that the white student be admitted because the school's affirmative action
program was unjustifiably biased against whites. The effects of that decision on
efforts to increase access of minority groups to education and jobs are still
being debated. At Mr. Bakke's school, in a first-year class of 100 medical
students, only two are black. (A14:2-5.)
The 1968 presidential campaign debts run up by Robert F. Kennedy and Hubert H.
Humphrey have finally been paid off by the Democratic National Committee. But
unlike its rich Republican counterpart, the Democratic committee is not
debt-free. (B7:1-2.)
Metropolitan
Mayor Koch ordered a hiring freeze in all New York City agencies, citing
uncertainty over whether the State Legislature would approve his request for
$519 million in aid and taxes. The Mayor also asked budget aides to compile a
list of additional reductions in the budget for fiscal 1983. Although the mayor
said that layoffs would be a last step, aides said privately that they might be
necessary. (A1:1.)
Education officials denounced the Federal Government for saying it may require
the transfer of teachers to achieve desegregation of the teaching staffs in New
York City's public schools. (B3:5-6.)
The safe evacuation of Westchester County in the event of a serious nuclear
accident at its Indian Point nuclear power plants was doubted by Alfred B.
DelBello, the County Executive. He called on the Federal Nuclear Regulatory
Commission to give the utilities 120 days to come up with a workable plan or
face a possible shutdown by the Government. (B2:1-2.)
Visas have been approved for 50 members of the World Peace Council who had been
denied entry into the United States to attend United Nations disarmament
meetings. A spokesman for the Immigration and Naturalization Service said the
visas were approved because the members had been invited by the United Nations.
(B1:5-6.)
The nuclear disarmament rally June 12, which is expected to draw hundreds of
thousands of people to Manhattan, was conceived and organized by groups with a
history of protest reaching back to anti-Vietnam War days and by new protesters.
(B6:1-2.)

Business Digest, Page Page D1

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              226 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 4, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

PROTESTERS OLD AND NEW FORGE ALLIANCE FOR ANTINUCLEAR RALLY

BYLINE: By ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 830 words


The nuclear disarmament rally that is expected to draw hundreds of thousands of
people into Manhattan on June 12 has been conceived and organized by groups with
a history of protest reaching back to anti-Vietnam War days and by a new set of
protesters.

With strong participation from national church groups and local minority
organizations, the rally's coordinating group, the June 12th Rally Committee,
has been emphasizing the broadness of its representation.

The purpose of the rally is to show support for the United Nations' Second
Special Session on Disarmament and to call for ''a freeze and reduction of all
nuclear weapons and a transfer of military budgets to human needs,'' according
to the official slogan. Minority organizations say their recognition of a link
between larger defense budgets and reduced social spending has propelled them to
join the rally.

'Participation of Poor'

''Two characteristics of the peace movement worldwide over the last year are the
internationalization of it and the participation of the poor, and for that I
think we have to thank Mr. Reagan,'' said the Rev. William Sloane Coffin of
Riverside Church, which has taken a very active role in disarmament activities.

''This is something the standard peace movement has been saying for at least
four years, but there has not been the active participation of poor people,''
Mr. Coffin added.

While the logistics of the rally have been overseen by the June 12th Rally
Committee, other groups have been holding activities in New York building up to
the rally.

Among these are Physicians for Social Responsibility, whose growing membership
has been speaking throughout the region on the medical issues of nuclear war,
and Performing Artists for Nuclear Disarmament, another rapidly expanding group,
which was formed last month. The artists' group is holding several benefits for
the rally committee, as well as free events involving song, dance and drama.

Among the more familiar names on the rally executive committee are SANE, an
antinuclear group founded in 1957; Mobilization for Survival, a network of peace
and social-action groups that planned the rally in 1978 for the United Nations'
First Special Session on Disarmament; Greenpeace, an ecological group, and the
Women's International League for Peace and Freedom, a pacifist group that was
started in 1915 by Jane Addams.

Union Groups Represented

Joining these groups are newer antinuclear protesters. There are three union
groups - the Coalition of Black Trade Unionists, District 65 of the United Auto
Workers and District 1199 of the National Union of Hospital and Health Care
Employees. The two church groups on the committee are the Ministerial Interfaith
Association and the Riverside Church Disarmament Program.

In addition, there are four minority organizations - the Rev.  Herbert
Daughtry's National Black United Front, the African American Coordinating
Committee, the Asian American Caucus for Disarmament and Hispanics for Survival
and Disarmament. The last three coalitions, made up of New York-based groups,
were formed specifically for the rally.

When the rally's executive committee was being formed, the minority
organizations pressed for a strong role and at one point split off to form a
separate organizing committee. The rift became so wide that at one point Gordon
J. Davis, the city's Parks Commissioner, was given two separate applications for
a rally permit.

The issue was resolved, however, with the inclusion on the executive committee
of the four groups.

Distillation of Groups

The executive committee is a distillation of more than 100 national sponsors and
hundreds of other local ''endorsers.'' Among the sponsors are groups of women,
officials of the clergy, political activists, senior citizens, college students,
unionists, nuclear scientists and others too numerous to categorize.

Among the political groups that are sponsors are Americans for Democratic
Action, the Citizens Party, Communist Party U.S.A. and the Socialist Party.

However, the rally committee is working to keep election politics out of the
protest. No Presidential or gubernatorial candidates or United States senators
have been invited to speak, not even Mayor Koch or Senator Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts, one of the main proponents of a nuclear freeze.

Instead the protesters will hear from such speakers as Coretta Scott King, widow
of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, the slain civil-rights leader; Dr. Helen
Caldicott, president of Physicians for Social Responsibility, City Council
President Carol Bellamy and retired Adm. Noel Guyler. There will also be
performances by popular singers and dramatic readings by well-known actors and
poets.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Rev. William Coffin

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              227 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

OUTCAST VIETNAM CHILDREN STILL HOPE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 916 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, June 3


Scores of children and adolescents of mixed American and Vietnamese parentage
were camped outside the Cuu Long Hotel today to sell peanuts to a party of
visiting Vietnam War veterans from the United States and some American
reporters.

They also begged, posed for photographs, laughed if the visitors smiled, stared
somberly, and occasionally scattered when a khaki-clad policeman or some other
government agent stabbed his finger down the boulevard and told them to go away.

There are uncounted thousands of the offspring of American fathers and
Vietnamese mothers in Vietnam. Most live in Ho Chi Minh City.  About 70 such
children have been declared by the State Department to be United States
citizens, able to pick up their passports at any consulate. Yet none of the 70,
none of about 500 others whose American paternity has been established, and none
who have appealed over the past two years to Vietnamese and American
authorities, have actually left Vietnam.

According to American and other Western experts, the obstacles range from United
States law to inaction or obstruction by the Vietnamese, from the technical
difficulties of establishing paternity to the lack of a clear American sense of
what if anything the United States should do for such children.

Many Want to Go to U.S.

Other problems include the absence of formal diplomatic relations between the
two countries, the fact that letters go astray in Vietnam, the mixed feelings of
some American fathers toward the prospect of becoming involved with their
children, most of whom are illegitimate, and the question of whether mothers
should accompany the children if they are ever admitted to the United States.

What is clear is that large numbers of such families want to go to the United
States. Life for them, as for many Vietnamese, is poor and unemployment is high.
It has also been reported that the children have suffered official
discrimination - for both racial and political reasons - in schools, jobs and
welfare programs.

Such discrimination, however, is extremely hard to measure, according to
European and American officials in the Orderly Departure Program.

Contacts with a dozen or so such children over the past few days reveal only
that some are frail and sickly and others strong and healthy, some are withdrawn
and others boisterous and streetwise. A few revealed themselves to be literate
in Vietnamese, but none spoke more than a few words of English.

Records of 4,000 Compiled

Two or three adolescents said that their families managed, one way or another,
to bring in the equivalent of $15 to $20 a month, more than many other
Vietnamese families earn. Others were dressed in tattered shorts and ripped
shirts. Yet ragged clothes are a common sight all over Ho Chi Minh City.

Since the inauguration of the Orderly Departure Program for Vietnam two years
ago, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the American Embassy
in Bangkok have compiled records of about 4,000 children of American-Vietnamese
background out of a total that may run to 10,000 or twice that many. Most of the
cases were initiated by mothers, other relatives or guardians; the number of
true orphans is unknown.

Several bills pending in Congress would make it easier for some of these
children to enter the United States. The general intent of the bills appears to
be supported by the Reagan Administration and the private delegation of Vietnam
War veterans that left here for New York today after a six-day visit praised
them in meetings with Vietnamese officials.

Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach told the veterans in Hanoi that ''all''
children of mixed American and Vietnamese background could leave Vietnam. Later,
however, officials said at lower levels, but more formally, that the children
could go if their fathers ''accepted'' them and if the program for dealing with
them was ''simple.''

American officials involved in the Orderly Departure Program said many fathers
are discouraged by state laws from accepting them, or the fathers are dead or
cannot be found, or, most commonly, that while they might be willing to claim
paternity they do not want to take the children into their homes.

Still the Children Hope

The proposed laws typically offer asylum to the Vietnamese children of American
military personnel, but not of American contractors, Government employees and
others who worked in Vietnam in the 1960's and 1970's.

Evidently these tangles have not kept the children from hoping. One day last
week, while the delegation from the Vietnam Veterans of America was discussing
the problem in a closed meeting with Do Duy Lien, deputy chairman of the Ho Chi
Minh City People's Committee, dozens of them, some on bicycles, began gathering
at the end of Nguyen Hue Street outside the meeting place, a palace that used to
be Saigon's municipal hall.

To some, the presence of Americans seemed an occasion for high jinks and
determined poses in the rain. Most, however, were silent.  A mother approached
with three children fathered, she said, by three different Americans, one a
soldier, the others civilians. She said she had applied for American visas, but
had not received them.  She then wrote her name and case number and her
children's names in a reporter's notebook. As she was writing, a young policeman
approached and demanded to see the notebook.

He soon returned it and left, and the woman continued her appeal.  Later she
approached the foreigners more cautiously.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 23, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A dispatch from Ho Chi Minh City on June 5 about children of American-Vietnamese
background incorrectly gave the number of such cases documented by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the American Embassy in Bangkok. It
is 2,000, although the High Commissioner believes the children number about
4,000.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of children of American fathers

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              228 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

SHELLING OF STANLEY: MOST TERRIFYING KIND OF ATTACK;
Military Analysis

BYLINE: By DREW MIDDLETON, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 4


The British ground, sea and air forces around Stanley, the last Argentine
stronghold on East Falkland, have subjected the garrison to prolonged
bombardment by field artillery, naval guns and bombers.

This kind of attack, military analysts said, is one of the most terrifying and
the one most likely to sap the defenders' will to resist. Three factors worsen
the Argentines' plight. The first is that the ground troops have meager means to
respond. Fire against the destroyers and frigates of the British fleet is likely
to be ineffective. These ships reach their positions after nightfall and move
constantly. Without air observation, the Argentine gunners are at a serious
disadvantage.

The British guns in the hills overlooking Stanley have limited mobility. But
they benefit from forward observation posts set up in positions from which
Argentine infantrymen have withdrawn. Any Argentine guns that open fire on the
British artillery can be brought immediately under heavy fire from those in the
hills. The Argentines have no forward observation posts.

Little Protection Available

Meager protection is the third factor. Wood, which was used to protect shelters
in the two world wars, in Korea and in Vietnam, is not available in the
Falklands. Consequently the defenders must rely on earthworks that disintegrate
under the impact of shells or bombs.  Because the water table on the islands is
so high, the Argentine troops cannot dig foxholes deep enough to protect them
from bombardment.

The retirement of the garrison from its forward positions to a horseshoe-shaped
formation around Stanley has eased the task of British gunners and bombardiers.
Fire is concentrated around the clock on a limited number of targets.

Sustained bombing by the Argentine Air Force appears to be the only available
antidote to the British bombardment. Attacks on the fleet and on field
artillery, however, would have to be carried out in daylight. The air force,
depleted in earlier battles, would have to overcome the Harrier jets, which
control the air over the battlefield, and the Rapier and Blowpipe antiaircraft
missiles of the British ground forces.

Some analysts believe, however, that despite these risks the Argentine Air Force
will make a desperate effort to knock out the British field guns. They regard an
attack on the destroyers and frigates, which shell at night, as far less likely.


Reported Short of Supplies

Non-British military experts say Brig. Gen. Mario Benjamin Menendez, the
Argentine commander, erred in pulling back his forward positions. One reason may
have been a shortage of supplies. Reports reaching London say some of the
forward observation posts overrun by British marines and paratroops lacked food,
water and even radios for communication with the garrison's artillery.

In view of the British superiority in guns and in the air, many analysts
discount the idea of a land attack by the British ground forces on the Stanley
position. But, it was pointed out, Maj. Gen.  Jeremy Moore, who is directing the
ground forces, could be influenced by the plight of about 400 Falkland Islanders
caught in the capital.

Should the British launch a ground attack, they are in a much better position
logistically than they were earlier this week, when the first advance units of
marines and paratroopers probed the hills overlooking Stanley. Milan antitank
missiles, artillery ammunition and some tanks have been moved forward.
Ammunition and fuel depots have been expanded and antiaircraft protection
increased. The troops around the capital are now getting two hot meals a day,
officials said. Clothing is being issued to replace that worn out on the march
across East Falkland Island.

Superior Mobility Gained

Sea King helicopters from the fleet are being used to bring reinforcements
forward to the battle zone. Their presence gives the besiegers superior mobility
to meet any Argentine sortie against the British lines.

Senior officials in London appear unconcerned about any Argentine attack. Their
confidence grows out of earlier successes, when the British attackers were
outnumbered, and the firepower now available.  They also stress the difficulty
of mounting a major Argentine counterattack over the terrain separating the two
forces. ''Uphill all the way,'' was how one officer described it.

A British sweep Thursday across the slopes leading down to Stanley did nothing
to shake this confidence. Intelligence sources reported that the sweep had
brought in a few stragglers from an Argentine infantry company that had been
sent forward earlier in the week.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of wounded British soldiers

TYPE: Analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              229 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ARGENTINA AND CUBA SIGN TRADE PACT

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 517 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, June 4


Argentina's Foreign Minister signed a $100 million trade agreement with Cuba
Thursday night to underline the new friendship that has sprung up as a result of
the Falkland crisis.

But before leaving here today for Caracas, Venezuela, the Argentine official,
Nicanor Costa Mendez, told reporters he had not discussed Cuba's offer of
military aid to Argentina. ''We have excellent diplomatic and commercial
relations,'' he said, ''but the military question is not of my competence.''

Mr. Costa Mendez, who appealed Thursday for support for Argentina at a meeting
of third world nations professing nonalignment, also said he was ''very
surprised and astonished that the United States has given Britain arms and
assistance to kill our people.''

Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader, said at an informal news conference Thursday
night that he was sure the 94-nation Nonaligned Movement would adopt a
resolution favorable to Argentina. He described the Argentine Foreign Minister's
speech as ''excellent, clear and rational.''

Allies' Ranks 'Weakening'

''I don't question the right of Argentina to recover their territories using the
methods that all peoples have always used,'' he said.

''Even if the United Kingdom recovers the islands, they have not won the battle
of the Malvinas,'' he continued, using the name by which the islands are known
in Latin America. ''Support for Argentina grows by the day, while the ranks of
the allies are weakening.''

But no agreement has yet been reached on the exact phrasing to be used on the
Falkland issue in the final conference document.  Argentina's sovereignty over
the islands is expected to be reaffirmed, but Jamaica and other Commonwealth
countries have resisted efforts to describe Britain's move to recover control of
the islands as ''aggression.''

Many African and Asian delegates expressed surprise at the unusually radical
stance adopted by Mr. Costa Mendez on Thursday on numerous third world issues.
Not only did he sharply criticize South Africa and Israel and express support
for the Palestinians, but he praised the struggles of Algeria, India, Cuba and
Vietnam ''for liberation.''

Argentine diplomats said the Foreign Minister had made a clear effort to appeal
to the strongly anticolonialist sentiments of many members of the Nonaligned
Movement by placing Argentina's claim to the Falklands within the context of a
colonial struggle. Argentine journalists accompanying Mr. Costa Mendez also
remarked on the unusual sight of a senior member of Argentina's strongly
anti-Communist regime being embraced publicly by Mr. Castro.

Mr. Castro, who met Mr. Costa Mendez on three separate occasions during his
36-hour visit here, told reporters last night that he had supported Argentina's
claim to the Falklands for ''30 or more years'' and that he was filled with
''admiration'' by the ''very clean and elegant way'' in which the islands were
seized April 2.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Fidel Castro and Nicanor Costa

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              230 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

U.N. ENVOY SURVIVES IN A FEUD WITH HAIG

BYLINE: By BERNARD GWERTZMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 4


If an ordinary ambassador runs afoul of the Secretary of State, especially one
with a temper like that of Alexander M. Haig Jr., the ambassador runs the risk
of a quick return to private life.

But Jeane J. Kirkpatrick is no ordinary ambassador. In her 17 months as the
chief United States delegate to the United Nations, she has disagreed openly
with Mr. Haig over a number of issues, most recently the Administration's
Falklands policy, and has not only survived but has also been granted a
40-minute private audience with President Reagan.

Mrs. Kirkpatrick, by an American diplomatic quirk, is not only envoy to the
United Nations but also a member of the Reagan Cabinet.  The fact that she is
also the highest-ranked woman in the senior echelons of the Government and the
Administration's main liaison agent with the neo-conservative Democrats known
loosely as ''the Commentary crowd'' has also contributed to her ''fireproof''
status.

A senior Administration official, who admits to a bias in favor of Mr. Haig, was
musing the other day over the ambiguity of the tradition that gives Cabinet
status to an official who, by the nature of her job, has to take instructions
from civil service bureaucrats in the State Department.

A Tradition Survives

He noted that before the inauguration, the Reagan transition team recommended
abolishing that tradition. ''I think a lot of the problem between Jeane and Al
could have been avoided if we had taken the transition team's advice,'' he said.

Ambassadors often differ privately with their government's policies, but not
publicly, at least not for long. Last summer, for example, Robert G. Neumann,
then the Ambassador to Saudi Arabia, criticized Mr. Haig's Middle East policy in
a conversation with Senator Charles H. Percy, chairman of the Foreign Relations
Committee. Mr. Haig heard about it and, within two days, Mr. Neumann was forced
to resign.

But ever since the Falklands crisis erupted, Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who is an
Argentine specialist, has been critical of the Administration's handling of it.
She was especially perturbed when Mr. Haig persuaded the President to side with
Britain after Mr. Haig's mediation efforts failed.

As a Cabinet member, Mrs. Kirkpatrick has the right to consult directly with
President Reagan without going through Mr. Haig or the State Department. All
ambassadors are appointed by the President and theoretically have the same
right. But, in practice, it is rare for an envoy ever to see the Oval Office
after posing for his departure picture. And Mr. Haig is unlikely to suffer
gladly any who try to go there over his head.

On the other hand, as the United States delegate to the United Nations, Mrs.
Kirkpatrick has to follow instructions that are usually drafted by the State
Department. The person whose responsibility it is to tell Mrs. Kirkpatrick what
to do is the relatively lowly Assistant Secretary for International
Organizations.

Administration officials say that Mrs. Kirkpatrick has not enjoyed taking orders
from middle-level officials and that on sensitive matters, Deputy Secretary
Walter J. Stoessel or even Mr. Haig has had to deal with her.

After her latest dispute with Mr. Haig surfaced, Mrs. Kirkpatrick made it clear
that as a Cabinet officer she would deal directly with the President. She spent
40 minutes with him, with only William P.  Clark, the national security adviser,
present, to discuss her views on the Falklands. Even though the Administration
has publicly sided with Britain, Mrs. Kirkpatrick publicly admits to ''tilting
toward neutrality.''

The first U.N. delegate to be appointed to the Cabinet was Henry Cabot Lodge,
former Senator from Massachusetts, in the Eisenhower Administration. President
Kennedy named Adlai E. Stevenson to the United Nations in 1961, and he had his
public problems with Washington, particularly when he let it be known that he
had not been consulted before the Bay of Pigs invasion.

President Johnson, in trouble over Vietnam, persuaded Arthur J.  Goldberg, then
a Supreme Court Justice, to be his U.N. envoy, promising him a major policy role
in the effort to bring peace. Mr.  Goldberg opened an office in the State
Department and told journalists of his independent marching orders. But his
dovish views quickly cut his influence.

Andrew Young, the first black United States chief delegate to the United
Nations, was a close political ally of President Jimmy Carter and took his
Cabinet rank seriously enough to make statements that constantly caused
Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance trouble. Mr.  Young and Mr. Vance were much
closer than Mr. Haig and Mrs.  Kirkpatrick, but Mr. Young was finally forced to
quit after it was learned that he had met with the Palestine Liberation
Organization envoy without permission.

Strains Set In

According to State Department officials, Mr. Haig and Mrs.  Kirkpatrick started
out working well together, but after about six months, strains began to set in,
starting with Mrs. Kirkpatrick's handling of the Security Council debate over
Israel's June 1981 bombing of the Iraqi reactor. From New Zealand, Mr. Haig's
aides let it be known that Mr. Haig thought Mrs. Kirkpatrick had acted against
orders.

In that case, the White House rushed to her defense, and Mr. Haig was forced to
say that his aides were misinformed. That retraction was never taken seriously
by Mrs. Kirkpatrick's aides, who believed that Mr. Haig was jealous of her
success in getting a resolution that the United States could support through the
Council.

''You want to know what the problem is?'' one official asked. ''It is very
simple. The chemistry is bad.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Jeane Kirkpatrick photo of Alexander Hiag Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              231 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

THEATER: MORE OFFERINGS IN 'MARATHON' ONE-ACT

BYLINE: By FRANK RICH

SECTION: Section 1; Page 11, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1237 words


The offerings in Series C of the Ensemble Studio Theater's one-act play
''Marathon'' are not fully accomplished works, but in its own rough-hewn way the
evening is a modest success. In two of the three plays, we encounter writers
with striking young voices, and that's just what should be happening at the
E.S.T.

The playwright who's furthest along is Mary Gallagher, whose ''Buddies'' closes
the evening. Miss Gallagher's play is set in a ramshackle house shared by four
students at a small, all-male Middle Western college in 1967. We meet three of
the men and three of their women on a late summer night when marijuana and
Vietnam are just beginning to cast a long shadow over the young people of Middle
America. But while Miss Gallagher's characters are not unaware of what's blowing
in the wind, they're still basically beer drinkers who listen to the
nonpsychedelic rock of the Lovin' Spoonful.

The play's main story, acted with exceptional sensitivity and honesty by Jan
Leslie Harding and Mark Arnott, is about the tentative romantic gropings of
Theresa, a plain Jane who is awkward around boys, and Jerry, a none-too-bright
jock who is also socially inept. Yet what makes Miss Gallagher's writing
particularly impressive is not her warm and touching account of her lonely,
would-be lovers but her ability to capture the camaraderie, conflicts and humor
of all her play's buddies, male and female.

Both the playwright and her director, Mary B. Robinson, dexterously handle the
overlapping vignettes that spill from the house's living room onto its front
porch and lawn. Unfortunately, an all-toocatalytic character arrives at midpoint
- Theresa's best friend, a sexual tease who has spent a year in Italy and now
returns to upend, at least temporarily, the household's various relationships.
In part because the role is miscast - we don't see what either Theresa or the
men could ever find appealing about this woman - the play begins to unwind. Miss
Gallagher, too, stumbles a bit, finally to descend into some overly diagrammatic
and unconvincing plot reversals in her rush to a tidy final-curtain resolution.

''Rosario and the Gypsies,'' the middle work on the bill, is a musical -and not
like any musical you've ever seen. Set at ''an abandoned outdoor theater just
outside San Diego,'' it tells of a political, avant-garde 1960's theatrical
troupe that has lost its audience and its era. Or at least I think that's the
subject. Eduardo Machado, who wrote the book and lyrics, and Rick Vartorella,
who wrote the Latin-flavored music, work in an absurdist, stream-ofcraziness
vein that is sometimes entirely private.

Unformed, incoherent and repetitive as ''Rosario'' can be, it is also endearing.
It's fun to watch Mr. Machado and Mr. Vartorella try anything in the pursuit of
the outrageous. One character, Howard (well done by James Ryan), injures his
finger in a part-time lawnmowing job and sings, ''It's beginning to sting/ The
whole world stinks.'' Dominic Chianese, dressed like a circus roustabout, does a
solo about how ''gurus aren't worth a dime anymore.'' The troupe's two women,
played in funny, ersatz-ethnic fashion by Julie Garfield and Cheryl McFadden,
perform ''revolutionary'' flamenco dances. John Rothman, as a Moral
Majority-type blue nose, arrives to sabotage the company but instead ends up in
the bushes with Claude (Stefano Loverso), its flamboyantly homosexual French
balladeer.

''There is no moral to our story - no moralizing,'' explains one character at
the end, and that seems to be the case. ''Rosario'' is at once a send-up and
celebration of yesteryear's avant-garde, proletariat-minded street theater -
with a little bit of parodistic backstage romance and melodrama thrown in. While
the music and lyrics fly off in all directions, none of them remotely
conventional, Shirley Kaplan's lively direction gives the musical, sags and all,
the unifying ambience of a lunatic street party.

The evening's opening play is Susan Vick's ''Ord-Way Ames-Gay'' (pig Latin for
''Word Games''). It's about two sisters of the 1950's - respectively on the
brink of marriage and high-school graduation - and what happens when their
innocent hopes are later splintered by divorce, changing times and a death in
the family. The playwright's flash-forward structure accentuates the work's air
of sentimental contrivance, and the thin-blooded heroines are not much enlivened
by the acting. But, if nothing else, the stale air of ''Ord-Way Ames-Gay'' does
make the fresh currents of ''Rosario'' and ''Buddies'' feel all the more
invigorating later on.

The Cast
MARATHON 1982, Series C. Scenic design, Brian Martin and Dana Hasson; costume
design, Nina Moser; lighting design, Richard Lund; production supervisor, David
S. Rosenak; sound de- sign, Gary Harris; production stage manager, K. Siobham
Phelan. Presented by the Ensemble Studio Theater, Curt Dempster, artistic
director, and Deborah Dahl, managing director. At 549 West 52d Street.

and
BUDDIES, by Mary Gallagher; directed by Mary B. Robinson; stage manager, Joan
Ungaro; assistant to the director, Yvonne Adrian.  Boe Stewinski
............................Chris Lutkin Theresa Mullen .....................Jan
Leslie Harding Jerry Framingham ..........................Mark Arnott Zoodirt
Grogan ...........................Willie Reale Lisa Schneider
...........................Chel Chenier Lacey Contini
........................Stephanie Murphy

and
ROSARIO AND THE GYPSIES, book and lyrics by Eduardo Machado; music by Rick
Vartorel- la; directed by Shirley Kaplan; arranger and piano, Gary Manheit;
bassist, Daniel Krimm; stage manager, David Thalenberg; assistant to the
director, Alice M. Hale; assistant to the playwright, Edit Villarreal.  Gustavo
..............................Dominic Chianese Rosario
................................Julie Garfield Claude
...............................Stefano Loverso Mary
..................................Cheryl McFadden Customer
.................................John Rothman Howard
.....................................James Ryan Max
...................................Rick Vartorella

and
ORD-WAY AMES-GAY, by Susan Vick; directed by Pamela Berlin; stage manager, Lisa
DiFranza.  June ......................................Polly Adams Charlotte
.............................Anne O'Sullivan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Julie Garfield

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              232 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

ANTI-NUCLEAR GROUPS ARE USING PROFESSIONS AS RALLYING POINTS

BYLINE: By ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Section 2; Page 26, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1265 words


Organizing within the professions, new nuclear disarmament groups have spread
throughout the metropolitan area in the last two months.  There are Dancers for
Disarmament and Nurses for a Non-Nuclear Future, Social Workers for Nuclear
Disarmament and Architects for Social Responsibility. There are new
organizations of magazine editors and life insurance salesmen, psychotherapists
and cancer researchers. And they have all been moved to action by what they see
as the threat of a nuclear holocaust.

''Our whole orientation is providing protection for people,'' said Sidney A.
Sass, a 60-year-old life insurance salesman who just a few weeks ago helped form
Life Insurance Industry Committee for a Nuclear Weapons Freeze. ''In a sense
this is the most basic issue of life - is there going to be any?''

Many of the groups began with the actions of a few people who were concerned
about the issue, and quickly gained a solid membership.  When Anne Mollegen
Smith, editor in chief of Redbook, and a few of her colleagues decided to hold
an informational meeting for other magazine editors two weeks ago, 130 editors
showed up after work to hear McGeorge Bundy, the former national security
adviser, and Herbert Scoville, former deputy director of the Central
Intelligence Agency.

Involvement Out of Fear

''I'm terrified.'' said Edward D. Sheffe, editor in chief of Adventure Travel.
''I have been for 10 years, that's why I'm here.'' ''I came out of personal
interest,'' said Patricia Irons, editor of Baby Talk. ''I don't know if new
parents would be interested - maybe they should be.''

When Florence Falk, a theater scholar, and a group of other theater people
including Jules Feiffer and Harry Belafonte, set up a membership rally April 5
to start Performing Artists for Nuclear Disarmament, 1,500 people were turned
away from an 800-seat meeting hall.

The new groups' organizers attribute an increase in awareness and concern about
the nuclear issue to, among other factors, President Reagan's statements on the
need for a nuclear weapons buildup, Jonathan Schell's best-selling book, ''The
Fate of the Earth,'' the much-publicized Foreign Affairs article by four former
government officials calling for a pledge of no first strike by the United
States, and the approaching June 12 disarmament rally at the United Nations.

Performers Organize

Perhaps the most visible new group, by virtue of its members profession, is
Performing Artists for Nuclear Disarmament. Since its inception in April, the
group has held a score of events including a rally for children at the Delacorte
Theater in Central Park where youngsters who belong to a new group called Future
Generations for Nuclear Disarmament put on skits and dances. They were joined by
the singers James Taylor, Richie Havens and Chaka Kahn, who gave a free show.

The performers group is just beginning to discover and exploit its fund-raising
potential for the disarmament movement, beginning with a benefit Tuesday, which
is being organized by Meryl Streep, the actress.

And the performers group is reaching out to gather more members.  At the
unlikely time of 11:15 P.M. on a recent, the performers group held a teach-in at
the American Place Theater on West 46th Street.  The hour was calculated to draw
actors and dancers fresh from their Broadway curtain calls.

Cast members from ''Pirates of Penzance,'' '' Dancin' '' and ''Joseph and the
Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat,'' among others, filled the seats until the
audience built to about 80 people. They heard Jonathan Lorch, who is president
of the New York chapter of Physicians for Social Responsibility, a decade-old
group newly returned to life, detail the medical consequences of a nuclear war.

Political Neophytes

Many of the actors described themselves as political neophytes.  ''I have quite
an aversion to protests at any time,'' said Bebe Neuwirth, a performer in
''Dancin.' '' She explained that in the anti-Vietnam War days Students for a
Democratic Society and the Weathermen, two radical groups, had staged an
''unwarranted'' protest at her father's workplace. ''But I feel this is quite a
different story,'' she said.

Laurie Dawn Skinner, another ''Dancin' '' cast member, said: ''I was raised in a
military family and if anything there was advocacy for military spending, but
this is a little scary. There comes a point, where do you draw the line?''

Colleen Dewhurst, the actress, has been deeply involved in the nuclear
disarmament movement and urged the actors before her to get involved. ''Brezhnev
and Reagan in the headlines - that is us,'' she said of the two leaders' calls
for arms negotiations. ''You think you have no power. That's us in those
headlines.''

A Special Contribution

She said performing artists could make a special contribution. ''We are the ones
who express the dreams, the hopes, the loves and, most of all, the life of
people,'' she said. ''That's our profession. So we are the ones who can speak
for our country.''

This is just what Lyrysa Smith, a 22-year-old actress and currently a waitress,
came to hear. ''I felt so angry and so helpless,'' she said. ''I felt through an
organization some voice would be heard.''

Each professional group is trying to approach the issue in its own terms. Wayne
Roberts, a member of the life insurance salesmen's committee, said: ''We hope to
prepare a simple policy or form which I'm calling The Last Life Insurance
Policy, the insured being the human race, the insurers being the governments of
the United States and the Soviet Union and the grace period running out very
rapidly.  Every life insurance policy has a grace period, a period of time
following the due date, usually one month, where you have to pay it before it
lapses - the analogy being the grace period on the nuclear weapons race is
running out so to speak. We don't have unlimited time to play with.''

Underneath the exhilaration the organizers are feeling over having drawn such
support lies concern about the strength of commitment and whether the issue will
dissipate after the June 12 rally.

Exhilaration and Alarm

''I find it very exciting and exhilarating and a little alarming,'' said Mrs.
Falk, the president of the performers group. ''When one sees this kind of
energy, having had the Vietnam experience, hoping it will hold and having seen
how quickly boredom sets in, and one gets co-opted. One of the pledges we've
made is to keep educating ourselves.''

Mrs. Smith, the Redbook editor, told her peers of her hope ''that this issue of
disarmament would not have the fate of a fad - would not be the kind of trendy
issue that can claim a lot of our space and a lot of media time for a short time
and then fade out of sight.''

''As Dr. Scoville said,'' she continued, ''the last few months have been very
exciting, but as fall comes, as demonstrations slow down, there will be a
temptation to feel that we've said enough about that. But I think it is
something for all of us to keep in our minds, that our attention needs to be
sustained if we are to have this public education, this continuing debate and
the sense that this issue overrides and infuses all the others that we might be
giving space to.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of 130 magazine editors at an informal meeting

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              233 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 5, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

BUYERS VOW TO COVER U.P.I. LOSSES

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 2; Page 48, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1196 words


The new owners of United Press International said yesterday that all of the news
agency's financial ties to its previous owner had been severed and that they
alone would be responsible for paying any of U.P.I.'s operating losses or any
closing costs if they could not turn the operation around.

In interviews conducted between their meetings with U.P.I.  managers, the buyers
said there were no hidden partners or financiers and there was no escape clause
that would return ownership to the E.W. Scripps Company.

They told of their backgrounds. One man had served 10 months in a Federal prison
for resisting military conscription. Two were active in the Baha'i church, an
independent religion that emphasizes spiritual unity for mankind.

''We are not going to divulge how we put the thing together and how it is
financed,'' said Douglas Ruhe, one of the four men who announced Wednesday that
they would buy U.P.I., which has 6,000 newspaper and broadcasting clients. The
four are operating as the Media News Corporation. No disclosure was made of the
purchase price, but according to a former U.P.I. official, whose information
could not be confirmed, the buyers paid $17.5 million. He said that Scripps
intended to take a $40 million write-off of its losses.

Have 'Enough Money,' They Say

''We have enough money'' to pay the operating losses and develop new services,
Mr. Ruhe said. U.P.I. has said it lost more than $8 million last year and
expects to lose $5.5 million this year in its battle with the nation's largest
news agency, The Associated Press.

Alluding to questions raised in the industry, Mr. Ruhe noted, ''No one is behind
us.'' His partners are William E. Geissler, a partner with Mr. Ruhe in the
Nashville-based Focus Communications Company; Len R. Small, a Moline, Ill.,
publisher whose family owns seven papers in the Middle West and California, and
Cordell J. Overgaard, a Chicago lawyer who has represented the Small family's
communications interests.

In meetings at the Harley Hotel in New York, Mr. Geissler, 36 years old, told
U.P.I. executives he had been in the Federal prison in Danbury, Conn., from
August 1969 to June 1970 for refusing to fight in the Vietnam War. He said that
he had offered to serve in a noncombatant role, but that his draft board
insisted on the prison sentence.

Mr. Geissler and other draft resisters were pardoned in 1975 by President Ford.
''The experience was an agonizing one for the entire nation,'' he said,
referring to the war. ''I did what I felt was honorable. I did not dodge the
draft. If called upon to serve today, I would do so.''

Partner a Rights Activist

Mr. Ruhe, 37, Media News's managing director, said he had been arrested twice in
the 1960's for civil rights activities, but that all the charges against him
were eventually dropped.

Mr. Ruhe and Mr. Geissler worked together at the Baha'i National Center in
Wilmette, Ill., in the mid-70's, producing informational material. The Baha'i
church, which began in the 19th century, says it has three million adherents
worldwide, including 100,000 in the United States. Mr. Ruhe said his and Mr.
Geissler's religious beliefs would not affect their operation of the news
agency, and added that no Baha'i money was involved. ''I'm a First
Congregationalist,'' Mr.  Small interjected, ''and they're out of it too.''

Mr. Small, 39, the chairman of Media News, said his experience with the Small
Newspapers and other operations had given him some training for tackling the
problems of running U.P.I.

He and Mr. Ruhe said they would develop new services and technologies that were
within the abilities of the agency. They said this would require new capital and
a reallocation of resources on hand. They did not say whether this would mean
any reduction in news gathering, the primary concern of many U.P.I. clients.

Reported Issue in Reuters Talks

Mr. Ruhe said Media News would be responsible for any shutdown liabilities. When
the British news agency Reuters was negotiating a possible purchase of U.P.I.,
it was reportedly deterred by a potential $60 million liability in pension and
severance costs.

Lawyers said, however, that under Federal laws U.P.I. employees might be able to
assert a claim against Scripps if the news agency closed in the next five years
and Media News could not pay pension and severance costs.

Roderick W. Beaton, president of U.P.I., said the agency lost $8.2 million
before taxes last year and that it had been estimated that the figure would drop
to $5.5 million this year. Profits from other operations in 1981 reduced the net
loss to just over $4 million.

Small Newspapers has three dailies in Illinois, two in Indiana and one each in
Minnesota and California. The largest, The Rochester (Minn.) Post-Bulletin, has
a daily circulation of about 39,000.  Industry experts estimated that the
revenues for the group did not exceed $30 million a year.

An Interest in Magazine

The group also had a 25 percent interest in Family Weekly, a magazine
distributed in Sunday newspapers. CBS Publications bought the magazine for $50
million, and the Small family's profit on its holding was estimated at $9.5
million. Mr. Overgaard was formerly the chairman of the magazine's directors.

Focus Communications operates a subscription television station in Joliet, Ill.,
and has license applications pending for stations in Kannapolis, N.@C.;
Murfreesboro, Tenn.; Norfolk, Va.; Seaside, Calif.; Derry, N.@H., and Waco, Tex.

Mr. Beaton said Scripps would not have sold the agency to the four men ''unless
they felt they were adequately financed and backstopped.''

''I happen to know'' what that backing is, he said, ''and I'm very comfortable
with it.'' Mr. Small's father, Leonard Small, had helped to establish U.P.I.'s
Newspaper Advisory Board. He was scheduled to become president of the American
Newspaper Publishers Association but he died in an automobile accident in March
1980.

End of Three-Year Effort

Scripps' three-year effort to sell U.P.I. attracted several potential buyers,
including Carl Eller, a communications entrepreneur from Arizona, and John Jay
Hooker, a Nashville businessman and former publisher of The Nashville Banner. In
an interview, Mr. Hooker said he had no connection with Focus Communications or
its principals, Mr. Geissler and Mr. Ruhe.

''I went to Ruhe's office,'' he said, speaking of a visit he paid there
Thursday, ''and there's certainly nothing to lead you to believe they were about
to take over a worldwide news agency. I'm just sorry they got it instead of
me.''

Bankers and brokerages in Nashville said they had no information about Focus's
business and financial arrangements or any indication how the purchase of U.P.I.
had been financed.

Mr. Ruhe and Mr. Geissler have said they are operating independently of Focus
Communcations, and Mr. Overgaard said he was acting independently of his law
firm, Hopkins & Sutter, in which he is a senior corporate partner. The
61-year-old firm, one of the largest in Chicago, employs 95 lawyers and
specializes in corporate and financial litigation, tax matters, securities,
corporate mergers and acquisitions.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              234 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

U.P.I. CLIENTS PLEASED ABOUT NEW OWNERSHIP

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 25, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 658 words


Officials of newspapers and broadcasting stations that use the services of
United Press International say they are pleased the news agency has new owners
but also express uncertainty about what the owners intend to do to improve the
news-gathering operations.

''I'm glad they finally found a buyer,'' said William B. Ketter, editor of The
Patriot Ledger in Quincy, Mass. The editor, a former U.P.I. employee, said he
had ''overwhelming curiosity'' about who the buyers were, how much money they
had and what they intended to do to strengthen the news service's regional
coverage.

United Press International was sold Wednesday to a group of four relatively
unknown newspaper and television operators who formed the Media News
Corporation. The sale ended a three-year effort by the E.W. Scripps Company of
Cincinnati to rid itself of the troubled news agency, which lost more than $8
million last year and expects to lose $5.5 million this year.

That effort had stirred fears among clients, as well as among the agency's
employees, that the agency might be closed, ending 75 years of competition with
The Associated Press, the nation's largest news agency. The competition, the
U.P.I. clients said, has provided readers, viewers and listeners with more
complete and up-to-date information than they would have received from a single
news agency.

U.P.I. has an annual budget of $110 million, a third less than the A.P.'s, and
about 2,000 employees around the world, as against its competitor's staff of
2,600. The Associated Press is a cooperative of newspapers and broadcasting
stations that assesses its members the cost of its operations. U.P.I. has no
such flexibility. To reduce its deficit, which reached $12 million in 1980, it
has cut the size of its news staff, which makes competing all the more
difficult.

The best known of the four new owners is Len R. Small, editor and publisher of
The Daily Dispatch in Moline, Ill. He is also vice president of the Small
Newspaper Group, a family-owned business in Kankakee, Ill., with seven daily and
three weekly papers. The 39-year-old Mr. Small, the chairman of Media News, said
he felt his experience had given him some training for tackling the news
service's problems.

The Small family has been close friends with Roderick L. Beaton, the president
of U.P.I., who said he had not taken a major role in arranging the sale but
allowed that his tie to the Smalls ''probably was not damaging.''

The Small family is ''first rate,'' said James Hoge, publisher of The Chicago
Sun-Times. ''They bring instant credibility to the new ownership,'' agreed
Robert L. Paige, a former U.P.I. executive and now a vice president of News
American Publishing Inc., the Rupert Murdoch-owned parent company of The New
York Post.

The other three owners are Douglas Ruhe and William E. Geissler, partners in the
Nashville-based Focus Communications Company, and Cordell J. Overgaard, a
Chicago lawyer who has represented the Small family, Clients of U.P.I. said they
were not particularly concerned that two of the owners, Mr. Ruhe and Mr.
Geissler, had been active in civil rights and resistance to the Vietnam War.

The clients said they were concerned, however, that the new owners had not shown
they had the financial resources needed to improve the news agency. ''Our
interest is that we have two good viable wire services,'' said Kenneth L.
Bagwell, an officer of Storer Broadcasting Company and chairman of a 15-member
board that advises U.P.I. on the concerns of broadcasting clients. ''The
question is how much money they will be willing to put in.''

''We have enough money'' to pay the operating losses and develop new services,
Mr. Ruhe said last week.  Mr. Beaton has said that Scripps would not have sold
U.P.I. to the four men ''unless they felt they were adequately financed and
backstopped.''

''I happen to know'' what that backing is, Mr. Beaton said, ''and I'm very
comfortable with it.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              235 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Future Events In and Out of Town

BYLINE: By RUTH ROBINSON

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 68, Column 3; Society Desk

LENGTH: 767 words


Tickets for the following may be obtained from the beneficiaries unless
otherwise indicated.

Rite of Spring
June 10 - The New York City Ballet's annual spring gala benefit and supper ball
at the New York State Theater opens the company's weeklong salute to Igor
Stravinsky on the 100th anniversary of his birth. The proceedings start with a
cocktail party outdoors on the Promenade Terrace at 6:30 P.M., followed at 8
P.M. by the performance with premieres of works choreographed by George
Balanchine and Peter Martins. A black-tie supper ball on the Theater Promenade
until 1 A.M. winds up the festivities. Vera Stravinsky, the composer's widow, is
the honorary chairman for the gala, the proceeds from which will go to the
company's production fund. Tickets, $1,000, $500 and $250 for the entire
evening, depending on the seating arrangements, $100 for cocktails and the
performance only.

With a Russian Accent
June 11 - The Tolstoy Foundation, which likes variety in its annual
fund-raisers, is calling the 1982 edition at the Knickerbocker Club an
''International Summerlands Ball.'' The foundation's supporters, 150 strong,
will be joined for dancing after cocktails and dinner by the junior contingent,
35 years of age and under. The beneficiary, established in 1939 by Alexandra
Tolstoy, the author's youngest daughter, to aid Soviet immigrants, today extends
its services to refugees from many countries, including Vietnam, Afghanistan and
Poland. Tickets, $150. Junior tickets, $35. From 628-0218.

Under the Big Top
June 12 - The second annual Fine Arts Ball of the Council of the Nassau Museum
of Fine Art will be held in a pristine white tent on the grounds of the museum,
the former Childs Frick estate in Roslyn Harbor, L.I. Cocktails will be served
to the 500 guests on the lawn or indoors, where they can view the current
exhibition ''The Long Island Collections, A Century of Art: 1880-1980,'' 160
paintings and sculptures by such masters as Picasso, Monet, Renoir, Kandinsky
and Calder. Patron tickets for the black-tie benefit, $250; donor tickets, $150.


A Little Evening Music
June 14 - A ''vecherinka,'' or little evening party will be held in Sotheby's
York Avenue Galleries to benefit the St. Sergius School and the American Society
for the Preservation of Russian Monuments.  The event, which includes a
performance by the Cappella Russian Male Chorus, a buffet dinner with Russian
specialties and dancing, coincides with a presale exhibition for Sotheby's
Russian Works of Art sale June 17, when 80 lots, half of them from the Faberge
workshop, go on the block. Both St. Sergius, the only fully accredited
Russian-English high school in the United States, and the Preservation Society,
are dedicated to conserving Russian traditions and culture. Tickets, $75 for
sponsors, $40 for juniors (under 30 years old) from 288-3397 or 472-4840.

Film Fare
June 14 - The New York premiere at Cinema 1 of ''Firefox,'' the espionage movie
for which Clint Eastwood is producer, director and star, will be sandwiched
between a reception and supper-dance. It's all in aid of the Film Preservation
Fund of the Museum of Modern Art. The benefactors' package of $5,000 consists of
10 tickets for a cocktail reception given in Mr. Eastwood's honor by Blanchette
Rockefeller, president of the museum, at her apartment; 10 movie tickets and a
table for 10 at a recherche supper-dance at the Pierre Hotel. Individual
tickets: $75 for champagne reception at the theater plus the movie; $300 for
champagne reception, movie and supper-dance. All from 944-1858.

Dancing of All Kinds
June 15 - A cast party at the Red Parrot after the Martha Graham Dance Company's
performance at the City Center, is just one of a series of benefits planned in
conjunction with the troupe's New York season. For good measure the Martha
Graham Junior Guild, sponsor of the event to benefit the Martha Graham School of
Contemporary Dance, has extended an invitation to dancers from the Royal Danish
and New York City Ballets. So there'll be some competition out there on the
dance floor to live music alternating with disco. Tickets $35, $40 and $60 for
the entire evening, $25 for Red Parrot party only, from 832-9166.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              236 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Music View;
STRIKING A POLITICAL NOTE

BYLINE: By John Rockwell

SECTION: Section 2; Page 23,; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1483 words


Classical music is conventionally encountered in cloistered halls, cloaked in
the musty rituals of concert life. But sometimes music reaches out to engage the
larger issues of the day, reminding us of the links between esthetic pleasure
and political concern. Just now, several otherwise unrelated events have pointed
up the curiously ambivalent relationship between art-music and politics.

Those events began on May 25 with a memorial concert at Symphony Space for
Cornelius Cardew, a British composer killed in a hit-andrun accident in London
last December. Mr. Cardew had evolved, with an inexorable, seemingly
self-punishing logic, from the chilly rigor of total Serialism to the libertine
anarchism of John Cage to a determined, neo-folkish simplicity inspired by
Marxist-Leninism.

His music never made much of a dent on its own, and after the May 25 concert, it
does not seem very likely that it will. But the concert attracted a wide range
of new-music composers and performers both on the stage and in the audience. Mr.
Cardew's appeal to them must have been more as a moral example than as a
compositional model. No matter why they came, however, their presence focused
attention on the growing accessibility and, hence, potential for politicization
of the younger musical avant-garde.

The second event is this coming Saturday's nuclear disarmament demonstration in
Central Park, to the support of which a remarkably wide variety of artists in
every medium has rallied. Whatever one thinks of nuclear disarmament, no issue
since the Vietnam war has united so many artists in the service of politics.

But even in this general enthusiasm, strictly classical musicians, and
conventional ''modern music'' composers (as opposed to the experimentalists and
self-conscious avant-gardists), seem distinctly under-represented. And that,
along with Mr. Cardew's deliberate abandonment of the entire panoply of
20th-century musical modernism, makes one wonder.

To be fair, classical performers are not entirely uninvolved with this issue, or
inactive politically. An ambitious ''Symphony for United Nations'' free concert
will take place at St. Patrick's Cathedral tonight, with an orchestra that
includes leading members of the New York Philharmonic and two Tokyo orchestras.
Itzhak Perlman will contribute to an evening of anti-nuclear testimonials
tomorrow at the Beacon Theater; a group of Boston Symphony musicians raised a
considerable sum for the same cause in February, and such classical artists as
Pinchas Zukerman, Lukas Foss and Norman Dello Joio have lent their names and
their organizational energies to the antinuclear movement.

Nor is this by any means the only political issue that mobilizes musicians. On
June 14 at Avery Fisher Hall, there will be a concert featuring Vladimir
Feltsman in absentia. Mr. Feltsman is a highly regarded Russian pianist whose
career has been crippled by the Soviets since he applied to emigrate to Israel,
and the concert will call attention to his case and the more general plight of
Soviet Jewry.

But even for such a relatively noncontroversial event as this, which is centered
on a concert pianist, the only strictly classical musician listed for the
benefit is Misha Dichter; otherwise the roster offers such disparate talents as
Tony Randall, Helen Hayes and Gelsey Kirkland. A nuclear-movement spokesman
attributed the relatively small number of classical musicians supporting that
cause to their simply not having been contacted yet. But the impression remains
that classical musicians are less active politically than artists in other
mediums - or than jazz, pop and vanguard musicians.

There is no absolute or historically ordained contradiction between great
musical artistry and active political involvement. In the Romantic era, the
greatest composers and performers openly indentified with nationalist or
socialist causes, often to their personal detriment. One need only think of
Beethoven's paeans to freedom, Verdi's fierce Italianism and Wagner's socialism
and yearslong banishment from Germany. Paderewski's proud Polish pianism carried
that tradition into the 20th century.

Our country and time offer less heroic models. In the 30's and 40's, it was
still possible for a composer like Aaron Copland to write both ''serious''
concert music and folkish crowd-pleasers, and to make both styles recognizably
his own, and related. On the whole, however, and particularly since World War
II, the steady evolution of modernist music into ever more abstract, chromatic
idioms has posed the serious, morally concerned composer a painful dilemma. Such
composers want to write music that is truly of their time. They also want to
reach people, and most people abhor the fashionable modernist idioms.

There is a parallel between tonality and tunefulness on the one hand, and
pictorial realism in painting on the other. The general audience still prefers
musical and visual art with a clear connection to everyday life, familiar things
that can be recognized and, in the case of music, hummed. Recently we have seen
revivals of both realism in painting and tonality in composition. Neither
revival was specifically inspired by political concerns. But both reflect
artists' anxiety about their detachment from life, and both facilitate the
rebirth of a more politicized art.

Many of the artists and critics publicly associated with the ''return to
Romanticism'' and painterly super-realism are neoconservatives. They have
reverted to the past as part of their rejection of the present and the more
recent, modernist past.  Conservatism hardly precludes political action, to be
sure. But most of the efforts over the past 60 years to resolve the
contradiction between modernist complexity and popular accessibility - to create
a serious simple style - have been linked with the left.

The ''Gebrauchsmusik,'' or ''music for use,'' of the 1920's in Germany and the
tuneful ballads of Kurt Weill and subsequent composers for Bertolt Brecht, are
examples. The populist music dictated by European Socialist Realists (and
Fascists, too) in the 30's and 40's - which were extreme manifestations of the
same social concern evinced by Mr. Copland and the other American musical
populists - is another.

So, too, are the minimalism and conceptual-art simplicities of more recent lower
Manhattan avant-gardists, and the active art-rock crossovers currently endemic
in downtown lofts. It is no accident that the SoHo arts community, composers
very much to the forefront, is highly active in the present round of
anti-nuclear benefits. This is a music with a limited but viable audience, one
that reflects today's sensibility without precluding popular appeal.

Neither performers nor composers can hope to address the present with the
vocabulary of the past. Orchestras, opera companies and soloists are museum
curators today, concerned with the preservation of a repertory that speaks of
centuries long gone. Beethoven's ''Ode to Joy'' (which concludes the Symphony
for United Nations concert tonight at St. Patrick's) may be a universal plea for
brotherhood, but it is couched in the idealistic rhetoric of German
intellectuals gazing longingly at the French Revolution from across the Rhine.

There is music that speaks directly of today, of course, but that is popular
music; popular musicians are everywhere evident in behalf of political causes,
as in the various benefits being given here this week by Linda Ronstadt, James
Taylor and Jackson Browne.

The division that has opened up between ''serious'' and popular music, and the
tacit reinforcement so many modern composers give one another not to
''vulgarize'' their music, assures the political irrelevance of their art.
Beethoven was a serious composer, but he tried to appeal to ''the people,'' too,
not least in his ''Ode to Joy.'' Milton Babbitt may care passionately about some
political issue. But his music could hardly serve as a call to battle, or even
attract people to pay money to hear it at a benefit.

There are those who cling to the ideal of art's separation from, and superiority
to, the jostling mundanities of everyday life, even the noblest of political
causes. For them, art in general and music in particular, so often upheld by
estheticians as the purest, most detached of the arts, soil themselves by a too
casual intercourse with the real world.

This is an intellectual position with a time-honored pedigree, and one with
considerable appeal today for intellectuals continually assaulted and bruised by
the crass bustle of the real world. But it would not have meant much to
Beethoven, Verdi or Wagner.

Today there are signs of a timid but tangible rapprochement between politics and
serious music. That suggests not a nostalgic, revanchist ''return to
Romanticism,'' but a newly vital art-music that can actually stir people in the
ways that mean most.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              237 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

STEVIE WONDER TAKES A LONG LOOK BACK

BYLINE: By ROBERT PALMER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 4; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1361 words


Stevie Wonder is a pop star of the brightest magnitude. His singing style has
been so influential for the past decade or so that several artists, among them
the jazz guitarist and pop crooner George Benson, have achieved spectacular
commercial breakthroughs by copying it blatantly, while many others have altered
their phrasing or timbre so that it reflects a bit of Mr. Wonder's special glow.
Several of his harmonically sophisticated, jazz-influenced pop ballads, ''Ma
Cherie Amour'' and ''You Are the Sunshine of my Life'' for example, have become
instant standards, performed by pop singers of almost every conceivable stripe,
but he has also written rock songs, dance floor funk, angrily explicit protest
songs, and many other songs that are more difficult to categorize.

Mr. Wonder's arrangements, and especially his layering of synthesizer parts to
create ingenious melodic and rhythmic counterpoint, have also been widely
copied. And as Paul McCartney recently remarked, Mr. Wonder projects
considerable spiritual and moral authority.

But even pop stars of Mr. Wonder's radiance sometimes feel the need to take
stock of what they've done, to present retrospectives that allow both the artist
and the public to re-evaluate the quality and significance of his work. And that
is precisely what Mr. Wonder has done with ''Stevie Wonder's Original
Musiquarium I'' (Motown), a tworecord album that collects 12 of his most durable
past successes and four substantial new tunes.

This is not a haphazard collection of hits. It has been programmed with great
care, presumably by Mr. Wonder himself, so that the songs flow into one another
and are grouped loosely into four categories - protest funk on Side One,
sophisticated ballads and lightly swinging rhythm tunes on Side Two, tributes to
various influences and inspirations on Side Three, and dance tunes with
jazz-like chord structures on Side Four. The selections have been drawn from the
last decade rather than from Mr. Wonder's entire career; ''Fingertips,'' ''Ma
Cherie Amour,'' and ''I Was Made to Love Her,'' and other early triumphs can be
found on the three-record ''Stevie Wonder Anthology'' album (Motown) or on an
earlier greatest hits collection. But concentrating on the 1970's and early
1980's was a good idea, since it was during this period that Mr. Wonder's
influence reached its zenith.

This is an impressive album. Fans will undoubtedly bemoan the absence of one or
two personal favorites, but it is difficult to imagine a more cogent or
convincing argument for Mr. Wonder's message or his talent. The way he has
programmed the album encourages the listener to hear each song again, to
actually listen to it as a piece of music rather than greet it like a familiar
friend. And the songs repay repeated listening. In fact, one realizes after
reviewing them in this new context that they are not always what one thought
they were, and that some aspects of Mr. Wonder's talent have been greatly
exaggerated while others have been overlooked.

Mr. Wonder's devotees have sometimes gone overboard and compared him to Duke
Ellington and other great American composers, or to various innovative jazz
figures. But surely anyone who listens to his stabs at ''classical'' composition
on albums such as ''Songs in the Key of Life'' and ''Journey Through the Secret
Life of Plants'' can only conclude that they are pleasantly derivative at best
and hackneyed at worst. And while his instrumental skills are considerable -he
is a terrifically inventive harmonica and keyboard soloist, for example - he is
hardly a jazz virtuoso, as he would probably be the first to admit. He is a
consummate pop tunesmith who admires the jazz greats and has written
jazz-influenced material that large numbers of people can relate to.

The term tunesmith, with its connotations of hammering finished works out of
disparate materials in a hot forge, is actually the most appropriate description
of the way Mr. Wonder puts his music together. One thing ''Stevie Wonder's
Original Musiquarium I'' makes abundantly clear is that like virtually every
other pop songwriter and arranger, Mr. Wonder is a derivative artist. He
rummages through America's rich storehouse of vernacular musics for melodic
snippets, chord changes, and arranging ideas, but he welds these elements
together seamlessly.

His song ''I Wish,'' for example, grafts a shouting brass arrangement that Count
Basie's band would be proud to play onto a contemporary funk rhythm. Big band
arrangers who want to ''appeal to the kids'' have been attempting this sort of
thing for years, but their work usually sounds self-conscious and awkward. Mr.
Wonder makes the combinations sound effortlessly natural. And ''That Girl,'' one
of the album's four new songs, insinuates melodic fragments and chord changes
derived from mid-1960's Motown soul into a lyrical piece that doesn't sound one
bit old-fashioned.

''You Are the Sunshine of my Life'' is as gorgeous a pop melody as anyone has
written in the past 10 years, but Mr. Wonder is not a consistently superior
melodist. When one listens to four of his most melodically appealing tunes back
to back on Side Two, they soon begin to blur together. It isn't the melodies
that are distinctive, it's the way Mr. Wonder frames his melodies with beguiling
harmonies and instrumental interludes that are often more melodically memorable
than the songs themselves. His gift for melodic writing is showcased especially
well on the churning protest song ''Living for the City.'' That song's bluesy,
sing-song melody almost begins to seem repetitive, but Mr. Wonder is flirting
with monotony in order to set up a ravishing little melodic interlude, played on
the synthesizer, that really makes the piece come alive.

The four new songs on ''Musiquarium'' are placed at the end of each of the
album's four sides. The first, ''Front Line,'' is a starkly economical,
eloquently anguished portrait of a Vietnam veteran's bitterness and dead-end
fatalism, and an exciting mixture of guitar rock in a Cream/ Hendrix vein with
springy funk.

''Ribbon in the Sky'' is an exceptionally pretty and tender love ballad. ''That
Girl'' isn't as rich in lyricism or nuance, but it's certainly charming enough.
''Do I Do,'' which concludes the album, is a sweetly sexy seduction song that
turns into a 10-minute jam, with Dizzy Gillespie making a brief and somewhat
inconclusive appearance on trumpet and Mr. Wonder playing supercharged, gutsy
keyboards.

''I know the record's about to end,'' Mr. Wonder says after capping a passage of
marvelous brass writing with an incisive harmonica solo, ''But we're gonna
play,'' and the band does, jamming along for several minutes before the
inevitable conclusion. It's a very clever way to end the record; its sustained
intensity and invention are so spectacular they leave one hungry for more.

If the melodies collected on ''Musiquarium'' are not as varied or as distinctive
as one remembers them being, Mr. Wonder's stylistic grafting and juxtapositions
are certainly skillful enough and intelligent enough to compensate. And while he
has not been as prolific recently as he was through much of the 1970's, the new
work on ''Musiquarium'' suggests that he is still growing.

His lyrics seem more focused and more handsomely phrased than they used to be,
he is a more resourceful and effective arranger, and unless he is working on
some magnum opus and keeping it a secret, he isn't overwriting and overreaching
the way he sometimes used to do.  His music is solid, built to last, and
''Stevie Wonder's Original Musiquarium I'' (presumed to be the first of a
projected series) is a solid retrospective. It sounds like the work of a man who
has paused momentarily to look back before moving decisively forward.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Stevie Wonder

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              238 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

GIVING IS NO PICNIC IN GUATEMALA

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1041 words

DATELINE: GUATEMALA CITY


The new military Government of Guatemala is causing an unusual kind of headache
for Washington. The United States Agency for International Development and other
American agencies ''are scrambling to find money for them,'' an official said,
''but these guys are saying they don't want it.'' The Reagan Administration
wants to send helicopters, $2.5 million in military equipment, $300,000 for
military training and at least $50 million to assist Guatemala's crippled
economy.

For economic and political reasons, in the Reagan Administration's perspective,
Guatemala should be a more important candidate for aid than neighboring El
Salvador, which also has been upsetting its friends in Washington. Guatemala is
Central America's most populous and wealthiest country. It has oil. Above all,
for an Administration concerned about leftist inroads close to home, Guatemala's
revolutionaries, some reportedly trained in Cuba, appear to be better organized
and militarily stronger than their counterparts to the south. Little is known
about their leaders but it is widely assumed that they hope to implant a
socialist and possibly a Marxist government.

Gen. Efrain Rios Montt, President since the three-man military junta took over
in March, has nevertheless insisted he does not need military or economic help
from Washington. Another junta member, Col. Francisco Luis Gordillo Martinez,
said that ''if the aid from the United States is conditioned, it will be
rejected.'' He was reacting to statements by Democratic congressmen indicating
that, as in El Salvador, aid might be linked to human rights improvements.

Congressional opponents of the Administration's Guatemalan aid request are
watching rights developments here closely. Violence in the cities has declined
noticeably since the coup, as has repression of the Roman Catholic church, the
university and on radio and newspapers.

But Indian peasants - who account for two-thirds of the 7.2 million people - are
still being killed. Recently 21 peasants were found in a mass grave, including
nine children aged seven months to 13 years.  Victims in another village
included 26 children, three men and 14 women, four of them pregnant. The
publisher of the conservative newspaper, El Grafico, called the mass killings of
Indians ''genocide'' and said, ''we really are not worthy of any aid while this
continues.''

Also complicating aid prospects is the Guatemalan junta's reluctance to commit
itself to elections. Return to democracy has been the linchpin of American
policy in El Salvador, and the Administration has repeatedly criticized
Nicaragua's Sandinists for delaying voting. But, despite pressure from the
United States and local political parties, General Rios Montt has not set an
election date here.

Parallels With El Salvador

Critics of deepening United States involvement in El Salvador have asked whether
it was not turning into another Vietnam. Now some are asking if Guatemala will
become ''another El Salvador.''

In both countries, moderate officers deposed a repressive military regime. Prior
to both coups, the United States was supplying no military and only minimal
economic assistance. Then, in El Salvador, the United States resumed aid,
arguing that this would encourage the moderates. Instead, the Government moved
to the right, American policy followed and aid was increased until El Salvador,
about the size of the Falklands but with 4.8 million people, is now the fourth
largest American aid recipient.

But much of what Washington hoped to accomplish has not come to pass. Political
violence is still unacceptably high - some 250 people are killed each week in El
Salvador, the State Department said (500 a week, according to leftists). Much of
the land redistribution program for impoverished peasants has been stopped. Last
week, the chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Representative
Clement Zablocki, said United States aid should be cut off if land reform were
halted in El Salvador. In a similar move, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee
has voted to cut military aid by $100 million if the Salvadoran Government
''modifies, alters, suspends, or terminates any provisions of the land reform
programs.''

In El Salvador, American policy makers pinned their policy on Jose Napoleon
Duarte. In Guatemala, some people are calling Gen. Rios Montt ''Duarte with a
pistol.'' General Rios Montt said in a recent interview that he subscribed to
the principles of ''communitarianism,'' a doctrine that emphasizes cooperatives
and the state's role in achieving equitable distribution of wealth. He has read
Mr. Duarte's book on the subject, he said. But many Guatemalans and foreign
diplomats have questioned whether General Rios Montt would be willing, or any
more able than Mr. Duarte was, to control the military hard-liners and end the
violence.

Unlike the former Salvadoran junta, the Guatemalan rulers have announced no new
social reforms or land distribution programs to aid the Indians, who are as poor
as the poorest in Haiti or Somalia.  Critics say 1 percent of the population
controls 60 percent of the arable land. Washington should withhold military aid
and offer ''a little'' economic assistance in exchange for promises to establish
democracy, suggests Vinicio Cerezo, the leader of Guatemala's Christian
Democrats. ''If the United States gives them all the aid and support,'' he adds,
''they are not going to return to democracy.''

American diplomats admit to another difficulty in planning United States aid -
the question of whether General Rios Montt and other relatively moderate leaders
would be around to spend it. Guatemalan politicians and foreign diplomats say
there are at least four groups plotting coups. If they succeed, General Rios
Montt's successors could be even less acceptable to Congress and the North
American public than he is.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Government soldier getting his boots shined

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              239 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOREIGN AID UNDER FIRE

BYLINE: By Ann Crittenden

SECTION: Section 6; Page 66, Column 4; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4705 words


Ann Crittenden reports on international economic affairs for The New York Times.

Imagine Manhattan's Helmsley Palace in the South Bronx. Dacca's first new hotel
since the 1960's is a gigantic five-star refuge, a $40 million product of
Japanese aid to Bangladesh, set in the middle of one of the worst slums in the
world. The Sonargaon is an elegant stage setting for local arts, and a retreat
where visiting dignitaries, foreign-aid bureaucrats and journalists can relax
over imported wines and Chateaubriand. But permeating the luxurious grounds and
drifting over the swimming pool is a faint smell of garbage, of smoke fires and
human waste. There is an extra edge of obsequiousness in the service, an
unnerving desperation in the rickshaw drivers who crowd around the guests as
they step into the capital city's street. No matter how insulated, life at the
Sonargaon, like life everywhere in Bangladesh, is more or less uncomfortable.
Ever since winning its independence from Pakistan in a brutal civil war 10 years
ago, Bangladesh has been the world's pre-eminent recipient of international aid.
The country, no bigger than Illinois but with a population of 90 million - more
than the United Kingdom, the Benelux countries and Switzerland combined - has
been the beneficiary of a steady, multibillion-dollar dole of food and money
from governments and private relief agencies from dozens of nations.  The money
accounts for almost 90 percent of Bangladesh's development budget and roughly
one-tenth of its annual gross national product. Dispensing this largesse are
some 10,000 employees of Dacca's ''aid establishment,'' most of them ensconced
in villas as far removed as the Sonargaon from the squalor of the city's teeming
streets.

The presence of this vast aid bureaucracy makes Bangladesh an ideal place to
observe the effects of foreign aid as it is currently dispensed: For if economic
assistance has alleviated the worst ravages of poverty in parts of the third
world and spurred economic growth in others, there is evidence to suggest that,
in many instances, it has also hindered profound and lasting development.
Increasingly, it is clear that where governments are corrupt or indifferent to
the living conditions of the majority of their people, aid may not only fail to
relieve poverty, but may shore up a system that perpetuates it.

In Bangladesh, a rich alluvial plain with more cultivable land per person than
prosperous Taiwan, the persistence of malnutrition and desperate poverty
provokes questions not only about the governments in charge but about the
efficacy of the seemingly endless outpourings of aid over the past decade.

To some extent, the Bangladeshis have begun to raise these issues themselves. In
April, a military coup overthrew a civilian government, charging it with rampant
corruption. And the country's new leaders, in their first pronouncements,
declared that the country should rely less on foreign assistance, and more on
its own resources.

At a time when the United States seems to have grown impatient with the demands
of the third world and is itself experiencing economic difficulties, such
developments take on added urgency. On the one hand, many on the political left
argue that foreign aid is a subtle form of economic colonialism; on the other,
some conservatives insist that charity should begin at home, and that all the
United States receives in exchange for its helping hand are demands for more,
coupled with denunciations in the United Nations. The upshot of the controversy
is that the percentage of its revenues that the United States Government devotes
to foreign aid has declined from 0.31 percent in 1970 to 0.25 percent today.

The most lasting achievements of foreign assistance, it is often argued, have
occurred in India and Pakistan. Years of outside investment in those countries'
agriculture have begun to pay off in bountiful harvests undreamed of only a few
years ago. Similarly, injections of development aid into Bangladesh's fertile
countryside have resulted in increased food production and some improvement in
the lives of the millions of people crowded into the rich delta of the Ganges,
Brahmaputra and Meghna Rivers. For the past few years, food production has
outpaced population growth and malnutrition has become less prevalent. The l982
winter harvest was a disappointing one, the result of a severe drought, but
barring further civil strife or a devastating natural disaster - perennial
possibilities in Bangladesh - further gains in agriculture can probably be made
in the near future.

The problem is that these advances have not translated into a better life for
fully half the people in the country, who have neither land nor jobs nor the
money to buy the additional food that could be produced. The problem is that the
gains have been made despite the indifference of the previous Bangladeshi
Government, many of whose officials have preferred to solicit assistance from
the West rather than change a feudal land-tenure system. The problem is that a
sad, lingering mood of futility hangs over a country where ruler, ruled and
benefactor alike often seem to believe that survival depends upon the ceaseless
flow of charity from abroad.

Bangladesh may be an extreme case. But the country is not an isolated example of
the apparent failure of more than 30 years of development assistance to put poor
countries on the road to self-sustaining growth. In Haiti, a long-time recipient
of United States aid, two-thirds of the rural population still have an annual
per capita income of less than $40. In Tanzania, after years of support from
sympathetic Scandanavian countries, the vast majority of the population has seen
few if any benefits. Despite decades of aid to Latin America, millions remain
destitute.

Given these uneven results, it is hardly surprising that a large section of the
American public has soured on aid. More surprising, perhaps, is the aid
bureaucracy's unwillingness to acknowledge that more is not necessarily better
when it comes to foreign assistance.

Shortly after arriving in Bangladesh last October, I met with two officials of
the United States Agency for International Development.  Like other American
officials I spoke with, their comments centered on the ''hopeless'' plight of
Bangladesh and the need to keep the country afloat. (They also insisted that
their names not be used. The Reagan Administration has evidently cautioned
Foreign Service officers abroad to treat the American press with the same
wariness with which they might approach a K.G.B. official.)

Over lunch in the windowless, nearly empty dining room of the Purbani Hotel,
just across the street from the charmless office building that houses the United
States Embassy, the two diplomats recited the dismal economic realities facing
the country. Bangladesh was bankrupt. The country could not afford the
fertilizer imports essential for the next crop and, even worse, was on the verge
of running out of cooking oil, necessary if the population is to eat.  Only
desperate injections of expensive commercial bank loans and World Bank and
International Monetary Fund credits were keeping the country from the brink.

''This place is so poor that there are only 17 taxis in Dacca,'' one of the
A.I.D. men mourned. Dacca, a city of roughly two million, is one of the few
places left on earth where rickshaws, pulled by men, are still the prevailing
mode of transport. ''There are no rocks. Cement is cheap everywhere else, right?
Here they first have to bake bricks and then break them up for concrete and
cement.''

''There is no wood,'' one of the officials continued. ''They rake leaves for
fuel, which means fires can't be hot enough to cook anything properly. This is a
major city with no garbage-disposal system.''

Amid this squalor, the American aid mission's first priority is population
control. The United States Government is spending more than $20 million dollars
a year on family planning. The approach has been less than stunningly
successful, considering that the birth rate per 1,000 population is still 46 a
year (by way of comparison, India's is 36 a year, Mexico's is 33), down only
slightly from the birth rates of the 1960's. This pace will result in a doubling
of the population every 28 years, in what is already one of the most densely
crowded countries in the world.

The United States has made agriculture its second priority in Bangladesh, and
efforts in this area, along with those of the World Bank and other major donors,
have been more rewarding.

Since 1947, despite political and climatic upheavals, Bangladesh has chalked up
average annual increases in food production of 2.1 percent (compared with 1.8
percent annual increases in Japan and the United States). After two good crop
years, the country in 1981 had a record amount of grain in storage. The stocks
have been depleted rapidly since then, however, and the A.I.D. men were not
optimistic that much in the way of permanent improvement had been accomplished.

''Even assuming enough food is produced, how do you generate employment so
people can buy the food that is being produced?'' one asked.

''People don't know how to eat, either. They won't even grow or eat vegetables -
it's not in the culture,'' the other man added, echoing the belief of many
nutritionists that poor dietary habits are responsible for much of the
undernourishment that affects the majority of the population.  My first
conversations with representatives of private organizations were with Martin
Hanratty of the Ford Foundation and Rudolph von Bernuth, head of CARE's office
in Dacca. At Ford's headquarters, a rambling bungalow in one of the capital's
best neighborhoods, Mr. Hanratty began by outlining some of the basic economic
and social facts of Bangladesh.

''The British maintained a land-ownership system that didn't require that large
landholders live outside of Dacca. The zamindars simply collected taxes and
crops from their tenants, and supported the police. That was the government, and
the basic structure hasn't changed much since independence. The administrative
structure was to move things out of the rural areas, not to infuse large
government inputs into the countryside. So when outside donors come in with
money intended 'for the poor,' there are a lot of problems with carrying that
out.''

Mr. von Bernuth expanded on the theme. ''Absentee landowners dominate
Parliament. In the countryside, the wealthiest 17 percent of the population
controls two-thirds of the land and almost 60 percent of the rural population is
effectively landless. The system is exploitative, and the inequality is
accepted.''

''In the United States, we look at wealth as expanding,'' he continued. ''You go
out and get it, not necessarily take it from somebody else. Here people are very
aware that there are 1,600 people per square mile. The land and its product
appear to be extremely finite, and it's dog-eat-dog on all levels.''

When the phone rang, Mr. von Bernuth picked up and began talking about an
interview he had just given to another reporter. ''He was trying to get into the
'food for work' stuff, but didn't ask any really penetrating questions,'' he
assured whoever it was on the other end of the phone. ''I kept him happy with
some overall numbers; I don't think he got anything.''

When the tall, mustachioed relief worker came back and sat down, I decided to
pick up where the hapless reporter had left off. When I began to ask Mr. von
Bernuth about ''food for work,' a program that provides landless peasants with
rations of grain in exchange for labor on construction projects, he insisted
that our discussion be off the record.  Since independence, Bangladesh has
received almost $11 billion in foreign aid, and despite recession and
budget-cutting in most industrialized countries, the flow is continuing
unabated. New aid commitments for fiscal 1982 will amount to approximately the
same or slightly more than in 1981, between $1.6 billion and $2 billion.  Actual
disbursements are lower, however, and are leveling off.

This is partly because, as one World Bank economist delicately put it, ''there
are problems in getting the Government active again, and involved in organizing
and approving projects, after the assassination of President Ziaur Rahman in May
1981.''

Moreover, the donors are more and more interested in extending socalled project
aid - credits or loans for development projects which can mean sales for their
own manufacturers and contractors - than in giving Bangladesh the actual
commodities, such as fertilizer, petroleum and raw cotton, which it needs even
more. Indeed, World Bank economists say, unless the country gets more commodity
aid, which generates Government revenues from its sale within the country, Dacca
will not have the funds necessary to finance the local costs of the
foreign-sponsored projects.

''The aid has been too easy and not the right kind,'' said Hugh Brammer, an
adviser from the United Nations' Food and Agriculture Organization, based in
Rome, to the Ministry of Agriculture. Mr.  Brammer, a resident of Bangladesh for
more than two decades, is considered a leading authority on the country's food
situation. On a long trip to the eastern province of Comilla to visit some model
food-production areas, as we drove through the lush green countryside and waited
for ferries across the vast rivers that flood the rich land every year, Mr.
Brammer began to explain what the massive foreign presence means in Bangladesh.

''Most of the assistance is for specific projects, and the donors are competing
with each other for things to do. A few years ago, the World Bank even had to
hold up a significant portion of its disbursements because of a shortage of
takas (the Bangladeshi currency) to finance the local costs of its projects. And
since then even more donors have come in and the problem is, if anything, worse.

''It has, in a sense, corrupted the Government,'' Mr. Brammer said of the aid.
''It has allowed them to put off difficult decisions.'' While we talked for
example, a large Bangladeshi delegation was in Cancun, Mexico, lobbying for more
aid. Calls to various ministries for interviews frequently were met with replies
that ''the minister is overseas.''

''Instead of governing,'' one disgusted A.I.D. official confided to me later,
''these guys are running all over the world asking for help.''

Among other things, the generous flow of foreign aid appears to have enabled the
Bangladeshi Government to avoid taxing its own citizens, a minority of whom live
exceedingly well by Western standards. ''Five thousand people run this
country,'' an admittedly cynical A.I.D. officer said toward the end of my visit.
''These are the ones with two houses - one rented to an embassy or an aid agency
- another house abroad, investments in Kuwait, factories in Ireland.''

On the last day of my stay in Dacca, I happened to visit such a family. The
husband, a prominent young politician, was out of town, but the wife sent a
Mercedes and driver to pick me up, for she was eager for a visit from someone
from New York, where she had lived before her marriage. At her lovely tropical
villa set on at least an acre of green lawn, over tea and delicious Bengali
sweets, she complained about the usual depiction of Bangladesh as an
impoverished outpost and chatted about her four months last year in Heidelberg
and her upcoming trip to Boston.

According to the representative of an international financial institution, who
asked not to be identified, such families pay virtually no taxes. As he put it,
''There is a lack of revenues relative to the country's Income Tax receipts
amount to only 8 percent of Bangladesh's G.N.P., possibly the lowest percentage
in the world. (Taxes in neighboring India, by way of contrast, are roughly 18
percent of the G.N.P.)

The United States has invested nearly $1.8 billion in aid to Bangladesh over the
past decade, much of it in the form of food.  Bangladesh is the world's biggest
beneficiary of food aid, and the United States Government alone has shipped some
5.5 million metric tons of grains and cooking oil to the country since 1971.

Contrary to what most American taxpayers might think, however, this flood of
food is not going to the poor and the hungry. It is given to the Government,
which then sells it at subsidized prices to the military, the police and the
urban middle class, the groups that potentially pose a political threat to the
Government. Officials with international relief agencies have recently estimated
that only about 25 percent or 30 percent of the total food aid distributed in
Bangladesh ever reaches people who are hungry.

Donald F. McHenry, the former American representative to the United Nations,
wrote in 1977 that Bangladesh's ''food-aid imports represent a form of
international income distribution favoring the middle class in a poor country.''

Even when the food is destined for the needy, corrupt officials easily find ways
to siphon off the lion's share. Both the United Nations, through the World Food
Program, and the United States, through CARE, operate ''food for work''
programs, yet a recent study found that during a six-month period in 10 villages
only 25 percent of the wheat distributed went to workers. The remainder was
appropriated by Government officials and local union council members.

Another report, to the United States Agency for International Development,
estimated that ''less than 70 percent of the wheat withdrawn for 'food for work'
finds its way to the laborers.'' This report concluded that the ''food for
work'' program strengthens an ''exploitative semifeudal system'' within the
villages of Bangladesh.

Corruption has been so embedded in the entire process of distributing food aid,
in fact, that the Ministry of Education recently rejected a World Food Program
offer to introduce a free food program into the schools. Only about 30 percent
of children attend primary school, and it was thought that the lure of free
meals might encourage better attendance. Nevertheless, the ministry has resisted
the proposal. According to one of the country's leading nutritionists, Dr.
Kamaluddin Ahmed of the University of Dacca, ''I really think the reason they
don't want it is that they're afraid of the bad name they might get from the
corruption that would come with such a program.''

CARE, whose young American employees try to enforce the ''food for work'' rules
in the field, and the United States Government have recently devised new rules
for distributing ''food for work.'' By simply refusing to pay for work that the
Americans believe is not being carried out, they have already saved 20 percent
of the cost of the program this year. The agency was spurred in its efforts last
year when one of its young women was threatened with death after she warned a
corrupt local official to keep his hands out of the grain bin.

One of angriest people in Bangladesh is the Rev. R.W. Timm, a Roman Catholic
priest who has been in the country off and on for more than 20 years with
Caritas (known as Catholic Relief Services in the United States).

A tall, ruggedly handsome man in his 50's, Father Timm is a strange but familiar
figure in Dacca as he whizzes around town on his motorcycle. During an interview
at his desk in a huge, dimly lit room in the Caritas headquarters, the priest's
voice rose in outrage.

''President Zia,'' he said, ''reduced corruption among ministers, but now it's
worse than it has ever been, at every level. One of our Caritas field officers
applied to administer some of the 'food for work,' about 200,000 takas' worth
(about $11,000 at the time), and he was told, 'O.K. - I get 25,000 and you get
25,000.'

''About two years ago, a road was built in one of our districts, and the local
union council chairman subsequently got wheat from the Government to pay for
building the same road, after it was already finished.''

After calling a rickshaw for me and bargaining the skinny man between the shafts
down from 50 cents to a quarter, Father Timm strapped on a helmet and climbed
aboard his motorcycle. Summing up what goes on in Bangladesh, he boomed, ''It is
stealing directly from the poor, which is a major crime against humanity.''
Given the corrupt climate that has prevailed in Bangladesh, the private volutary
organizations (known in the trade as the P.V.O.'s) and the donor governments
inevitably end up trying to police the distribution of that aid and to cajole
Bangladesh into accepting their priorities. Because aid constitutes such a huge
proportion of the available resources, its dispensers exert a powerful, often
overwhelming, influence on local policies.

The World Bank, which gave Bangladesh almost $400 million in lowinterest loans
last year, mostly for agriculture, has used that leverage to move toward a more
free market system of agriculture. The bank, for example, asked the virtually
bankrupt Government last year to reduce its subsidies on fertilizer (which would
have had the effect of increasing prices) at the precise moment when farmers
were deciding what to plant. The threat behind the request was a cutoff in funds
for fertilizer imports (a threat, by the way, that bank officials say they never
intended to carry out). Similarly, the United States held down food shipments to
Bangladesh in 1979 until the Government had raised the procurement price of
rice, in order to provide farmers with a greater incentive to produce.  Despite
occasional successes,the donors are generally frustrated in their efforts to
steer Government policies in what they believe are more constructive directions.
Sitting around over drinks with United States officials in Dacca evokes eerie
memories of similar evenings in Saigon. One night at the Sonargaon, an A.I.D.
man leaned over the table and confided: ''I realize we have a long way to go,
but there is light at the end of the tunnel.''

Interestingly, the United States Government's motives for investing so much in
aid to Bangladesh closely resemble its early intentions in Vietnam. An
unclassified United States Embassy document dated last October stated that
''U.S. economic assistance to Bangladesh is our principal means for supporting
the interrelated objectives of stability and orderly economic growth. A stable
Bangladesh in turn contributes to the important U.S. goal of regional stability
in South and Southwest Asia.''

Specifically, American policy makers have argued that massive aid to Bangladesh
has prevented the country from becoming overly close to India, which enjoys
close relations with the Soviet Union and whose entry into the struggle for
independence from Pakistan guaranteed the victory of the insurgents in what was
then East Bengal. Beyond that, the aid staves off what many officials fear could
be a major political upheaval if economic conditions were to worsen drastically.

The trouble is that the governments that have succeeded each other in Bangladesh
- governments which have been largely sustained by foreign aid - have not
appeared to be particularly interested in using the assistance to promote a more
equitable distribution of wealth. Official priorities are more evident in the
MIG's that flame over the Sonargaon hotel in the mornings, and in the tall,
well-fed soldiers jogging along the early morning roads past tiny, stooped
peasants in the fields.

What would happen if we simply cut off all aid to Bangladesh? The majority of
foreign officials there believe that the result would be an increase in human
suffering, at least in the short run. ''If we left, a lot of people would die,''
one American official claimed.  ''And if we left, the problem would come after
us. If other donors, like the Japanese or the Arabs, didn't come in, another
emergency might come along and we'd have to come back with a much more massive
relief effort.''

''Were Bangladesh to falter now,'' the Embassy's presentation to Congress for
fiscal 1983 states, ''economic dislocation could require us to revert to
essentially an expensive relief program along the lines of 1971-75. Thus our
current efforts, intended to maintain the momentum of development, in a real
sense protects (sic) our investment over the past decade of nearly $1.8
billion.''

Other observers in Dacca talk about more constructive kinds of aid that could be
given. The extensive investment by the World Bank and A.I.D in irrigation wells,
for instance, has brought water and a third harvest a year to many parts of the
country and clearly played a critical part in the recent surge in food
production. Some of the small P.V.O.'s are engaged in practical projects that
are having a direct effect on poor farmers. Among other things, the Mennonites
are conducting research on optimal management of the new three-cropper-year
system.

Above all, a number of experts stress, what Bangladesh desperately needs now is
commodity aid, including, especially, fertilizers, which at the moment the
country can scarcely afford to import. During our drive to Comilla, Mr. Brammer
and I figured out what that kind of aid could mean, in terms of feeding people.

If one spent the $820,000 that Nancy Reagan has spent refurbishing the White
House on food aid in the form of rice, we calculated that it would feed more
than 21,000 people for a year. If one spent t-same amount of money on
fertilizer, it would result in the production of enough additional rice to feed
more than 81,000 people for a year.  As my plane lifted out of Dacca's modern
new airport, built with French aid, I sighed with relief, and noticed that the
person seated beside me did the same. We shared some of our impressions and
agreed, as fellow guests of the Sonargaon, that the service had been superb,
although almost too superb, too touched with servility and an overanxiousness to
please.

He was a Swedish lawyer who had been in Dacca to help negotiate terms for a new
hydroelectic project that was being built with World Bank funds. ''What a funny
country,'' he mused. ''Do you know that our lawyer in Dacca, who argued for our
terms against those of his own Government, is one of the two leading candidates
for President?''

Two weeks later, I noticed in the paper that the other man had won. His victory
lasted only four months, however. At that point he was ousted amid charges of
corruption. And the country's new President, A.F.M. Ahsanuddin Choudhury, in one
of his first public speeches, declared that Bangladesh must begin to be
responsible for its own development. ''Bangladesh need not have been poor,'' he
said. ''It is not because we are poor in resources. It is only because we could
not manage our affairs honestly and efficiently.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Bangladeshis taking part in CARE project

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              240 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MAILER WRITING

BYLINE: By EDWARD HOAGLAND; Edward Hoagland's most recent book is ''The Tugman's
Passage.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 3, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1641 words


PIECES AND PONTIFICATIONS By Norman Mailer.  448 pp. Boston: Little, Brown & Co.
$20.

NORMAN MAILER'S powers may have waned, and yet a handsome amplitude of spirit
still animates his work. Increasingly, it seems that there is a good deal to be
said for that. Though he was always pugnacious toward rival writers, he was as
generous-hearted as any of them whenever he actually sat down to write; and
nowadays we do not see in him the sort of narrowing of sympathy, the blunted
responses and failing curiosity, the ethnic chauvinism and bankbook smugness of
so many of his intellectual contemporaries - ''neo''-thises, ''neo''- thats, who
perhaps like to boast that they grew up in rawest Brooklyn but do not evidence
the vaguest interest in anybody growing up in the old neighborhoods now. The
younger Mailer would not have despised the present author, at 59.

Mailer's literary heroes have been the salt of the American earth - Dos Passos,
Dreiser, Thomas Wolfe, Hemingway, Steinbeck, James T.  Farrell -and one rereads
''The Naked and the Dead'' affectionately for its echoes of them. Later on,
being rich in ambition as well as fervency, he labored hard on books of massive
research, such as ''Of a Fire on the Moon,'' about the space program, and ''The
Executioner's Song,'' about a murderer named Gary Gilmore. In books of passion
like ''An American Dream'' and ''Why Are We in Vietnam?'' he was unstinting in a
different way. My own favorites are his Hollywood novel, ''The Deer Park,'' and,
of course, his showpiece of the 60's, ''The Armies of the Night,'' wherein it is
a mark of Mailer's special versatility that he reached to Henry Adams as a
mentor and yet he himself personified the ebullient munificence and Halloween
flux of that quite splendid decade.

He was a man in love with shortcuts, however -using drugs, ''acting out'' his
work, stunting with the cops and for the press corps, splurging his dearest
thoughts in countless interviews, milking the new technology of electronics that
he professed to loathe for a quick fix of publicity at monthly intervals. His
essays suffered from a perishable garrulity; and if this new collection seems
less loquacious, that is only because it lacks vitality. He had been born with
more talent for writing than any of his countrymen since Faulkner and sometimes
appeared to be trying to throw it out the window. But he did shed a reflected
glamour on a thousand wallflower writers, whose private struggles outsiders took
a little bit more seriously because Mailer was continually going public with
his.  Six marriages; a lush and energetic pantheism as his religion, in a
universe that he considered ''fell with purpose''; roaring fame as a big-book
writer launching himself at hard subjects like war and race and sex and
''pullulation'' and America's remarkable decline - yet he had enough strength
left over to embark upon a second, throwaway career as very bad film maker. He
benefited from his courtship of the media by the media's boundless indulgence of
his miscalculations; so that, for example, when his judgment of the murderer
Jack Abbott proved mistaken, nobody went back to question the basis of his book
on Gary Gilmore (nor to the night when he had stabbed his second wife). His
intellectual frame of reference was thin and limited, and he rarely worked out
an idea: His ideas were notes for ideas. Nevertheless, more accurately than any
other novelist, he foresaw the ruination of life on earth by the collapse of its
ecology. Fewer and fewer people would be inclined to laugh at his old obsession
with cancer as apocalyptic metaphor; and I suspect he will turn out to have been
as wise as he was bold in other leaps of the imagination.

Many of his wild shots here are interesting - on the libido and on gluttony, on
the character of style and the style of character, on the mystery of electricity
in personality. He compares the art of writing to a rainbow on a soap bubble and
says that the metaphor ''the sparrow is on the wing'' is a way of saying that
the sparrow's center is within the wing, that the sparrow exists in two
manifestations, body and flight. Ours has become a ''keep-everybody-alive
society,'' he says, because we really feel a fearfully indifferent
destructiveness settling upon us, and he suggests that God is still growing, not
all-powerful, which might account for our perilously ''existential'' freedom. He
speaks of the momentum that an adventurous life can lend to writing, and of the
primary importance of mood, as opposed to facts, in true reporting.He mentions
working on books of several types ''as if you're a farmer and rotate your
crops.''

THE haste with which he works has been a point of pride for Mailer but can also
occasion a glib, disjointed train of thinking. This is illustrated in ''The
Faith of Graffiti,'' where he is championing the kids who scrawl their names in
tropical profusion on New York subway cars. The reportage is kindly and
intuitive, as he trades stories underground with a bunch of spray-can artists in
a manner that as admirable a writer as Saul Bellow would no longer be capable
of.  Mailer, who has not undergone the kind of spiritual constriction apparent
in the ''late'' books of Bellow, looks better than Bellow would be writing such
a scene. But then he begins comparing the kids to Cezanne, Matisse, Gauguin, van
Gogh, and unravels the points he had achieved.

Spies, prizefighters, Charles Manson, Marilyn Monroe -many of his former
fascinations remain in this collection, overblown. But he seems tired of paying
respects to Hemingway (and has been stepped on for it), and praises Henry Miller
filially. The trouble is, again, as with the kids, that he's not content with
praising him. He must go on to claim that ''one has to take the English language
back to Marlowe and Shakespeare before encountering a wealth of imagery equal in
intensity'' to Miller's.

In material included from the 60's, Mailer is modishly anti-intellectual, and in
the 70's, karma-prone. Still, not all of his positions have been popular. It is
essential that an essayist hold at least a few controversial opinions, if only
so we can believe he is being serious when his thinking runs along conventional
lines.  And Mailer - who is a political radical but a cultural conservative - is
resistant to both the newly fashionable androgyny of city living and what he
calls the ''manic optimism'' of feminism 10 years ago, which ascribed the
world's problems solely to gender and thereby lost much male support.

He indicates that he believes that plants can ''feel'' (a view I share) and
excoriates plastic as ''a material which is not even divorced from nature but
indeed has not ever been a part of nature.'' Building from a pantheist's belief
that ''virtually everything in American life works to deaden our senses,'' he
proposes a tax on the manufacture of plastic to reduce other taxes even as it
would begin to reverse this tide of the ersatz and give us back our eyes and
ears and sense of smell.

FROM scatology to eschatology, some pungent stuff is scattered here. What is
disturbing is that the meat of the book is in the interviews, or
''pontifications,'' as he apologetically describes them -where he is indebted to
the accidental collaboration of 20 or so interviewers - and not in the essays.
To be giving an interview at all implies a failure, he says, because the writer
has not managed to write what he thinks. And the contrast is so striking I wish
he'd made the best of it and had manhandled these assorted talk jobs into
another variation of the nonfiction novel, rewriting not just the questions and
answers but the character of the questioners too, retooling and renaming them.

Instead, he's meekly malleable. For Rolling Stone he is like Rolling Stone, and
for Antaeus like Antaeus. His interlocutors range from Joseph McElroy and
Barbara Probst Solomon, to several sidekicks from his regular entourage, to a
prurient pair from the magazine Puritan (''What do you think makes for great
sex?'' ''What sexual fantasies get you hot?'' ''What is the relationship between
God and sex?''). The very threadbare quality of the sessions imbues them with a
certain awkward charm, but in bulk they're indigestible and often wind up
irritating or pathetic because the author hasn't exercised himself enough to
describe even in straightforward terms the varied stew of souls he spent so many
hours with.

The longest essay is itself about interviews, Mr. Mailer rehashing some of his
fracases on television. ''The most obdurate and repellent medium,'' he calls it,
and loathes the hosts, the guests, himself.  You'd think at least in this
instance he would let loose and do a demolition job. But no, he never gets
around to it. He has raked Pauline Kael over the coals and gloated at the pain
and bewilderment he has caused Gore Vidal by butting him in the forehead just
before they both went on the ''The Dick Cavett Show.'' But faced with Cavett in
the flesh - and Merv Griffin, Johnny Carson, Mike Douglas - he is a pussycat. He
doesn't burn his bridges.

THAT first success with ''The Naked and the Dead'' had added 40 pounds to him
and knocked out his first marriage, but lately the pathos of a wounded elephant
has overtaken him. He has always been extraordinarily unable to take
responsibility for his own actions, unusually lacking in any instinct for damage
control. Instead, he inveighs here against the Eastern Air Lines shuttle,
pontificates that Eisenhower was ''a bit of a woman,'' rues his ruinous
celebrity and says ''the hardest thing for a writer to decide is whether he's
burned out or merely lying fallow.''

But no writer needs to ''decide'' such a question. The process is a mystery. And
nobody who loves literature would wish for Mr. Mailer anything but continued
pullulation and high fecundity.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Norman Mailer

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              241 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 6, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

BOOKS FOR VACATION READING

SECTION: Section 7; Page 15, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 10335 words


The following list has been selected from titles reviewed since the Christmas
Issue of December 1981. Such a list can only suggest the high points in the main
fields of reader interest. Books are arranged alphabetically under subject
headings. Quoted comments are from The Book Review.

Autobiography & Biography

BISMARCK. By Edward Crankshaw. (Viking. $19.95.) An eminently readable biography
of the Iron Chancellor that is also ''a cautionary tale about political and
military power'' and a very realistic look at the actualities of Realpolitik.

BOCCACCIO. By Thomas Bergin. (Viking. $25.) A comprehensive introduction to the
life and all of the works of the early Renaissance master by Mr. Bergin, the
acknowledged master of Italian literary studies in this country.

BRONX PRIMITIVE. Portraits in a Childhood. By Kate Simon (Viking.  $13.95.)
''Splendid as ever,'' the author of sophisticated guides to cities of the world
''now turns her powers of observation upon herself as a child'' growing up in
the Bronx.

CHINABOUND. A Fifty-Year Memoir. By John King Fairbank. (Harper & Row. $20.) The
dean of China studies looks back on his career with ''verve and style and a wry,
self-deprecating humor.''

CLARE BOOTH LUCE. By Wilfrid Sheed. (Dutton. $12.95.) A kind of meditation on
the life of the writer and diplomat who has accomplished much more than merely
marrying the right man at the right time. The tone is sometimes intimate and
personal, sometimes reportorial. If it is not a biography, Mr. Sheed says, ''I'm
not sure what it is.''

THE DAUGHTERS OF KARL MARX. Family Correspondence 1866-98.  Commentary by Olga
Meier. Adapted by Faith Evans. (Helen & Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
$19.95.) In these letters written by Marx's three daughters, the clear message
is the conflict between their political involvement and their domestic
responsibilities.

FDR. A Centenary Remembrance. By Joseph Alsop. (Viking. $25.) A personal
reminiscence of President Franklin Delano Roosevelt by the columnist, who is a
distant cousin, the book is illustrated with an exceptional selection of
photographs.

FIVE O'CLOCK COMES EARLY. By Bob Welch and George Vecsey. (William Morrow & Co.
$11.50.) The Los Angeles Dodgers pitcher who became an alcoholic at 23 ''has
written about his war against alcoholism as courageously as he waged it. The
result is a book particularly powerful.''

FLAWS IN THE GLASS. A Self-Portrait. By Patrick White. (Viking.$14.95.) ''About
as absorbing an autobiography as has been written by a novelist in this
century,'' this book of brilliant bits and pieces by the Australian Nobel Prize
winner ''amounts to a search for White himself.''

HANNAH ARENDT. For Love of the World. By Elisabeth Young-Bruehl.  (Yale. $25.) A
''scholarly, carefully researched'' personal and intellectual biography of the
German-born philosopher and social critic, written by a former student.

H.D. The Life and Work of an American Poet. By Janice S. Robinson.  (Houghton
Mifflin. $17.95.) ''An extremely interesting and informative'' biography of the
writer Hilda Doolittle, who was treated disgracefully by all the famous men in
her life, including Ezra Pound, Richard Aldington, D.H. Lawrence and, in a
chaster way, Sigmund Freud. Janice Robinson is the first biographer to have
access to all the Doolittle papers.

HUNGER OF MEMORY. The Education of Richard Rodriguez. By Richard Rodriguez.
(Godine. $13.95.) A young Mexican-American's ''superb autobiographical essay,''
written with ''exquisite clarity,'' about the experience of learning English as
a second language.

THE IMPERIAL ROCKEFELLER. A Biography of Nelson A. Rockefeller. By Joseph E.
Persico. (Simon & Schuster. $16.50.) The former Governor's speechwriter
describes life at the ''emperor's court.''

THE JOURNALS OF SYLVIA PLATH. Edited by Ted Hughes and Frances McCullough.
(Dial. $16.95.) Though this volume does not include the poet's diaries
from her last three years, it still provides an invaluable key to the ''life
from which the poems sprang.''

KAFKA. A Biography. By Ronald Hayman. (Oxford. $19.95.) ''The first
comprehensive biography of Kafka in English, the chronicle of a death in life,''
in which it becomes clear that, ''fanciful as Kafka's fiction is, it mirrored
his condition.''

LAST WALTZ IN VIENNA. The Rise and Destruction of a Family, 1842-1942. By George
Clare. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $16.50.) A loving memoir of three generations
of the author's family, ending in the extermination camps of 1942.

LEONARDO DA VINCI. The Marvellous Works of Nature and Man. By Martin Kemp.
(Harvard. $30.) A study of the works and of their creator ''as a whole man, not
exclusively as an artist,'' exhibiting ''a commanding control over the entire
history of thought that was available to Leonardo and his contemporaries.''

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF JOE McCARTHY. By Thomas C. Reeves. (Stein & Day. $19.95.)
The first ''full-scale, intensively researched'' biography of the Senator from
Wisconsin. What emerges is a ''complex portrait of a politician ... who
destroyed himself because of faults both of the head and of the heart.''

LULU IN HOLLYWOOD. By Louise Brooks. (Knopf. $15.) ''Terse, raffish,
authoritative essays'' on American film by the one-time actress and star of
''Pandora's Box.''

MABEL. By Betty Harper Fussell. (Ticknor & Fields. $15.95.) ''A bold and
satisfying'' film biography of Mabel Normand, Hollywood's first ''I-Don't-Care
Girl.''

MICHAEL BAKUNIN. Roots of Apocalypse. By Arthur P. Mendel.  (Praeger. $35.) A
''full-length psychiatric case history'' of the anarchist agitator that draws
heavily on Bakunin's private writings.

A MINGLED YARN. The Life of R.P. Blackmur. By Russell Fraser.  (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.  9.95.) About the eminent maverick critic and teacher, who was as
famous for his personal crochets as he was revered for his critical and moral
insights.

MUSSOLINI. By Denis Mack Smith. (Knopf. $20.) ''The leading historian of modern
Italy in the English-speaking world'' takes care never to ''waver from his
protagonist,'' a character ''even worse than the conventional image.''

NADIA BOULANGER. A Life in Music. By Leonie Rosenstiel. (Norton.  $24.95.) An
''often grudging'' biography of one of the most influential music teachers of
all time, based on previously unavailable papers.

THE PAST HAS ANOTHER PATTERN. Memoirs. By George W. Ball. (Norton.  $19.95.) A
''colorful and thought-provoking tour of the recent and not-so-recent past,
conducted by a skillful guide.''

POETS IN THEIR YOUTH. A Memoir. By Eileen Simpson. (Random House.  $15.50.) John
Berryman's widow, a psychotherapist, recalls with ''the feel of truth'' the
literary generation of the 40's and 50's: Berryman, R.P. Blackmur, Delmore
Schwartz, Robert Lowell and others.

THE POLITICIAN. The Life and Times of Lyndon Johnson. The Drive for Power, From
the Frontier to Master of the Senate. By Ronnie Dugger.  (Norton. $18.95.) A
''wild Texan's portrait of a wild Texan,'' in which the editor of The Texas
Observer suggests that it was Texas itself that made Lyndon Johnson who he was.

PSYCHIATRIST OF AMERICA. The Life of Harry Stack Sullivan. By Helen Swick Perry.
(Belknap/Harvard. $20.) The life and ideas of one of America's most gifted
psychiatrists as seen by a former student and the editor of his posthumous
papers.

RICKOVER. By Norman Polmar and Thomas B. Allen. (Simon & Schuster.  $20.75.) A
very definitely unauthorized but revealing biography of the cantankerous admiral
who built the nuclear navy virtually singlehanded, built the first commercial
nuclear power station and inspired a minor revolution in the nation's system of
technological education.

THE SACRED JOURNEY. By Frederick Buechner. (Harper & Row. $9.95.) A
''fascinating'' and ''beautifully written autobiography'' by the distinguished
writer-clergyman.

SCENES OF CHILDHOOD. By Sylvia Townsend Warner. (Viking. $10.95.) ''Literate,
reflective, evocative'' reminiscences of the world of her privileged C0ntinued
on Page 18
childhood by the late English novelist, poet and biographer.  SEEING IS
FORGETTING THE NAME OF THE THING ONE SEES. A Life of Contemporary Artist Robert
Irwin. By Lawrence Weschler. (California.  $14.95.) ''A kind of oral history,
with passages of straight biography and criticism,'' of an innovative Los
Angeles artist.

SKETCHES FROM LIFE. The Autobiography of Lewis Mumford. The Early Years. By
Lewis Mumford. (Dial. $19.95.) The ''introspective'' first volume of the
long-awaited autobiography of this century's ''greatest architecture critic.''

STRAVINSKY. Selected Correspondence. Volume I. Edited by Robert Craft. (Knopf.
$27.50.) This first volume of the letters of the dominant composer of the 20th
century shows a man who worked incessantly and sometimes exploited his friends
in the process.

THOMAS HARDY. A Biography. By Michael Millgate. (Random House.  $25.) A
''scrupulously fair and sensitive'' biography by the author of ''Thomas Hardy:
His Career as a Novelist.''

THOMAS MANN. The Making of an Artist, 1875-1911. By Richard Winston. (Knopf.
$17.95.) A meticulous, compassionate biography of the writer up to the
publication of ''Death in Venice.'' ''Winston has related the materials of
biography -events, people, documentation - to Mann's writing in a way that gives
us a glimpse of the creation of the literary characters almost through Mann's
own eyes.''

WALTER BENJAMIN. The Story of a Friendship. By Gershom Scholem.  (Jewish
Publication Society. $13.95.) The account of a quarter century of conversation
and correspondence with one of Germany's major metaphysical and literary
commentators, as remembered by the pre-eminent scholar of Jewish mysticism.

WITNESS TO POWER. The Nixon Years. By John Ehrlichman. (Simon & Schuster.
$17.50.) These memoirs are ''to your ordinary history as kung fu is to
calisthenics.'' They are ''unfair, bitchy, spiteful, gossipy, distorted,
self-serving -and eminently entertaining.''

YEARS OF UPHEAVAL. By Henry Kissinger. (Little, Brown. $24.95.) Political
memoirs, as well-written as they are controversial, of ''that incredible year''
between the summers of 1973 and 1974.

Children's Books

AIRPORT. Written and illustrated by Byron Barton. (Crowell. $9.95.  Ages 3 to
5.) Bold, colorful illustrations make this guided tour of plane and terminal a
''first-class trip all the way.''

THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE: They Said It Couldn't Be Built. By Judith St.  George.
Illustrated. (Putnam's. $10.95. Ages 11 to 15.) The people (dreamers, builders,
heroes) and the work (from caisson to tower) behind the building of the span
that celebrates its centennial next year. ''A tale of grit, intelligence and
imagination.''

THE DARKANGEL. By Meredith Anne Pierce. (Atlantic-Little, Brown.  $11.95. Ages
12 and Up.) A compelling fantasy pitting a servant girl against a handsome but
evil vampire.

JAKE AND HONEYBUNCH GO TO HEAVEN. Written and illustrated by Margot Zemach.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $13.95. Ages 4 to 7.) The misadventures of a man and a
mule in Paradise with words and glorious watercolors that capture the joy and
spirit of a black folk tale.

JOEL: GROWING UP A FARM MAN. By Patricia Demuth. Photographs by Jack Demuth.
(Dodd, Mead. $12.95. Ages 9 to 12.) Appealing photo-andtext study of a
13-year-old's year-round activities on his family's Illinois farm.

THE KESTREL. By Lloyd Alexander. (Dutton. $10.95. Ages 10 to 14.) Intrigue and
adventure abound in this political novel as an imaginary kingdom is invaded - a
sequel to the author's ''Westmark.''

MARCO POLO. By Gian Paolo Ceserani. Illustrated by Piero Ventura.  (Putnam's.
$9.95. Ages 8 to 11.) Succinct, informative prose and colorfully detailed
illustrations highlight this graceful account of the 13th-century Venetian
merchant's travels in Asia.

MARKED BY FIRE. By Joyce Carol Thomas. (Flare/ Avon. Paper, $2.25.  Ages 12 and
Up.)An eloquent first novel about the joys and sorrows of a black girl's first
20 years in a small Oklahoma community -''well worth reading.''

THE REFUGEE SUMMER. By Edward Fenton. (Delacorte. $10.95. Ages 12 and Up.) The
game five children play in a Greek seaside spa in 1922 reflects the troubled,
warring world of their elders. ''A totally absorbing evocation of a special
place and time.''

THIS STRANGE NEW FEELING. By Julius Lester. (Dial. $10.95. Ages 12 and Up.)
Three stories about men and women in love - and newly freed from the bondage of
slavery. Re-created from 19th-century historical accounts.

Crime

ADDRESS UNKNOWN. By Malcolm Hutton. (St. Martin's. $9.95.) An elderly man links
up with three children who live by their wits within London's Underground
system. The children are amoral but innocent; they live by their own code and
are preyed upon by bigger animals. A chilling book.

THE BUCK PASSES FLYNN. By Gregory McDonald. (Ballantine. Paper, $2.25.) A series
of bizarre events leads to an equally bizarre conclusion in this possible
parable of modern America. Black humor predominates; Flynn is mordant and
superefficient; and Mr. McDonald's writing is, as usual, highly original.

END OF THE LINE. By Shannon OCork. (St. Martin's. $10.95.) T.T.  Baldwin, a
feisty sports photographer for a New York tabloid, again: a lively story with a
nightmarish ending as crazed sharks and crazed THE OTHER SIDE OF SILENCE. By Ted
Allbeury. (Scribners. $11.95.) This novelistic reconstruction of Kim Philby's
espionage career emphasizes his motivations and psychological problems while
providing a look at England's Old-Boy network. Withal, a probing, well-plotted
book, based on a really original concept.

POWDER BURN. By William D. Montalbano and Carl Hiassen. (Atheneum.  2.95.) A
taut, believable story with an attractive hero, set in the Miami drug
underworld, with tentacles throughout South America.

SPLIT IMAGES. By Elmore Leonard. (Arbor House.  2.50.) Part psychological case
history, this book is about a millionaire killer whose motivations stem from
childhood trauma (mama division). A Detroit police lieutenant and his girl get
mixed up in the action; so does a crooked ex-cop. Constant action and top-notch
writing.

THE VATICAN RIP. By Jonathan Gash. (Ticknor & Fields. $10.95.) The somewhat
far-fetched fifth adventure of Lovejoy, the seedy British antique dealer who is
always in some kind of trouble. Here he is in Rome, under duress, trying to rip
off an item from the Vatican collection. Lively; superbly written.

Current Affairs & Social Comment

ALL THAT IS SOLID MELTS INTO AIR. The Experience of Modernity. By Marshall
Berman. (Simon & Schuster. $17.50.) The noted political scientist, who ''loves
the Bronx,'' argues that ''the modern age has lost touch with the roots of its
own modernity.'' He ''proposes if not a solution, at least a kind of cultural
palliative for the urban blight of which the beloved borough of his birth has
become an infamous model.''

AMERICA HELD HOSTAGE. The Secret Negotiations. By Pierre Salinger.  (Doubleday.
$16.95.) An insider's true ''fast-paced adventure story'' about the efforts in
Paris in 1980 of a left-wing French lawyer and an expatriate Argentine to
negotiate release of the hostages in the American Embassy in Iran.

AMERICA IN SEARCH OF ITSELF. The Making of the President, 1956-80.  By Theodore
H. White. (Bessie/Harper & Row. $15.95.) Partly reminiscences of Presidential
politics since the mid-1950's, partly an account of the 1980 campaign by one of
America's ''most celebrated political writers.''

THE BREAKS OF THE GAME. By David Halberstam. (Knopf. $15.) Professional
basketball exposed and celebrated by the well-known student of power politics,
who spent the 1979-80 season with the Portland Trail Blazers to research the
sport. ''He strides authoritatively through locker room, front office and
network suite, and he casts an unsparing wide-angle lens upon the power
struggles implicit in this big-money, fierce, TV-dominated enterprise.''

CHINA. Alive in the Bitter Sea. By Fox Butterfield (Times. $19.95.) The
sometimes gloomy observations of the first New York Times correspondent to be
based in Peking in 30 years are ''informative, disturbing, poignant and
absorbing.''

CHINA'S INTELLECTUALS. Advice and Dissent. By Merle Goldman.  (Harvard. $22.) A
skillful account of the debates among leading Chinese writers, philosophers,
historians, journalists and scientists in the past 25 years about society, human
values, the future of China.

DREAM TEAM. By Lewis Cole. (Morrow. $11.95.) The story of basketball's New York
Knickerbockers in the glory years 1969 and 1970, with an account of what the
players have been doing since.

AN END TO SILENCE. Uncensored Opinion in the Soviet Union from Roy Medvedev's
Underground Magazine ''Political Diary.'' Edited by Stephen F. Cohen. (Norton.
$19.95.) The first translation of 40 of the issues (about half the total run) of
the mimeographed monthly magazine that circulated among not more than 50
subscribers in Moscow from 1964 to 197l, filled with fascinating debates on
issues and values inside intellectual and party circles in the Soviet Union.

THE FATE OF THE EARTH. By Jonathan Schell. (Knopf. $11.95.) A ''work of enormous
force'' about the contemporary nuclear threat; an impassioned plea for nuclear
disarmament.

FROM THE CENTER OF THE EARTH. The Search for the Truth about China. By Richard
Bernstein. (Little, Brown. $15.95.) Time magazine's correspondent in Peking has
written a ''wry, acerbic, masterfully conceived account of China in the early
1980's.''

THE MONEY LENDERS. Bankers and a World in Turmoil. By Anthony Sampson. (Viking.
$16.95.) An ''excellent exercise in the higher journalism'' about the adroit
maneuvering and constant invention of new economic mechanisms by world bankers
who keep the global economy working, the book is also a meditation on the
fragility of human arrangements and politics.

LABYRINTH. By Taylor Branch and Eugene M. Propper. (Viking.  $17.95.) A
''suspenseful'' narrative about the 1976 assassination in Washington of Orlando
Letelier, a former Chilean diplomat and a leading critic of Chile's president,
Augusto Pinochet.

NUCLEAR WAR. What's in It for You? By Ground Zero. (Pocket. Paper, $2.95.) A
grass-roots educational handbook on nuclear issues.  THE POLISH AUGUST. The
Self-Limiting Revolution. By Neal Ascherson. (Viking. $14.95.) A ''perceptive''
account of the Polish rebellion of August 1980 and the events that followed it.

THE REFUSED. The Agony of the Indochina Refugees. By Barry Wain.  (Simon &
Schuster. $16.50.) ''Mr. Wain's book breathtakingly charts almost every sea mile
of the refugee-laden junks'' that bore almost two million fleeing people from
Indochina after the Americans abandoned that peninsula in the 70's.

THE RISE OF POLITICAL CONSULTANTS. New Ways of Winning Elections.  By Larry J.
Sabato. (Basic. $20.95.) ''There is absolutely no better guide'' to political
technology. ''Solid but not stuffy, lightened by professorial wit and even some
good burlesque, and always guided by ethical considerations without being
pious.''

SICILIAN LIVES. By Danilo Dolci. (Pantheon. $16.50.) Records of conversations
Dolci has had with Sicilians for decades. ''One reason these brief and for the
most part unhappy lives are so compelling is that Dolci is never self-serving;
indeed, he underlines the limited effectiveness of a righteous man.''

STRATEGIES OF CONTAINMENT. A Critical Appraisal of Postwar American National
Security Policy. By John Lewis Gaddis. (Oxford.  $25.) The author analyzes
America's ''containment'' policy toward Russia since World War II and
demonstrates that detente is only the most recent manifestation of that
long-term strategy.

THE WEST BANK STORY. By Rafik Halabi. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.  $12.95.) This
Israeli Arab journalist's condemnation of both his country's policy in the
occupied territories and the P.L.O. is ''strong enough to disturb even the most
ardent supporters of Israel.''

WHEN BAD THINGS HAPPEN TO GOOD PEOPLE. By Harold S. Kushner.  (Shocken. $10.95.)
A religious and philosophical consideration of the problem of evil, impassioned
by the author's account of thinking, as a believer, about his young son's fatal
disease.

WHO KILLED KAREN SILKWOOD? By Howard Kohn. (Summit. $16.95.) An account of the
life and mysterious death of the factory worker killed in a car crash on her way
to deliver confidential dossiers on nuclear-safety violations to a reporter. The
book examines the publicity around the death of Miss Silkwood as an
''illustration of the prodigious American talent for instant mythmaking.''

WHY WE WERE IN VIETNAM. By Norman Podhoretz. (Simon & Schuster.  $13.50.) The
editor of Commentary, revising his opinions of 10 years ago, argues that the
American involvement in Vietnam was morally right.

Essays & Criticism

AGON. Towards a Theory of Revisionism. By Harold Bloom. (Oxford.  $19.95.)
Essays on classic American writers from Emerson and Whitman to John Ashbery, in
which Bloom further develops his ''theory of poetic creation as a desperate
wrestling with forebears,'' ''a theory of radical idiosyncrasy as the key to
identity and creativity.''

ART OF THE OLMSTED LANDSCAPE. (New York City Landmarks Preservation
Commission/Art Publishers. $35.) ''A handsome, twovolume celebration'' of the
work of Frederick Law Olmsted, the genius who designed Central Park and other
magnificent urban parks.

DOWN THE RIVER. By Edward Abbey. (Dutton. Cloth, $13.95. Paper, $6.95.) The
latest collection of essays - about rivers, mountains, deserts, freedom - by the
Southwestern writer.

ESSAYS ON CHINESE CIVILIZATION. By Derk Bodde. (Princeton. Cloth, $25. Paper,
$9.95.) A broad spectrum of pieces (on everything from linguistics and
18th-century prison life to feudalism and magic) by the wide-ranging China
scholar.

THE ESSENTIAL EARTHMAN. Henry Mitchell on Gardening. By Henry Mitchell.
(Indiana. $12.95.) ''The most soul-satisfying gardening book in years,'' by the
gardening columnist of The Washington Post.

FADING FEAST. A Compendium of Disappearing American Regional Foods. By Raymond
Sokolov. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $17.95.) ''Savory short essays with
recipes,'' written originally for Natural History magazine.

THE FAMILY IDIOT. Gustave Flaubert 1821-1857. Vol. I. By Jean Paul Sartre.
Translated by Carol Cosman. (Chicago. $25.) The first of five volumes in the
first English translation of the 3,000-page work on Flaubert that Sartre left
unfinished at his death - a powerful philosophical, literary and biographical
analysis.

THE FASHIONABLE MIND. Reflections on Fashion 1970-8l. By Kennedy Fraser. (Knopf.
$14.50). Worldly, realistic, witty, wise, often funny and sometimes poignant
observations on the world of women's fashions and the fashions of the beau monde
collected from Miss Fraser's reports in The New Yorker magazine.

THE GREAT CODE. The Bible and Literature. By Northrop Frye.  (Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich. $14.95.) The first, self-contained volume - a literary analysis of
the Bible, its unity and its language - of Frye's long-announced ''big book
about the Bible.''

GROUP PORTRAIT. Joseph Conrad, Stephen Crane, Ford Madox Ford, Henry James and
H.G. Wells. By Nicholas Delbanco. (Morrow. $11.50.) A critical rumination on the
lives and work of five writers who lived near each other in England at the turn
of the century.

HOW LIFE IMITATES THE WORLD SERIES. An Inquiry Into the Game. By Thomas Boswell.
(Doubleday. $14.95.) The values, rites, ethics and myths of baseball, as seen in
a series of essays and sketches by a Washington Post sportswriter.

IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF JOHNSON AND BOSWELL. By Israel Shenker.  (Houghton Mifflin.
$13.95.) An ''agreeable'' book of travel, in which the American journalist
retraces Johnson and Boswell's 1773 tour of the western part of Scotland.

JAPONISME. The Japanese Influence on Western Art in the 19th and 20th Centuries.
By Siegfried Wichmann. (Harmony. $75.) A lavishly illustrated ''definitive
chronicle'' of the impact of Japanese art and culture on Western art, by the
pre-eminent art historian.

THE KENNEDY IMPRISONMENT. A Meditation on Power. By Garry Wills.
(Atlantic-Little, Brown. $14.95.) An ''energetic attempt'' to show that the
Kennedy family has for 40 years ''imprisoned'' itself through its worship of
image and political power.

THE LANGUAGE OF CLOTHES. By Alison Lurie. (Random House. $20.) The author of the
novel ''The War Between the Tates'' has given us an ''engagingly illustrated
volume about the uses of clothing in Western society.''

LATE INNINGS. A Baseball Companion. By Roger Angell. (Simon & Schuster. $17.50.)
New Yorker pieces on the all-American sport from 1977 to 1981 by a writer who is
''involved, unfettered and positive.''

LIFE AFTER MARRIAGE. Love in an Age of Divorce. By A. Alvarez.  (Simon &
Schuster. $14.50) A series of essays and meditations on love, personal identity,
sex, family and cultural unity in an age the author sees as one of healthy and
utterly disorienting freedom.

LIVING BY FICTION. By Annie Dillard. (Harper & Row. $12.95.) ''A stimulating
book'' in which the author of ''Pilgrim at Tinker Creek'' suggests that
''contemporary modernist'' fiction can give meaning to life in an apparently
meaningless world.

MAN BITES MAN. Two Decades of Satiric Art. Edited by Steven Heller. (A & W
Publishers. $35.) ''A refreshingly personal selection of satiric art from the
past two decades'' by 11 American and 11 European cartoonists.

ME AGAIN. Uncollected Writings of Stevie Smith. Illustrated by Herself. Edited
by Jack Barbera and William McBrien. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $15.95.) An
''intelligently and handsomely arranged collection'' of the previously
uncollected works - stories, essays, reviews, poems, letters and a radio play.

THE MONKEY GRAMMARIAN. By Octavio Paz. Translated by Helen R.  Lane. (Seaver.
$14.95.) Lyrical and brooding meditations on the origins and power of language,
and on the chancy business of wresting orderly thought from chaos, by Mexico's
leading poet.

NOBODY HERE BUT US CHICKENS. By Marvin Mudrick. (Ticknor & Fields.  $16.95)
Needling, inspiring, sometimes exasperating essays on literature, literary and
historical characters, language and lust by a learned, witty, wry, outrageous
thinker and teacher.

THE PLACE OF POETRY. Two Centuries of an Art in Crisis. By Christopher Clausen.
(Kentucky. $12.50.) A historical argument that poetry has lost its audience in
the last two centuries and has thus stopped being a moral and intellectual force
in cultural life.

THE REALISTIC IMAGINATION. English Fiction from Frankenstein to Lady Chatterley.
By George Levine. (Chicago. $25.) A ''rich and provocative book,'' setting out a
new theory of realism in the 19th and early 20th centuries and revealing how the
leading writers of the times understood the changing purposes and rules of
fiction. It ''will alter significantly the study of the 19th-century novel.''

REVERSE ANGLE. A Decade of American Films. By John Simon. (Clarkson N. Potter.
$17.95.) Film columns written between 1970 and 198l by the very particular
critic. He approves of only 15 of the 245 films discussed, but the reviewer did
not ''mind his telling me that what I thought I had enjoyed was actually
third-rate, because he illuminates so many things I failed to see.''

SARTRE & FLAUBERT. By Hazel E. Barnes. (Chicago. $25.) An outline, summary and
study of Jean Paul Sartre's ''The Family Idiot,'' providing not only a
comprehensible preview of the entire vast work but ''for the first time anywhere
an account of Sartre's notes for the final unwritten volume'' of the work.

SCIENCE OBSERVED. Essays Out of My Mind. By Jeremy Bernstein.  (Basic. $16.95.)
Seventeen essays, mostly about scientists and the process of science.

THE SECOND AMERICAN REVOLUTION. And Other Essays, (1976-82). By Gore Vidal.
(Random House. $15.) Recent journalism, book reviews and essays, best read as
''a function of Vidal's personality.''

TRADITION. By Edward Shils. (Chicago. $20.) ''One of the most learned and
far-ranging minds in American sociology'' examines the idea of tradition and the
force of it in human affairs, demonstrating ''with considerable eloquence the
sheer indispensability of tradition to human society.''

THE TRUANTS. Adventures Among the Intellectuals. By William Barrett.
(Anchor/Doubleday. $15.95.) Portraits and reminiscences of, and some judgments
about, the Partisan Review crowd of the 40's by an eloquent insider. ''It is a
penetrating analysis of the intellectual life of its period ... and very much a
text for our time as well.''

THE TUGMAN'S PASSAGE. By Edward Hoagland. (Random House. $12.50.) One of our
most distinguished essayists ranges widely over subjects urban and rural, male
and female.

THE UNIVERSITY AND THE PUBLIC INTEREST. By A. Bartlett Giamatti.  (Atheneum.
$12.95.) Thirteen occasional essays by the President of Yale University about
learning and values, generally in defense of the ''tolerant and skeptical goals
of liberal education.''

WHATEVER IS MOVING. By Howard Moss. (Little, Brown. $15.95.) A collection of
essays from several decades on poets, poetry and novelists in a manner that is
''polite but firm, coolly urbane, never at a loss for words and almost always
treating the writer under consideration with admiration.''

WORKING PAPERS. Selected Essays and Reviews. By Hayden Carruth.  (Georgia.
$19.95.) Thirty years' of reviews show us a poet whose ''judgment is not soft''
and whose ''ear does not err.''

Fiction

AGAINST THE STREAM. By James Hanley. (Horizon. $12.95.) A story about a family
struggling over a young English boy whose father has died and whose upper-class
mother has long since abandoned him. It is told with a ''clarity and a
dispassionate accuracy that shoot straight to the heart.''

THE AGE OF WONDERS. By Aharon Appelfeld. Translated by Dalya Bilu.  (Godine.
$12.95.) The distinguished Israeli writer's second novel to be published in
English deals with the family of a Jewish writer who clings to his Austrian
homeland in the very ''teeth of the Final Solution.''

AH, BUT YOUR LAND IS BEAUTIFUL. By Alan Paton. (Scribners.  $12.95.) An
''exquisitely written'' novel about the South African Liberal Party movement and
its involvement in the 1950's ''Defiance Campaign,'' by a novelist who has made
his place in the ''literature of social protest.''

THE ARCHITECT. By Meyer Levin. (Simon & Schuster. $15.50.) Architect Frank Lloyd
Wright is the hero of this posthumously published biographical novel.

AT THE CENTER. By Norma Rosen. (Houghton Mifflin. $12.95.) A novel set in a
private abortion center that ''humanizes an issue which has been denatured too
long by adversarial irrelevancies.''

BEYOND THE PALE. And Other Stories. By William Trevor. (Viking.  $12.95.)
Collected stories by the Anglo-Irish writer who ''shares with Joyce ... that
austere Irish prose that quietly charms and that can be adapted to portray
various walks of life.''

A BIGAMIST'S DAUGHTER. By Alice McDermott. (Random House. $13.50.) A fine first
novel about a young woman working for a vanity press who becomes involved with a
would-be author.

BODILY HARM. By Margaret Atwood. (Simon & Schuster. $14.50.) After her life in
Toronto is shattered by illness, the desertion of her lover and a death threat,
a journalist flees to a Caribbean island and finds herself involved in a
revolution. An ''eloquent, gnarled sermon'' on violence, sadism and death.

THE BOHEMIANS. John Reed and His Friends Who Shook the World. By Alan Cheuse.
(Apple-wood Books. $12.95.) A fictionalized account of Reed and the American
Bolsheviks that ''is alive with characters who dreamed great dreams as intensely
as they made spectacular fools of themselves.''

BRAIDED LIVES. By Marge Piercy. (Summit. $15.50.) A novel about ''growing up
female in the 50's,'' by a feminist writer who ''burns with anger and
conviction.''

!CLICK SONG. By John A. Williams. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) The ''private and
public'' vicissitudes of a black novelist trying to establish himself as a
writer of distinction are chronicled in this revealing tale of the New York
cultural scene from World War II to the present - told with ''directness of
language and feeling.''

COLLECTED STORIES. By V.S. Pritchett. (Random House. $20.) Stories, written over
a period of 50 years, in which the author steadily pursues a course of ''quiet
originality.'' Although the human foibles the stories expose are universal,
''they are displayed in unmistakably British form.''

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF AMADO MURO. Introduction by William Rintoul. (Thorp
Springs Press. $10.) ''Spare and literal'' sketches of hobo life and of northern
Mexico by the late, pseudonymous author who was, during his lifetime, thought to
be a ''promising young Chicano writer'' but who was really an Ohio-born
newspaperman.

THE COLLECTED STORIES OF ISAAC BASHEVIS SINGER. By Isaac Bashevis Singer.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $19.95.) Forty-seven stories by the Nobel laureate in
which the author's ''tenderness for ordinary folk, their superstitions, their
folly, their plainness'' are reflected in the ''phantasmagorical'' as well as
the ''real world.''

THE CRYING HEART TATTOO. By David Martin. (Holt, Rinehart & Winston. $14.50.) An
ambitious, ''darkly idiosyncratic second novel'' that charts the course of a
''lifelong love affair'' between a smalltown Midwesterner and a woman 20 years
his senior.

THE DEAN'S DECEMBER. By Saul Bellow. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) The Nobel Prize
winner's complex new novel is set mostly in Bucharest, where the Dean's
mother-in-law lies dying, but there are detailed flashbacks to the academic
turmoil he has left in Chicago.

DINNER AT THE HOMESICK RESTAURANT. By Anne Tyler. (Knopf. $13.50.) The
ruminations of an 85-year-old woman on her past and the fate of her three
children are the focus of this ''funny, heart-hammering, wise'' novel. While
''it edges deep into truth that's simultaneously ... psychological, moral and
formal,'' it is also ''superb entertainment.''

DISTANT RELATIONS. By Carlos Fuentes. Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden.
(Farrar, Straus & Giroux. $11.95.) The interaction between a Mexican father and
son and a French father and son of the same name who meet in a spectral Paris
mansion is the focus of this ''metaphysical ghost story'' by the Mexican author
who excels ''as a spinner of mysteries and concocter of startling surprises.''

DUTCH SHEA, JR. By John Gregory Dunne. (Linden/ Simon & Schuster.  $15.95.)
After his daughter's death, criminal lawyer Dutch Shea searches the past for
clues to the unraveling of his life in this elaborately plotted, ''funny, often
chastening, sometimes ghastly and always deftly handled'' novel.

A GOOD MAN IN AFRICA. By William Boyd. (Morrow. $14.50.) The misadventures and
blunders of Morgan Leafy, a British civil servant stationed in Africa, are the
focus of this comic first novel, which is peppered with wry one-liners.

A GREAT LOVE. By Alexandra Kollontai. Translated and introduced by Cathy Porter.
(Norton. Cloth, $12.95. Paper, $4.95.) Two stories and a novella - fashioned
after actual events in early-20th-century Russia -with the theme of love vs.
party loyalty; at her best Kollontai is ''provocative, prescient and
compassionate.''

HAPPY TO BE HERE. By Garrison Keillor. (Atheneum. $11.95.) Short stories that
are ''calmly, acrobatically droll,'' by the talented New Yorker writer, now
better known for his National Public Radio program, ''A Prarie Home Companion.''

HEADBIRTHS OR THE GERMANS ARE DYING OUT. By Gunter Grass.  Translated by Ralph
Manheim. (Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. $9.95.) Grass, ''the bad boy of German
letters,'' is both anarchist and pedagogue in this melange of a novel - ''part
fiction, part travelogue, part screenplay and part political pamphlet.''

HEADING WEST. By Doris Betts. (Knopf. $13.50.) A well-told tale of a Southern
spinster, a librarian who is kidnapped from a picnic, travels with her captor as
far as the Grand Canyon, escapes and then decisively comes to terms with her
life.

HONOUR & OTHER PEOPLE'S CHILDREN. Two Stories. By Helen Garner.  (Seaview.
$10.50.) Two stories by the author of ''Monkey Grip'' that deal with
contemporary life in Melbourne - a divorce in a traditional family and the
breakup of a ''group home'' or commune - and that are ''curiously American as
well as Australian.''

IMAGINARY CRIMES. By Sheila Ballantyne. (Viking. $13.95.) The author of ''Norma
Jean the Termite Queen'' returns with the story of a young girl's ''arduous and
unusual growing up'' in a novel that is ''at times heartbreaking, at times
inspiring.''

KAMAL. By D.W. Arathorn. (Harper & Row. $14.50.) Arathorn's portrait of a
French-Arabian terrorist who ''views the world through the distorting lens of
revolutionary nihilism'' makes this contemporary thriller a ''compelling and
enlightening'' novel.

L.A. WOMAN. By Eve Babitz. (Linden/Simon & Schuster. $13.50.) A portrait of
Sophie Lubin, ''a tinsel-skulled modern type,'' whose involvement with sex,
drugs and various prototypical L.A. characters give this novel an ironic and
humorous edge.

LEAH AND LAZAR. By Elizabeth Swados. (Summit. $13.95.) After freeing herself
from the influence of an adored but self-destructive older brother, an artistic
young woman sets out to discover herself in and around New York City. The
eclectic author - she is a poet, illustrator, songwriter and composer - has
written a ''strange, outrageous'' first novel that both ''startles and
mesmerizes.''

LEVITATION. Five Fictions. By Cynthia Ozick. (Knopf. $11.50.) New short work
from the author of ''The Pagan Rabbi and Other Stories.'' There are ''dazzling,
original and even beauteous'' stories here, but ''probability, necessity,
recognizable human feeling are replaced by the laws of what can only be called
mystical vision.''

LOVE AND WORK. By Gwyneth Cravens. (Knopf. $13.95.) In this witty tale of two
young New Yorkers falling immediately, helplessly in love, the author manages
''to reclaim for the serious novel some of the gerrymandered territory too long
in the hands of the Harlequin romances.''

LULLABY. By Oakley Hall. (Atheneum. $13.95.) Personal disaster and ''various
forms of real or hallucinated witchcraft'' beset a prosperous family in a novel
that ''swings somewhere between a bedtime story and a serious attempt to pierce
the human and cultural darkness.''

THE MAKING OF THE REPRESENTATIVE FOR PLANET 8. Canopus in Argos: Archives. By
Doris Lessing. (Knopf. $11.95.) The fourth in her cycle of ''visionary novels''
is one that, taken as a ''sort of ecological thriller,'' is ''splendid.'' But be
warned, Mrs. Lessing is ''no longer very interested in people.''

MALGUDI DAYS. By R.K. Narayan. (Viking. 14.95.) Set in the fictional Indian town
of Malgudi, this collection of stories is distinguished by the author's
''compassionate realism'' and sense of humor - ''fresh, sharp and wryly
ironic.''

THE MAN FROM ST. PETERSBURG. By Ken Follett. (Morrow. $14.50.) The author's
latest thriller is a ''retelling of the princess and beggarman romance'' set
against a backdrop of the negotiations for a British-Russian alliance on the eve
of World War I.

MARCO POLO, IF YOU CAN. By William F. Buckley Jr. (Doubleday.  $13.95.) Another
jolly Blackford Oakes spy novel, with enough diversions to suggest that the
author is having ''too much fun to worry about minor details'' like plot.

A MEDITATION. By Juan Benet. Translated by Gregory Rabassa.  (Persea. $15.95.) A
nameless narrator's remembrances of the period before and after the Spanish
Civil War. The first English translation of the ''most imposing, challenging ...
novelist writing in Spanish.''

THE MOSQUITO COAST. By Paul Theroux. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) The story of
the emigration to Honduras of Allie Fox, an arrogant, eccentric American
inventor. It is ''a fine entertainment, a gripping adventure story, a remarkable
comic portrait of minds and cultures at cross purposes.''

A MOTHER AND TWO DAUGHTERS. By Gail Godwin. (Viking. $15.95.) A novel about a
mother and her middle-aged daughters and their crisis over the loss of husband
and father, by the author of ''The Odd Woman.''

NELLIE WITHOUT HUGO. By Janet Hobhouse. (Viking. $12.95.) The heroine attempts a
reconciliation with her husband after an abortive affair with an old lover in
this contemporary domestic novel by a ''lively, intelligent writer.''

NIGHT THOUGHTS OF A CLASSICAL PHYSICIST. By Russell McCormach.  (Harvard. $15.)
An elderly theoretical physicist broods through the nights of September 1918,
contemplating the intellectual upheavals in science in the period since 1870. An
''artful experiment in writing the history of science.''

NOBODY'S ANGEL. By Thomas McGuane. (Random House. Cloth, $14.95.Paper, $6.95.)
What stamps this tale of a love triangle in Montana ranch country as a McGuane
novel ''are the bizarre episodes he invents for his characters and the wit with
which he reports them.'' The ''best book so far'' from a ''thoroughly American
writer.''

OH WHAT A PARADISE IT SEEMS. By John Cheever. (Knopf. $10.) ''A very short and
often lovely novel ... on being old'' in which the ordinary people who have
traditionally populated ''Cheever country'' return to the spotlight.

OLD WORLD, NEW WORLD. By Mark Dintenfass. (Morrow. $14.50.) A ''family saga to
do the genre proud,'' about a Jewish-American family ''with one foot in the old
world of religious belief and timeworn customs and the other in Brooklyn.''

THE PATRIOT GAME. By George V. Higgins. (Knopf. $12.95.) Set in Irish-Catholic
Boston, this tale of a Federal agent's attempt to prevent a pardoned murderer
from ''hitting'' the man who fingered him is heightened by the author's ''vivid,
larger-than-life characters and the mesmerizing exuberance of their language.''

THE POLISH COMPLEX. By Tadeusz Konwicki. Translated by Richard Lourie. (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $12.95.) The eminent Polish writer's novel about a queue formed
in front of a Warsaw jewelry store the day before Christmas, written as a tract
and a comedy of manners.

THE PORTAGE TO SAN CRISTOBAL OF A.H. By George Steiner. (Simon & Schuster.
$13.50.) The author's personal view of the Holocaust adds moral and polemical
weight to this novel about a gang of Jewish Nazihunters trying to wrest Adolf
Hitler from his Brazilian jungle hideaway in the 1970's.

PRIZZI'S HONOR. By Richard Condon. (Coward, McCann, & Geoghegan.  $13.95.) The
''delightfully preposterous and perverse plot complications'' enhance this tale
of an attempted Mafia takeover of a bank; Condon is an ''old pro at mixing
satire with suspense.''

RICHARD A. By Sol Yurick. (Arbor House. $14.95.) ''An engrossing (and scary)
cerebro-political thriller'' about a computer genius's involvement with the
C.I.A. in the early 1960's - a ''skillful assault from somewhere on the
apocalyptic left ... on le Carre turf.''

THE ROYAL GAME & OTHER STORIES. By Stefan Zweig. Translated by Jill Sutcliffe.
With an introduction by John Fowles. (Harmony.  $12.95.) A quintet of fictions,
by the Austrian-born writer who died in 1942, that are ''brilliant, unusual and
haunting enough to ensure that Stefan Zweig's time of oblivion is over for
good.''

THE SAFETY NET. By Heinrich Boll. (Knopf. $13.95.) The German Nobel Prize winner
turns to the question of political terrorism in this philosophical novel about a
newspaper publisher whose life is controlled by the realistic fear of
kidnapping.

THE SEMI-ATTACHED COUPLE AND THE SEMI-ATTACHED HOUSE. By Emily Eden. (Virago
Modern Classics/Dial. Paper, $7.95.) Two mid-19thcentury novels -the first a
''comic gem'' about marriage difficulties, the second a drama of class
differences - by ''a fine writer'' who ''wrote in frank admiration of Jane
Austen.''

SOULS AND BODIES. By David Lodge. (Morrow. $12.50.) A witty and ambitious novel
about the meaning and practice of Catholicism for a dozen English university
students as they mature through the tumultuous 60's and 70's.

SOUNDING THE TERRITORY. By Laurel Goldman. (Knopf. $13.50.) An ''admirably
touching'' first novel about a young man suffering mental problems who
periodically commits himself to Bellevue.

SOUTHERN DISCOMFORT. By Rita Mae Brown. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) A tale of
adultery, miscegenation and incest set in early-20th-century Alabama, in which
the author examines the ''comic futility'' and ''wasteful pain'' that results
from the conflict between ''human passions and societal conventions.''

STORIES UP TO A POINT. By Bette Pesetsky. (Knopf. $9.50.) These very short
stories ''read like telegraphic dispatches from the battlefield of modern life.
... The news is all bad.'' The stories are very good. ''At its best her
off-rhythm, quirky technique is impressive.''

TAKE FIVE. By D.Keith Mano. (Doubleday. $17.95.) The demise of the ''outsized
protagonist,'' filmmaker Simon Lynxx, is the focus of this ''mammoth'' novel,
which is distinguished by its ''stylistic richness and scenic ingenuity.''

TAKING CARE. By Joy Williams. (Random House. $12.50.) A fine collection of
stories concerned with ''social disjunction and the discontinuity of
relationships.'' Her style is marked by ''wonderfully crisp writing and patches
of bleak humor.''

TIME FOR FRANKIE COOLIN. By Bill Griffith. (Random House. $13.50.) A vividly
portrayed ''middle-aged, weatherbeaten, Irish-Catholic redneck'' living in the
Chicago slums becomes involved in a case of trafficking in stolen goods in this
''potent, insightful'' novel.

TO SEE YOU AGAIN. By Alice Adams. (Knopf. $13.50.) In her second collection of
stories the author explores the ''feelings and impulses'' of primarily
well-educated, San Francisco Bay Area characters - ''Adams's manner is
good-humoredly ironic and understated, and she is a deft social observer.''

TWICE SHY. By Dick Francis. (Putnam's. $13.95.) Former jockey Francis returns to
the English horse-racing setting in this tale of the machinations surrounding
the attempt to secure a successful computer program of a handicapping system -
''the writing is spare, clean and always effective.''

WAITING FOR THE BARBARIANS. By J.M. Coetzee. (Penguin. Paper, $3.95.) ''A
realistic fable, at once stark, exciting and economical,'' about an imagined
empire, ''recognizable as a universalized South Africa.'' South African novelist
Coetzee renders his concern for the ''chaos and ugliness'' of his homeland with
''esthetic distance'' - ''a distinguished piece of fiction.''

WATCHFIRES. By Louis Auchincloss. (Houghton Mifflin. $13.95.) At the outbreak of
the Civil War, a lawyer who is having an affair with his sister-in-law placates
his wife by contributing to her effort to assist escaped slaves in this
historical romance by ''our most observant novelist of manners.''

WATER MUSIC. By T. Coraghessan Boyle.(Little, Brown. $15.95.) A very clever book
with two heros - one genteel, one vulgar - and two plots, both ''picaresque,''
about the explorer Mungo Park and a streetwise fellow called Ned Rise. A very
modern version of an oldfashioned novel.

WAKING. By Eva Figes. (Pantheon. $7.95.) This slender novel examines ''the life
of a woman by revealing her thoughts in the quiet time between sleeping and
waking, at different stages of her life.''

THE WEDDING GUEST. By David Wiltse. (Delacorte. $15.95.) A ''splendid'' first
novel about a menacing villain in pursuit of the son of a U.S. intelligence
operative who has stumbled onto a plot involving the late Shah of Iran and a
former President called ''The Man.'' The author has ''taken formula fiction and
thrown the formula away.''

A WEEKEND WITH CLAUDE. By Beryl Bainbridge. (Braziller. $10.95.) A woman's
friends try to convince a young geologist that he is the father of her unborn
child in this revised edition of a novel published earlier in England.

WHITE HORSES. By Alice Hoffman. (Putnam's. $12.95.) A haunting novel, set in
northern California, in which there is an ''almost seamless transition from the
real to the unreal.'' It is about the ''dispersion and disintegration'' of the
Conners family, and the strange incestuous relationship between dreamy daughter
Theresa and her brother Silver, a small-time drug dealer.

WHO KILLED SAL MINEO? By Susan Braudy. (Wyndham. $14.95.) A ''first-rate
thriller romance'' that follows an investigative reporter through the Los
Angeles sexual underground in search of the killer of the 50's matinee idol.

THE WINTER PEOPLE. By John Ehle. (Harper & Row. $13.95.) Set in the North
Carolina mountain region during the 1930's, this tale of love, murder and
vengeance is ''drenched in local wit and custom.'' The author ''stakes a
serious, quiet claim'' to a ''profoundly American territory.''

History

BITTER FRUIT. The Untold Story of the American Coup in Guatemala.  By Stephen
Schlesinger and Stephen Kinzer. (Doubleday. $16.95.) A ''fast-paced and
well-documented'' account of the C.I.A.-sponsored 1954 coup.

THE BRANDEIS/FRANKFURTER CONNECTION. The Secret Political Activities of Two
Supreme Court Justices. By Bruce Allen Murphy.(Oxford. $18.95.) A ''valuable and
fascinating'' study of the extrajudicial activities, such as advancement of
political causes and covert intervention in national affairs, of two of the
Supreme Court's most celebrated Justices.

THE ENDLESS WAR. Fifty Years of Struggle in Vietnam. By James Pinckney Harrison.
(Free Press/Macmillan. $17.95.) Drawing on the speeches and party documents of
the Vietnamese Communist leaders, as well as French and American scholarship,
Harrison shows the ''incredible perseverence and resilience of the Vietnamese
Communists'' over more than 50 years.

A HISTORY OF THE GUYANESE WORKING PEOPLE, 1881-1905. By Walter Rodney. (Johns
Hopkins. Cloth, $26.50. Paper, $6.95.) The last book by the young Guyanese
patriot, politician and socialist who was killed by a bomb in 1980, Rodney's
analysis ''exposes Guyanese planter attitudes, and makes clear why they have
changed so little over time.''

A HISTORY OF VENICE. By John Julius Norwich. (Knopf. $22.95.) ''A thousand years
of prodigious, intricate, sometimes unbelievable events'' in one ''living
book.''

THE HOLOCAUST AND THE HISTORIANS. By Lucy S. Dawidowicz. (Harvard.  $15.) A
''shrewd and generally fair'' analysis of how European and American historians
and commentators have dealt with the holocaust, or failed to.

THE HOUSE OF SAUD. The Rise and Rule of the Most Powerful Dynasty in the Arab
World. By David Holden and Richard Johns. (Holt. $19.95.) This modern history of
Saudi Arabia's ruling dynasty, from the capture of Riyadh in 1902 to the siege
of Mecca in 1979, includes the ''best and fullest journalistic account of Arabia
during the past 15 years.''

KENNEDY, KHRUSHCHEV AND THE TEST BAN. By Glenn T. Seaborg. With Benjamin S.
Loeb. (California. $16.95.) The former chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission
draws on his personal journal to describe the negotiation of the limited
test-ban treaty of 1963.

KOREA. The Untold Story of the War. By Joseph C. Goulden. (Times.  $22.50.) A
''breezy'' anecdotal history of the American involvement in Korea, based on
highly classified documents released through the Freedom of Information Act.

THE LEFT BANK. Writers, Artists and Politics From the Popular Front to the Cold
War. By Herbert R. Lottman. (Houghton Mifflin. $15.95.) ''A guided tour of the
1930's and 1940's as seen from the Sixth Arrondissement'' by the biographer of
Albert Camus.

NO PLACE OF GRACE. Antimodernism and the Transformation of American Culture
1880-1920. By T.Jackson Lears. (Pantheon. $18.50.) Social and cultural history
of affluent and literate Americans in the generations on either side of the turn
of the century who felt they were the victims, not the beneficiaries, of the new
American culture.

THE RULING RACE. A History of American Slaveholders. By James Oakes. (Knopf.
$16.95.) This ''latest in a series of outstanding'' re-examinations of slavery
is ''more effective as a work of revision'' of the scholarship of Eugene
Genovese than as an alternative portrait of the planter class.

SLAVERY AND FREEDOM. By Willie Lee Rose. (Oxford.$17.95.) Collected essays, some
previously unpublished, by the eminent historian who is ''a masterly
practitioner of the ironic and compassionate approach to history.''

STRONG-MINDED WOMEN. And Other Lost Voices from Nineteenth-Century England. By
Janet Horowitz Murray. (Pantheon. Cloth, $22.50. Paper, $11.95.) ''Fascinating,
detailed accounts'' of the lives of Victorian Englishwomen, constructed from
parliamentary testimony, private letters, books and other reports.

THE STRUCTURES OF EVERYDAY LIFE. The Limits of the Possible.  Volume I.
Civilization and Capitalism 15th-18th Century. By Fernand Braudel. (Harper &
Row. $30.) This first volume of Braudel's large economic history of Europe
contains his ''ingenious exploration'' of the ''often invisible realm of
material life.''

THIS WAS HARLEM. A Cultural Portrait, 1900-50. By Jervis Anderson.  (Farrar,
Straus & Giroux. $17.95.) A history of Harlem from its ''brash and vibrant
cultural youth and its political and cultural maturity, on to its frustrated,
sometimes violent middle age.''

THE VINEYARD OF LIBERTY. The American Experiment. By James MacGregor Burns.
(Knopf. $22.95.) A history of the Republic from 1787 to 1863 that is
''distinctive above all for the character of its narrative, which is episodic,
even cinematic in style,'' and remarkable for its focus on the wide range of
people who created the nation, so that ''women, laboring people, blacks and
Indians become part of the story.''

WOMEN, RACE & CLASS. By Angela Y. Davis. (Random House. $13.50.) A historical
study of how the three themes of the title became entangled in the growth of
American society, given resonance by Miss Davis's insights into current women's
concerns such as rape, child care, housework and reproductive freedom.

THE WORLD RUSHED IN. The California Gold Rush Experience. By J. S.  Holliday.
(Simon & Schuster. $16.95.) A ''meticulous reconstruction of the California
stampede,'' told through entries in the diary of New York farmer William Swain,
who joined the Gold Rush at its beginning. Excerpts from other chronicles of the
time give depth to Swain's engaging personal tale.

Poetry

ANTARCTIC TRAVELLER. By Katha Pollitt. (Knopf. $11.50.) ''These poems are
beautiful objects. Stately, dignified, slightly aloof, they exult in polished
diction and elegant surface.''

THE CHINESE INSOMNIACS. New Poems. By Josephine Jacobsen.  (Pennsylvania.
$9.95.) These ''characteristically understated poems attempt to calibrate in
exquisite, polished and unfailingly intelligent language the wonders and horrors
of the interior landscape.''

THE COUNTRY BETWEEN US. By Carolyn Forche. (Harper & Row. $11.50.) This book of
mostly political poems about El Salvador ''is a distinct step forward'' for this
young poet. ''The cumulative power of the volume is considerable.''

THE FORTUNATE TRAVELLER. By Derek Walcott. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux.  l.95.)
''Descriptive and meditative occasions. ... He writes high, forcing his themes
to rise to the occasions of his rhetoric. ... There are some gorgeous poems''
here.

HUNDREDS OF FIREFLIES. By Brad Leithauser. (Knopf. $11.50.) Some of these poems
''transport the reader to realms of suggestiveness involving time, nature and
mystery that could never be encompassed by cleverness, sheer skill or mere
observation.''

THE LAST LUNAR BAEDEKER. By Mina Loy. Edited and introduced by Roger Conover.
With a Note by Jonathan Williams. (The Jargon Society. $25.) The first
publication of more than a third of the poems by the late Miss Loy, who won the
praise of Ezra Pound, T.S. Eliot and many other great poets.

LIFE SUPPORTS. New and Collected Poems. By William Bronk. (North Point Press.
$20.) ''The quality of our experience is unmistakable in these abstract poems,
which nevertheless are more concrete than the 'objects' of reality.''

THE MAN IN THE BLACK COAT TURNS. By Robert Bly. (Dial. $10.95.) ''The most
somber book he has written,'' but ''the surfaces of these poems crackle with
energy, liveliness.''

THIS JOURNEY. By James Wright. (Random House. $10.50.) Poems that explore ''the
terrible harshness and beauty of nature, but with a luminous depth and
intensity.'' The last volume completed by Wright, who died two years ago at the
age of 52.

WHISPER TO THE EARTH. By David Ignatow. (Atlantic-Little, Brown.  $10.95.)
''This book is a triumphant return for David Ignatow, a testament to the
enduring spirit of man.''

A WILD PATIENCE HAS TAKEN ME THIS FAR. Poems 1978-1981. By Adrienne Rich.
(Norton. $4.95.) ''We are in the presence here of a major American poet whose
voice at midcentury in her own life is increasingly marked by moral passion.''

Science & Social Science

BEYOND THE IVORY TOWER. Social Responsibilities of the Modern University. By
Derek Bok. (Harvard. $15.95.) The president of Harvard ''brings a keenly
analytical mind'' to his renegotiation of the relationship between universities
and society.

THE BILL JAMES BASEBALL ABSTRACT 1982. By Bill James (Ballantine.  Paper,
$5.95.) A ''marvelous'' book, based on ''sabermetrics'' - the mathematical and
statistical study of baseball.

BLAMING TECHNOLOGY. The Irrational Search for Scapegoats. By Samuel C. Florman.
(St. Martin's. $12.95.) A spirited polemic in defense of technology, arguing
that the changes made in our lives by technology are not determined by
technologists, but result from larger ''human choices made in constantly
shifting circumstances.''

THE COSMIC CODE. Quantum Physics as the Language of Nature. By Heinz R. Pagels.
(Simon & Schuster. $17.50.) A ''marvelously effective'' explanation of the
fundamental ideas of theoretical physics.

THE GERMANS. By Gordon A. Craig. (Putnam's. $15.95.) A ''literate, eminently
readable'' and unconventional history of German life and culture over the past
several centuries.

GREED IS NOT ENOUGH. Reaganomics. By Robert Lekachman. (Pantheon.  $13.50.) A
critique of current domestic policy by one of America's leading economists.

THE GROWTH OF BIOLOGICAL THOUGHT. Diversity, Evolution and Inheritance. By Ernst
Mayr. (Belknap/Harvard. $30.) This first of two ''ambitious'' volumes on the
background and development of the ideas of modern biology focuses on the
ultimate questions of evolution.

THE HIDDEN FACE OF EVE. Women in the Arab World. By Nawal El Saadawi. (Beacon.
Paper, $8.25.) The first book by the Egyptian doctor, novelist and Marxist
feminist to be translated into English: a discussion of the lives of women in
contemporary Egypt, in world history and in Arab history and literature.

HOMETOWN. By Peter Davis. (Simon & Schuster. $14.95.) A report on America as
seen through one community -Hamilton, Ohio: ''The stories ... will doubtless
resonate in other American hometowns.''

IN A DIFFERENT VOICE. Psychological Theory and Women's Development. By Carol
Gilligan. (Harvard. $15.) A ''consistently provocative,'' feminist reassessment
of Lawrence Kohlberg's theories of moral development.

THE INVISIBLE BANKERS. Everything the Insurance Industry Never Wanted You to
Know. By Andrew Tobias. (Linden/Simon & Schuster.  $15.50.) A ''good read''
about the insurance business, by the author of ''The Only Investment Guide
You'll Ever Need.''

IS THERE NO PLACE ON EARTH FOR ME? By Susan Sheehan. (Houghton Mifflin. $14.95.)
A ''moving, coherent'' study of mental illness and its treatment, which focuses
on the pseudonymous Sylvia Frumkin, a diagnosed and deteriorating schizophrenic,
and her experiences at Creedmoor Psychiatric Center.

LANGUAGE OF THE UNDERWORLD. By David W. Maurer. Edited by Allan W.  Futrell and
Charles B. Wordell. (Kentucky. $30.) Papers and articles, representing 50 years
of research by the late lexicographer, on the language of America's colorful
types.

THE MIND'S I. Fantasies and Reflections on Self and Soul. Composed and arranged
by Douglas R. Hofstadter and Daniel C. Dennett. (Basic.  $15.50.) A collection
of fiction, essays and dialogues by philosophers, poets and writers exploring
the ideas of mind, consciousness and the conscious person in the light of new
scientific discovery and philosophical analysis.

THE NEW EVOLUTIONARY TIMETABLE. Fossils, Genes and the Origin of Species. By
Steven M. Stanley. (Basic. $16.75.) A readable and illuminating statement of the
new revisionist theory of evolution whose proponents think that the evolution of
species happened not in a continuous but in an episodic mode; after long periods
without significant change, nature took odd leaps and rapidly produced variants.

ON LEARNING TO READ. The Child's Fascination With Meaning. By Bruno Bettelheim
and Karen Zelan. (Knopf. $13.95.) Rigorous examination of how children learn to
read and why, with an extensive critical survey of current primers and methods.
The critical survey and the suggestions for change are characteristically
provocative.

SCIENCE IN TRADITIONAL CHINA. A Comparative Perspective. By Joseph Needham.
(Harvard. $12.50.) A more accessible version of part of the immense ''Science
and Civilization in China.'' Essays focusing on gunpowder and firearms,
macrobiotics, acupuncture and moxibustion, and Chinese attitudes to time show a
scholar ''freewheeling, amusing, constantly alert and rarely dogmatic.''

A SECRET SYMMETRY. Sabrina Spielrein Between Jung and Freud. By Aldo Carotenuto.
(Pantheon. $16.95.) The diary and letters of an analysand (and mistress) of
Jung's who later became a psychoanalyst herself under Freud at the Vienna
Psychoanalytic Society. A ''valuable footnote to the early history of
psychoanalysis.''

SOUND EFFECTS. Youth, Leisure and the Politics of Rock 'n' Roll.  By Simon
Frith. (Pantheon. $18.50.) ''The most succinct and lively account of the
structure of the music business of any book now available,'' but also a study of
how the audiences and the performers use the music in their personal lives and
in society.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: List

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              242 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

HANOI TRIP: GAINS SEEN BY EX-G.I.'S

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1056 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, June 3


A group of American veterans of the Vietnam War has left this country after a
six-day visit, taking with them what seemed a heightened awareness of the
possibilities - and pitfalls - of unofficial diplomacy.

The veterans, who left today, were on their way back to the United States after
their encounter with Vietnamese officials, high and low. They came to this
country to talk about the fate of American soldiers missing in action, the
chemical defoliant known as Agent Orange, the children of Vietnamese citizens
and American servicemen, and the need, as they saw it, for more cultural
exchanges between Vietnamese and Americans.

Several of the veterans remained unsure about what their mission had
accomplished. Nor, despite Vietnam's release May 29 of information on several
American war dead, did they know where such visits might lead or what Vietnam
hoped to gain from such encounters.

The trip was ambiguous on another level, since it was not clear precisely whom
the veterans spoke for. All of them said they represented their organization,
Vietnam Veterans of America, which claims 8,000 to 10,000 members. Some added
that they hoped they represented many other Vietnam veterans as well.

U.S. Said to Show Keen Interest

Thomas A. Bird, the group's leader, and a number of his colleagues said that on
some points the veterans were also telling Vietnam what the United States
Government would say if it were in their place.  Washington, the veterans said,
had taken an intense interest in how they spoke and what they expected to learn
in Vietnam.

The welter of missions turned out to be a case study in the problems of
conducting unofficial diplomacy.  Officially, according to State Department and
Defense Department spokesmen, the veterans' trip was strictly unofficial, like a
similar but more modest journey last December. The veterans have characterized
their trip in the same terms.

Government spokesmen have also said that the veterans were briefed on Government
policy toward Vietnam and that Washington wished the group luck in their talks
about missing Americans and the children of American servicemen and Vietnamese
women. They said that, given Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia, no Vietnamese
performing artist would be issued an American visa, and warned that the veterans
were in grave danger of being used by the Vietnamese for propaganda purposes.

More Stress on Defoliant Noted

This danger centered particularly, they said, on Agent Orange, which American
officials say has gained importance in Vietnam's public statements since the
United States began accusing Vietnam and the Soviet Union of waging chemical
warfare in Indochina and Afghanistan.

In addition to these official positions, however, Washington told the veterans
more.  The group's lawyer, Leslie A. Platt of Washington, said that the group's
proposal to Vietnam for an international scientific commission - including
American scientists - to study the possible effects of Agent Orange in Vietnam
had been submitted in draft to both the White House and the State Department.
Mr. Platt said that the Government's suggested changes had been incorporated
into the proposal that was submitted in Hanoi.

On the matter of missing Americans, Mr. Bird said that the veterans' plans for
discussions with the Vietnamese had been discussed in detail with Defense
Department officials. As a result, the group later pressed the Vietnamese for
''the fullest possible accounting in good faith'' of the missing.

Mr. Bird said that he and his fellow veterans, in their closed session with the
Vietnamese on May 29, had moved from the subject of ''fullest possible
accounting'' - which the veterans told the Vietnamese meant going through the
United States Government's list of names, one by one - to the question of which
name to discuss first.

'Category I' List Suggested

Mr. Bird then proposed that they start with what the Defense Department called
''Category I'' names, a list of 166 Americans who had been identified, through
photographs or other strong evidence, as having been captured alive during the
war.

The Vietnamese are said to have received such lists long ago from the Defense
Department's Joint Casualty Resolution Center. But they told the veterans to
provide them with a Category I list.

One other indication of Washington's interest in the veterans' trip, members of
the group said, was that they had dealt with fairly high American officials.
John H. Holdridge, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific,
met with members on May 15.  Later, John Gunther Dean, American Ambassador to
Thailand, met with them twice in Bangkok.

Mr. Holdridge was said to have told Mr. Bird and Joseph Papp, the New York
theatrical producer who accompanied the veterans, that the Government's official
position was sympathetic, cautionary and firmly against cultural exchanges.

One of the veterans, H. Scott Higgins of Manhattan, came away from Bangkok
saying that the Ambassador had been ''very good, very supportive.'' Mr. Dean
also stressed the differences between ''dialogues'' and ''a result,'' Mr.
Higgins said.

Reporters Invited to Meeting

The Vietnamese invited American reporters into their Hanoi conference room after
the missing-in-action session and announced that four American identity cards -
one with a soldier's bodily remains - plus four or five other unidentified
remains would be turned over to the veterans.

The veterans were elated. Most believed they had scored a breakthrough after
hours of negotiations.  Mr. Bird said later that the Vietnamese, before finally
opening an envelope containing a typed press release about the remains, had
asked the veterans several times what they could do for Vietnam in return for
cooperation on missing Americans. Mr. Bird responded that he had spoken with
Ambassador Dean and had come away with a feeling of support.

Before the veterans' departure, Mr. Bird said that the negotiations on the
missing had produced ''small results.'' As for the proposal that American and
other scientists come to Vietnam to study the effects of agent orange, the
Vietnamese replied that they would study the proposal.

Members of the group said they had received mixed signals in their discussions
of the plight of thousands of children fathered by Americans.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 22, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A dispatch from Ho Chi Minh City on June 7 about a visit there by Vietnam
veterans gave an incorrect date for a meeting the veterans had with John H.
Holdridge, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific. It took
place May 13.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of American veterans

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              243 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. IS FASHIONING NEW MILITARY STRATEGY FOR ASIA

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 6


The Reagan Administration has fashioned a new military strategy for Asia that
emphasizes a shift in planning and forces from Northeast Asia to Southeast Asia
and the Indian Ocean, according to Administration officials.

While no American forces are to be withdrawn from Japan or Korea now, the
officials say, plans are being made to send United States Navy, Marine, and Air
Force units based in Japan and Okinawa to the Persian Gulf area in the event of
hostilities there.

Moreover, United States forces held in reserve, such as an Army division in
Hawaii and a Marine division in California, could be deployed to the Persian
Gulf rather than to Northeast Asia as reinforcements.

To carry out that strategy, officials say, the Administration is insisting that
Japan and South Korea increase their responsibilities for security in Northeast
Asia. The Administration plans especially to turn the United States relationship
with Japan into an active military partnership.

Counter Vietnamese Policies

The Administration is looking to Southeast Asian nations to counter what is seen
as Vietnamese expansion and to support United States efforts to project military
power into the Indian Ocean and the oilproducing regions around the Persian
Gulf.

The Administration plans to strengthen military ties with China.  But Taiwan is
not included in the Administration's plans, leading Congressional conservatives
to express fears that the Administration may abandon United States commitments
there.

The officials say that the Administration is trying to weave a loose coalition
of Asian nations by dealing with each directly instead of trying to mold them
into a formal group.

The evolving strategy, the officials say, culminated in Secretary of Defense
Caspar W. Weinberger's trip to Japan, Korea and the Philippines in March where
he tried to persuade those nations to support it. Mr. Weinberger took a low
posture in public, but officials say he was forceful in private.

Worries Over Soviet Navy

About the same time, Mr. Weinberger approved the Defense Department's classified
strategic guidance for the next five years, in which the policy is outlined more
explicitly than it is in those portions made public. It places East Asia behind
Western Europe and Southwest Asia in priority for American military resources.

''Our foremost objective in East Asia and the Pacific is, in conjunction with
our regional friends and allies, to prevent the Soviet Union and Vietnam from
expanding their influence in the region,'' the defense guidance says.

Officials said the biggest danger in Asia is the Soviet naval threat to American
sea and air lines of communication that run from the West Coast through Hawaii,
Guam and the Philippines to Diego Garcia and the American fleet in the Indian
Ocean. Vietnam adds to that threat, they said, by providing naval, air and
communications bases to the Soviet Union.

To permit American forces to shift their attention southward, the defense
guidance says the United States must ''transform our relationship with Japan
into an active defense partnership in which Japan significantly increases its
defense capabilities.''

U.S. Commitment to Japan

The present relationship is based on a security treaty under which the United
States is committed to defend Japan while Japan has no obligations to the United
States other than providing bases. Until now, Administration officials have only
suggested that Japan acquire forces capable of defending Japan and the sea lanes
out to 1,000 miles. The defense guidance makes that an explicit objective.

The defense guidance continues the longstanding policy of assisting South Korea
in the event of hostilities and calls for improvements in intelligence, command,
firepower and antitank weapons for American forces there.

In Southeast Asia, the guidance says the United States must ''foster the
strength and cohesion of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations to counter
Vietnamese expansionism while developing further the capacity of member
countries to support the projection of United States power from the Western
Pacific to the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf.'' Members of that association are
the Philippines, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and Indonesia.

The strategic guidance says the United States must ''maintain the strategic
value of our relationship with the People's Republic of China by supporting
measured increases in its military capability.''

The plan says that ''encouragement and, if possible, logistic support will be
provided to China's military initiatives that would fix Soviet ground, air, and
naval forces in the U.S.S.R.'s Far Eastern territories.''

Lines of Communication

In a war against the Soviet Union with conventional arms, the guidance says,
deployments of American forces from East Asia ''will not be automatic and will
be decided on a case-by-case basis.''

In the Pacific, the document says, ''first priority will be to defend Alaska,
Hawaii, and connecting lines of communications with the continental United
States.''

Next, the guidance directs, ''naval and air forces will control lines of
communications to the Persian Gulf and control the East and South China Seas to
interdict Soviet resupply or reinforcement of naval forces deployed in the
area.''

Forces remaining in Japan and Korea, including the American infantry division in
South Korea, would assist those nations, ''giving particular emphasis to
protection of United States bases in the region.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              244 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

PRIEST REFLECTS ON DECADES OF AMERICAN UNIONISM

BYLINE: By WILLIAM SERRIN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 972 words

DATELINE: CASTLE SHANNON, Pa.


To talk with Msgr. Charles Owen Rice as he reflects on five decades of
involvement with American unions is to gain an understanding of the tumultuous
fights between Communists and anti-Communists, the repercussions of which are
still felt today.

The 73-year-old monsignor, now pastor of St. Anne's Roman Catholic Church in
this suburb of Pittsburgh, has almost been two people. In the 1940's and 1950's
he was one of the most ferocious anti-Communist fighters in the labor movement.
But by the 1960's his attitude had changed.

In the book ''The Great Fear,'' a study of anti-Communism during the Truman and
Eisenhower Administrations, David Caute says that Monsignor Rice and his
Association of Catholic Trade Unionists, supported by priests in their pulpits,
helped drive leftists from the radical United Electrical Workers and from the
old Congress of Industrial Organizations.

But by the late 1950's, the priest, who had grown up as somewhat of a radical,
had begun to doubt whether the labor movement was right in so vigorously
attacking leftists, and he had begun to feel uncomfortable cooperating with
strident anti-Communists. Then, in late 1960, Michael Harrington, the Socialist,
wrote an article in Labor History saying that Father Rice had been used as a
tool of the conservative labor establishment. This article, the monsignor said,
changed him.

Opposed the Vietnam War

He went on to condemn the 1965 American intervention in the Dominican Republic
and became a strident critic of the Vietnam War and a supporter of the civil
rights movement. Today he is a defender of the rank-and-file steelworkers and an
opponent of the steel industry and of the United Steelworkers of America, which
he sees as lacking imagination and aggressiveness.

It was his outspokenness in the early 1950's that brought him into disfavor with
the Roman Catholic Church. He thought Francis Cardinal Spellman had helped to
break a strike of cemetery workers in New York, and he wrote in his column in
The Pittsburgh Catholic that a scab was a scab, whether he wore ''cardinal red
or denim blue.''

Partly because of this, in October 1952 he was sent to a parish in Natrona, Pa.,
by Bishop John Dearden and in 1953 his column was canceled.

''I never lost my dignity and I never groveled,'' he said of that period,
sitting in the living quarters at St. Anne's. ''I was sort of in eclipse. I
still talked to unions, I supported strikes.''

He served in Natrona for several years, then was sent to Washington, Pa. In
1966, the new Bishop, John J. Wright, in effect rehabilitated Monsignor Rice. He
was brought back to Pittsburgh, his column was restored and he became an adviser
to the Bishop.

Respected in the Church

Today he is still outspoken, but he is a respected member of the church
establishment and an adviser to the present Bishop, Vincent M. Leonard.

While he wishes he and the church had not been so strongly anti-Communistic,
Monsignor Rice said, he understands why so many Catholics assisted moderate
labor leaders in attacking Communists in the labor movement in the 1940's and
50's.

''The Catholic Church takes its philosophers and philosophy very seriously,'' he
said, adding that Karl Marx and leftists who followed him had declared war on
the church, so it was natural for the church to fight back.

Communists, the monsignor said, had established control in the United Electrical
Workers, the United Automobile Workers, among government workers, among
longshoremen, in Hollywood and on the stage and in radio.

''They were unbelievable infighters,'' he said, adding that when they won a
union election they would run the union and when they lost they would make it
impossible for the winners to run the union. ''It took an extraordinary man to
beat them.''

'They Would Chew You Up'

Communists, he said, were beaten not merely by McCarthyism but by their own
actions.  ''Communists beat the heck out of people,'' he said. ''I don't mean
physically, but they would chew you up.'' This brought enmity from liberals and
others, he said. And, he added, the Communists' constant changes of position, as
dictated by the Soviet Union, made them appear erratic rather than committed
trade unionists.

Monsignor Rice said he regretted that, in the purge of Communists and suspected
Communists, the labor movement lost some of its most vigorous, creative members.
This loss still hurts, he said.

Today, he said, the American labor movement is confused and anemic.

'Spirit Has Gone'

''The spirit has gone out of them because of what's happening,'' he said,
referring to such things as the rise of Republicans in Washington and business
demands for union concessions on wages, benefits and work rules.

But he said the spirit had not ''totally gone'' and added, ''The workers would
fight if they knew how to fight and what to fight, if they knew what the enemy
was.''

He thinks the steelworkers' union, which faces vast unemployment and companies
trying to leave the industry, is ''in a weak situation.''

''They are confused and bewildered,'' he said. ''They don't know what tactics to
use or how they will save themselves and their people.''

Looking back on his career, Monsignor Rice said he had regrets, but held no
animosity toward the church.  ''Sending me up to Natrona, knocking me out of the
paper, that isn't much,'' he said. ''I am a tough cookie. I waited, waited.''
But, he said, ''I wish I'd been radicalized a lot sooner.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Msgr. Charles Owen Rice

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              245 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

GLOBAL CONFLICT: A 90-DEGREE SHIFT

SECTION: Section A; Page 18, Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 482 words


To the Editor:

A number of commentaries and news articles, like Bernard Gwertzman's of May 23,
have subjected the Falkland crisis to a thoughtful analysis of its larger
context, in an evident attempt to trace its puzzling origins and implications.v.
hat I have missed so far is a clearcut statement that this crisis, like others
in recent years - Iran, even Vietnam - has originated in a fundamentally new
direction of contemporary history, a direction for which neither our traditional
outlook nor, certainly, the general orientation of our foreign policy has been
prepared.

Putting it in somewhat simplistic terms, our world appears to be increasingly
dominated by the North-South conflict while our thinking has remained fixated on
the tensions between East and West. The rumblings of profound hemispheric
resentment against U.S. assistance to Britain should warn us that a sea change
of seismic proportions is in the making, which is in fact by no means confined
to Latin America.

From a historian's viewpoint, the origins of the change go way back to early
modern history: what we are witnessing is merely a dramatic acceleration of
forces a long time in coming. We seem to be caught in the backwash of an
anti-colonial revolt whose seeds were sown during the Age of Discoveries and
whose repercussions are likely to shape our future.

From the Latin American viewpoint, rooted in historical memories, Britain is
merely taking up the role of Spanish colonialism - of which Latin America was
the original target and by which it was victimized way into the modern age. No
rational argument about ''who started first'' in the Falklands is likely to
influence a response rooted in these age-old traumas.

What we in the West need to learn above all is that these feelings run deeper
than any contemporary ideological issue, mainly because they stem from a
longstanding dual historical heritage: the pent-up resentment against 500 years
of Western expansion across the globe and the third world's response to the
almost equally continuous impact of Western ideas -disseminated by missionaries,
schools and public media - with their inherent emphasis on the freedom of the
individual.

The global revolt against the West, often occurring in strange and bewildering
ways, was sparked by the Western concept of freedom.  Compared with these
fundamental fissures in our historical geology, the anti-Communist issue appears
of almost passing significance, ultimately an issue provoked by Communism
itself.  THOMAS E. GOLDSTEIN Professor of History, City College New York, May
28, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              246 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

DEFOLIANT LINKED TO CANCER RATE

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 443 words

DATELINE: BALTIMORE, June 6


A defoliant that the Army stopped using in the Vietnam War because of potential
ecological damage is suspected of causing an increase in cancer deaths in
western North Carolina, The Baltimore Sunday Sun has reported.

The Sun's article said scientists would study cancer records in two counties to
see whether an increase in cancer might have been caused by the herbicide, Agent
White. It is sold by the Dow Chemical Company under the name Tordon.

Agent White contains picloram, a chemical which has been used since 1965 in
Cherokee County, N.C., by timber companies, the Tennessee Valley Authority and
the United States Forest Service, the article said.

Until 1979, the death rate due to cancer in Cherokee County was well below the
national average.

Cancer Deaths Rising

In 1973, 26 of 181 deaths in the county were attributed to the disease. But by
1979 the county had the state's fourth highest cancer mortality rate, with 45 of
174 deaths attributed to cancer, according to state figures. In 1980, 46 of 171
deaths were the result of cancer.

''There's no doubt in my mind that picloram is a carcinogen,'' said Dr. Melvin
D. Reuber, the former director of the Experimental Pathology Laboratory of
Frederick Cancer Research Center, Frederick, Md.

''If you look at the tissue slides from the rodents fed picloram, any
pathologist could see it causes malignant tumors,'' he went on.  More than 5
million gallons of Agent White were sprayed in Vietnam between 1965 and 1971.
Use of the chemical was discontinued after Army scientists warned of great
potential for long-term, permanent ecological damage. They said picloram was ''a
potentially harmful herbicide once it enters surface and ground-water systems.''


A Target of Veterans' Concern

Veterans of the war in Vietnam who had been exposed to Agent Orange, Agent Blue
and Agent White have asserted that the defoliants have caused cancer, genetic
damage and other serious health problems.

But officials of Dow Chemical defended Tordon. ''We feel it's safe,'' said
Robert W. Charlton, a company spokesman.  ''Picloram is completely safe for
humans,'' said Wendell Mullison, a retired Dow scientist. ''Table salt is three
times more toxic.'' North Carolina's Department of Human Resources has assembled
a group of toxicologists and epidemiologists to study cancer deaths in Cherokee
and Macon counties. Scientists will also take soil and water samples to see
whether the chemical has seeped into well water, The Sun reported.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              247 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 7, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

RELATIONSHIPS;
YOUTH: A CHANGE IN VALUES

BYLINE: By Glenn Collins

SECTION: Section B; Page 11, Column 1; Style Desk

LENGTH: 898 words


IT has been a spontaneous occurrence at more than a few graduation c eremonies
this year: the spectacle of students rising in cap and g own to applaud their
parents in the audience. It is a sight that w ould have been inconceivable
little more than a decade ago, when thew ar between the generations erupted in
the cancellation of graduationc eremonies throughout the nation. What does this
new behavior say a bout the mores of a new generation of students? And is it the
emblemo f a sea change in the relationship between parents and children?

''We've been finding broad support for traditional American values among the
students we've been questioning,'' said James Shriver, director of the Gallup
Youth Survey in Princeton.

''Sixty percent are saying they get along very well with their parents, and 82
percent see their parents' disciplinary efforts as being 'about right,' '' said
Mr. Shriver. When asked who they would turn to if they had to make a very
serious decision, like whether to drop out of school, 77 percent say it would be
their parents, and 18 percent say their best friends.

The Gallup Youth Survey has polled a national sample of 1,000 youths 13 to 18
years old twice a year for the last five years. The organization does not have
comparative data for youths during the late 1960's, Mr. Shriver said, ''and the
five years we've been polling is a short time in which to document a major
change in values,'' he believes. ''But we can say right now,'' he said, ''that
the data easily supports the idea that kids are basically conformist, with a few
exceptions. They disagree with parents in areas like curfews or
minimum-drinking-age laws.''

Right now there are no significant social divisions between young and old
comparable to those in the era of the Vietnam war and the military draft, said
Dr. Myron Harris, a clinical psychologist who practices in New York and
Scarsdale. Dr. Harris has treated adolescents for three decades and is the
co-author of a 1981 survey of 160,000 youths, ''The Private Life of the American
Teen-Ager'' (Rawson, Wade $14.95.) As part of the study, 857 subjects 13 to 18
were polled and 150 queried in hour-and-a-half-long interviews.

''The most striking indication of the absence of such a great division,'' said
Dr. Harris, ''surfaced when we asked adolescents what their greatest fear was.
It wasn't fear of atomic war or crime - it was the fear of losing their parents.

''Even the issue now that could be termed the counterpart of the Vietnam war -
the nuclear-freeze movement -involves a threat that affects both parents and
children together.''

''I don't want to be a Pollyanna about it,'' said Dr. Harris.  ''Many kids are
suffering with serious family difficulties, and problems of alienation,
loneliness and isolation. The suicide rate among young people is rising, as is
the number of runaways. But the majority of them conform to classic American
values.''

To Dr. Harris, the change from the 1960's has been significant.  ''I remember a
time,'' he said, ''when I was treating patients in the 60's and there used to be
major struggles with parents involving long hair. And many of the kids I treated
in the 60's found adults' support for sending them off to the Vietnam War very
distressing.  They had a strong sense of patriotism, but they said that the
Government was taking advantage of their gullibility.''

To Dr. Donald A. Bloch, some of the closeness between parents and children now
is a product of the state of the economy and cutbacks in student loans. ''An
entire family has to struggle to put kids though college now, and the current
economic crisis brings out the strengths manifested in pulling together,'' said
Dr. Bloch, who is executive director of the Ackerman Institute for Family
Therapy in Manhattan.

''Although deprivation can bring out the best in families,'' he said, ''it's a
two-edged sword, because families can buckle under that kind of stress and be
irreparably harmed.''

The act of applauding parents at a graduation ceremony is ''an honoring of
connectedness,'' he said. ''It is saying, 'Thank you for all you've done for
me.' This is at the opposite pole from the trashing of families that went on in
the 60's, where, for some, there was no understanding, no sympathy, and the
belief that 'I invented the world and you aren't worth a thing.' ''

But separateness must be honored as much as connectedness, said Dr. Bloch.
''Loss of self and the legitimate concern about being stifled are keenly on the
minds of young people,'' he said. Differences in graduation ceremonies over the
decade are simply a manifestation of what Dr. Bloch calls ''the constant
paradox'' of the young-adult years.

''You can't establish yourself as an individual and autonomous adult if you
haven't found a way to be at peace with the patterns of your family of origin,''
he said. ''It's the individual and familial struggle that everyone has to go
through, and it can't be avoided. As I say to patients, these are the two pieces
of work you have to do: to learn how to leave your parents, and learn how to
join them.'' Glenn Collins

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              248 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 9, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM'S AMERASIANS DRIFT IN SEA OF INDIFFERENCE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1211 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


There was a time not long ago when some Vietnamese cities offered up children
who resembled the thousands of children of mixed American and Vietnamese
background who now haunt this city.

They were the offspring of French soldiers and civilians. Like the children
later fathered by Americans, they were fair-skinned or darkeyed, black or
blue-eyed. The French who lived here and fought the Vietminh until 1954 came
from France and from the colonial territories.

Now there are untold numbers of Vietnamese who want to leave this country
forever. A fraction of them, amounting to thousands and perhaps tens of
thousands, are descended from Frenchmen and Americans. The half-French are now
older and fewer, but they are still leaving with other refugees and are settling
in France. The half-Americans, more numerous, are not leaving.

The differences between the two countries' current policies toward the children
they left behind are even more closely followed here than in the United States,
where Congress and the Administration are considering several bills that might
make it easier for some Amerasians to settle in America.

2,000 Have Appealed to U.S.

One French-American difference is particularly striking to refugee workers and
consular officials here and in Bangkok: Although hundreds of thousands of
Vietnamese refugees have been accepted by the United States since the war ended
in 1975, it remains almost impossible for an Amerasian child, lacking Vietnamese
relatives already in America, to gain entry to the United States except
indirectly - as one of the boat people. American paternity of the sort that
confers citizenship is hard to establish. By contrast, French paternity is
rather easily established and gets a Vietnamese to France.

Since 1980, when word began to spread through southern Vietnam that there was a
new program that might accept Amerasians as American citizens, the mothers or
guardians of about 2,000 Amerasian children have appealed to the United States
for permission to immigrate.

Of these 2,000, fewer than 100 have been declared citizens, and 70 of those are
still in Vietnam. They have not received exit permits.  An additional 500 of the
2,000, according to Donald I. Colin, director of the United States Orderly
Departure Program in Bangkok, have proved their American paternity and are now
''documented Amerasians.'' But the children have not received from their fathers
the kinds of legitimation that the United States Government requires to confer
citizenship.

'We've Struck Out'

''We've struck out,'' said Mr. Colin in a recent interview. Few of his 2,000
cases on file, he believes, are likely ever to establish their citizenship
through paternity. He estimates, moreover, that there are twice as many
''unassimilated'' young Amerasians in Vietnam than his files indicate. Other
estimates of Amerasians by private American charities have placed the figure as
high as 20,000.

Last week an officer at the French Consulate here described the practical effect
of French laws and regulations regarding French-Asians born in Indochina between
1945 and 1954.

A claimant to French paternity is first asked for documentary proof, according
to the officer, Michel Hollard, who deals with such cases every day. As in the
case of Amerasians, such evidence can include marriage licenses, birth
certificates, official statements that the parents were living together,
letters, photographs and so forth.

If French paternity is thus proved, the claimant may acquire dual French
citizenship with or without a father's statement. And many such Frenchmen have
left Vietnam over the past two decades, although in some cases the Vietnamese
have refused to grant them exit permits.

Most Don't Speak French

Mr. Hollard said that certain applicants, however, offer little or no
documentary evidence of French paternity. ''In those cases,'' he said, ''we are
free to choose.''

The choice he said was based on the person's age, declaration of paternity,
''Eurasian'' appearance and any relevant personal memories or statements by
relatives. Knowing French also helped, Mr. Hollard said, though he added that
four out of five such claimants spoke no French and usually spoke English if
they knew any foreign language.  Whether their fathers were soldiers or
civilians made no difference, he added.

These undocumented French-Asians are allowed into France as stateless persons.
Like the Vietnamese who go to France as refugees, they can apply for French
citizenship. The French-Asians almost never end up with their fathers, Mr.
Hollard said.

Since 1975 France is said to have admitted about 2,000 such cases together with
their immediate families.

No Diplomatic Ties

Unlike France, the United States has no diplomatic ties with Vietnam. In
practice, the United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees, through its Orderly
Departure Program, helps process cases of interest to the United States.
American consular officers from Bangkok regularly visit the airport here to
interview applicants for American visas.

The difficulties in any case of admitting Amerasians to the United States, said
Mr. Colin and other refugee workers, have stemmed more from American policy and
law than from the lack of formal ties.

Apart from fathers who cannot be found - and apart from Federal and state laws
that make it difficult even for willing fathers to confer paternity on children
whose mothers they do not want to marry - current Administration policy is to
favor for admission refugees who already have relatives in America or who once
worked for the United States Government. Few Amerasians or their mothers are
said to fit these guidelines.

Bills in Congress

Moreover, say Western refugee workers and consular officials, most of the
Amerasian legislation now pending in Congress, including the bills of Senator
Jeremiah Denton and Representative Stewart B.  McKinney, would admit only
Amerasians fathered by active-duty servicemen. Reportedly, this would exclude
nearly half the 2,000 ''possible Americans'' now on file. Most of the bills also
would exclude the Amerasians' mothers and siblings.

There may be further obstacles from the Vietnamese Government, whose current
policy, as outlined recently to a group of visiting American veterans, appeared
to be that Amerasian children may be released only to their fathers.

This city provides no evidence that Amerasian families are any more eager to
leave Vietnam than many other Vietnamese - 18,851 of whom, according to the
United Nations High Commission on Refugees, arrived elsewhere in Southeast Asia,
mostly by boat but also by orderlydeparture plane, during the first four months
of this year.  Yet Westerners who have spoken at length with Vietnamese
officials about the Amerasians have related private Vietnamese comments to the
effect that these children may never fit in, and that it would be good if they
left.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of child of American father

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              249 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 9, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

TEXT OF REAGAN'S ADDRESS TO PARLIAMENT ON PROMOTING DEMOCRACY

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4640 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 8


Following is the text of President Reagan's speech today to the British
Parliament, as made public by White House officials:

The journey of which this visit forms a part is a long one. Already it has taken
me to two great cities of the West - Rome and Paris - and to the Economic Summit
at Versailles. There, once again, our sister democracies have proved that, even
in a time of severe economic strain, free peoples can work together freely and
voluntarily to address problems as serious as inflation, unemployment, trade and
economic development in a spirit of cooperation and solidarity.

Other milestones lie ahead later this week. In Germany, we and our NATO allies
will discuss measures for our joint defense and America's latest initiatives for
a more peaceful, secure world through arms reductions.

Each stop of this trip is important but, among them all, this moment occupies a
special place in my heart and the hearts of my countrymen - a moment of kinship
and homecoming in these hallowed halls.

Feeling at Home in Britain

Speaking for all Americans, I want to say how very much at home we feel in your
house. Every American would, because this is one of democracy's shrines. Here
the rights of free people and the processes of representation have been debated
and refined.

It has been said that an institution is the lengthening shadow of a man. This
institution is the lengthening shadow of all the men and women who have sat here
and all those who have voted to send representatives here.

This is my second visit to Great Britain as President of the United States. My
first opportunity to stand on British soil occurred almost a year and a half ago
when your Prime Minister graciously hosted a diplomatic dinner at the British
Embassy in Washington. Mrs. Thatcher said then that she hoped that I was not
distressed to find staring down at me from the grand staircase a portrait of His
Royal Majesty, King George III.

She suggested it was best to let bygones be bygones and - in view of our two
countries' remarkable friendship in succeeding years - she added that most
Englishmen today would agree with Thomas Jefferson that ''a little rebellion now
and then is a very good thing.''

Looking at Eastern Europe

From here I will go to Bonn, and then Berlin, where there stands a grim symbol
of power untamed. The Berlin Wall, that dreadful gash across the city, is in its
third decade. It is the fitting signature of the regime that built it.

And a few hundred kilometers behind the Berlin Wall there is another symbol. In
the center of Warsaw there is a sign that notes the distances to two capitals.
In one direction it points toward Moscow. In the other it points toward
Brussels, headquarters of Western Europe's tangible unity. The marker says that
the distances from Warsaw to Moscow and Warsaw to Brussels are equal. The sign
makes this point: Poland is not East or West. Poland is at the center of
European civilization. It has contributed mightily to that civilization. It is
doing so today by being magnificently unreconciled to oppression.

Poland's struggle to be Poland and to secure the basic rights we often take for
granted demonstrates why we dare not take those rights for granted. Gladstone,
defending the Reform Bill of 1866, declared: ''You cannot fight against the
future. Time is on our side.'' It was easier to believe in the inevitable march
of democracy in Gladstone's day - in that high noon of Victorian optimism.

We are approaching the end of a bloody century plagued by a terrible political
invention - totalitarianism. Optimism comes less easily today, not because
democracy is less vigorous but because democracy's enemies have refined their
instruments of repression.  Yet optimism is in order because, day by day,
democracy is proving itself to be a not-at-all fragile flower.

From Stettin on the Baltic to Varna on the Black Sea, the regimes planted by
totalitarianism have had more than 30 years to establish their legitimacy. But
none - not one regime -has yet been able to risk free elections. Regimes planted
by bayonets do not take root.

The strength of the Solidarity movement in Poland demonstrates the truth told in
an underground joke in the Soviet Union. It is that the Soviet Union would
remain a one-party nation even if an opposition party were permitted - because
everyone would join that party.

The Threats to the World

America's time as a player on the stage of world history has been brief. I think
understanding this fact has always made you patient with your younger cousins.
Well, not always patient. I do recall that on one occasion Sir Winston Churchill
said in exasperation about one of our most distinguished diplomats, ''He is the
only case I know of a bull who carries his china shop with him.''

Witty as Sir Winston was, he also had that special attribute of great statesmen:
the gift of vision, the willingness to see the future based on the experience of
the past.

It is this sense of history, this understanding of the past, that I want to talk
with you about today, for it is in remembering what we share of the past that
our two nations can make common cause for the future.

We have not inherited an easy world. If developments like the Industrial
Revolution, which began here in England, and the gifts of science and technology
have made life much easier for us, they have also made it more dangerous. There
are threats now to our freedom, indeed, to our very existence, that other
generations could never even have imagined.

Threat of Global War

There is, first, the threat of global war. No President, no Congress, no Prime
Minister, no Parliament, can spend a day entirely free of this threat. And I
don't have to tell you that in today's world, the existence of nuclear weapons
could mean, if not the extinction of mankind, then surely the end of
civilization as we know it.

That is why negotiations on intermediate range nuclear forces now under way in
Europe and the Start talks - Strategic Arms Reduction Talks - which will begin
later this month, are not just critical to American or Western policy; they are
critical to mankind. Our commitment to early success in these negotiations is
firm and unshakable and our purpose is clear: reducing the risk of war by
reducing the means of waging war on both sides.

At the same time, there is a threat posed to human freedom by the enormous power
of the modern state. History teaches the danger of government that overreaches:
political control takes precedence over free economic growth; secret police,
mindless bureaucracy - all combining to stifle individual excellence and
personal freedom.

Inhumanities of Our Time

Now I am aware that among us here and throughout Europe there is legitimate
disagreement over the extent to which the public sector should play a role in a
nation's economy and life. But on one point all of us are united: our abhorrence
of dictatorship in all its forms but most particularly totalitarianism and the
terrible inhumanities it has caused in our time: the great purge, Auschwitz and
Dachau, the Gulag and Cambodia.

Historians looking back at our time will note the consistent restraint and
peaceful intentions of the West. They will note that it was the democracies who
refused to use the threat of their nuclear monopoly in the 40's and early 50's
for territorial or imperial gain. Had that nuclear monopoly been in the hands of
the Communist world, the map of Europe, indeed, the world, would look very
different today. And certainly they will note it was not the democracies that
invaded Afghanistan or suppressed Polish Solidarity or used chemical and toxin
warfare in Afghanistan or Southeast Asia.

If history teaches anything, it teaches: self-delusion in the face of unpleasant
facts is folly. We see around us today the marks of our terrible dilemma -
predictions of doomsday, antinuclear demonstrations, an arms race in which the
West must for its own protection be an unwilling participant. At the same time,
we see totalitarian forces in the world who seek subversion and conflict around
the globe to further their barbarous assault on the human spirit.

What Should the West Do?

What, then, is our course? Must civilization perish - in a hail of fiery atoms?
Must freedom wither - in a quiet, deadening accommodation with totalitarian
evil? Sir Winston Churchill refused to accept the inevitability of war or even
that it was imminent. He said: ''I do not believe that Soviet Russia desires
war. What they desire is the fruits of war and the indefinite expansion of their
power and doctrines. But what we have to consider here today while time remains,
is the permanent prevention of war and the establishment of conditions of
freedom and democracy as rapidly as possible in all countries.''

This is precisely our mission today: to preserve freedom as well as peace. It
may not be easy to see, but I believe we live now at a turning point.

In an ironic sense, Karl Marx was right. We are witnessing today a great
revolutionary crisis - a crisis where the demands of the economic order are
colliding directly with those of the political order. But the crisis is
happening not in the free, non-Marxist West, but in the home of
Marxism-Leninism, the Soviet Union.

Soviet Failings

It is the Soviet Union that runs against the tide of history by denying freedom
and human dignity to its citizens. It also is in deep economic difficulty. The
rate of growth in the Soviet gross national product has been steadily declining
since the 50's and is less than half of what it was then. The dimensions of this
failure are astounding; a country which employs one-fifth of its population in
agriculture is unable to feed its own people.

Were it not for the tiny private sector tolerated in Soviet agriculture, the
country might be on the brink of famine. These private plots occupy a bare 3
percent of the arable land but account for nearly one-quarter of Soviet farm
output and nearly one-third of meat products and vegetables.

Overcentralized, with little or no incentives, year after year the Soviet system
pours its best resource into the making of instruments of destruction. The
constant shrinkage of economic growth combined with the growth of military
production is putting a heavy strain on the Soviet people.

The Result of Comparisons

What we see here is a political structure that no longer corresponds to its
economic base, a society where productive forces are hampered by political ones.

The decay of the Soviet experiment should come as no surprise to us. Wherever
the comparisons have been made between free and closed societies - West Germany
and East Germany, Austria and Czechoslovakia, Malaysia and Vietnam - it is the
democratic countries that are prosperous and responsive to the needs of their
people.

And one of the simple but overwhelming facts of our time is this: of all the
millions of refugees we have seen in the modern world, their flight is always
away from, not toward, the Communist world.  Today on the NATO line, our
military forces face east to prevent a possible invasion. On the other side of
the line the Soviet forces also face east - to prevent their people from
leaving.

Resisting Totalitarianism

The hard evidence of totalitarian rule has caused in mankind an uprising of the
intellect and will. Whether it is the growth of the new schools of economics in
America or England or the appearnce of the so-called new philosophers in France,
there is one unifying thread running through the intellectual work of these
groups: rejection of the arbitrary power of the state, the refusal to
subordinate the rights of the individual to the superstate, the realization that
collectivism stifles all the best human impulses.

Since the Exodus from Egypt, historians have written of those who sacrificed and
struggled for freedom: the stand at Thermopylae, the revolt of Spartacus, the
storming of the Bastille, the Warsaw uprising in World War II.

More recently we have seen evidence of this same human impulse in one of the
developing nations in Central America. For months and months the world news
media covered the fighting in El Salvador. Day after day, we were treated to
stories and film slanted toward the brave freedom fighters battling oppressive
Government forces in behalf of the silent, suffering people of that tortured
country.

PICK UP FIRST ADD

Revelation of an Election

Then one day those silent suffering people were offered a chance to vote to
choose the kind of Government they wanted. Suddenly the freedom fighters in the
hills were exposed for what they really are: Cuban-backed guerrillas who want
power for themselves and their backers, not democracy for the people.

They threatened death to anyone who voted and destroyed hundreds of buses and
trucks to keep people from getting to the polling places.  But on election day,
the people of El Salvador, an unprecedented 1.4 million of them, braved ambush
and gunfire, trudging miles to vote for freedom.

They stood for hours in the hot sun waiting for their turn to vote. Members of
our Congress who went there as observers told me of a woman wounded by rifle
fire who refused to leave the line to have her wound treated until after she had
voted.

A grandmother, who had been told by the guerrillas she would be killed when she
returned from the polls, told the guerrillas, ''You can kill me, kill my family,
kill my neighbors, but you can't kill us all.'' The real freedom fighters of El
Salvador turned out to be the people of that country, the young, the old and the
in-between.  Strange, but there has been little if any news coverage of that war
since the election.

Other Fights Today

Perhaps they'll say it's because there are newer struggles now. On distant
islands in the South Atlantic, young men are fighting for Britain. And, yes,
voices have been raised protesting their sacrifice for lumps of rock and earth
so far away. But those young men aren't fighting for mere real estate.

They fight for a cause, for the belief that armed aggression must not be allowed
to succeed, and that people must participate in the decisions of government
under the rule of law. If there had been firmer support for that principle some
45 years ago, perhaps our generation wouldn't have suffered the bloodletting of
World War II.

In the Middle East, the guns sound once more, this time in Lebanon, a country
that for too long has had to endure the tragedy of civil war, terrorism and
foreign intervention and occupation. The fighting in Lebanon on the part of all
parties must stop and Israel must bring its forces home. But this is not enough.
We must all work to stamp out the scourge of terrorism that in the Middle East
makes war an ever-present threat.

Some Signs of Hope

But beyond the trouble spots lies a deeper, more positive pattern.  Around the
world today, the democratic revolution is gathering new strength. In India, a
critical test has been passed with the peaceful change of governing political
parties. In Africa, Nigeria is moving in remarkable and unmistakable ways to
build and strengthen its democratic institutions. In the Caribbean and Central
America, 16 of 24 countries have freely elected governments. And in the United
Nations, 8 of 10 developing nations which have joined the body in the past five
years are democracies.

In the Communist world as well, man's instinctive desire for freedom and
self-determination surfaces again and again. To be sure, there are grim
reminders of how brutally the police state attempts to snuff out this quest for
self-rule: 1953 in East Germany, 1956 in Hungary, 1968 in Czechoslovakia, 1981
in Poland.

But the struggle continues in Poland, and we know there are even those who
strive and suffer for freedom within the confines of the Soviet Union itself.
How we conduct ourselves here in the Western democracies will determine whether
this trend continues.

No Fragile Flower

No, democracy is not a fragile flower; still it needs cultivating.  If the rest
of this century is to witness the gradual growth of freedom and democratic
ideals, we must take actions to assist the campaign for democracy.

Some argue that we should encourage democratic change in right-wing
dictatorships, but not in Communist regimes. To accept this preposterous notion
- some well-meaning people have - is to invite the argument that, once countries
achieve a nuclear capability, they should be allowed an undisturbed reign of
terror over their own citizens. We reject this course.

As for the Soviet view, Chairman Brezhnev repeatedly has stressed that the
competition of ideas and systems must continue and that this is entirely
consistent with relaxation of tensions and peace. We ask only that these systems
begin by living up to their own constitutions, abiding by their own laws and
complying with the international obligations they have undertaken. We ask only
for a process, a direction, a basic code of decency - not for instant
transformation.
Drive to Promote Democracy

We cannot ignore the fact that even without our encouragement, there have been
and will continue to be repeated explosions against repression in dictatorships.
The Soviet Union itself is not immune to this reality. Any system is inherently
unstable that has no peaceful means to legitimize its leaders. In such cases,
the very repressiveness of the state ultimately drives people to resist it - if
necessary, by force.

While we must be cautious about forcing the pace of change, we must not hesitate
to clear our ultimate objectives and to take concrete actions to move towards
them. We must be staunch in our conviction that freedom is not the sole
prerogative of a lucky few but the inalienable and universal right of all human
beings. So states the United Nations' Universal Declaration of Human Rights
-which, among other things, guarantees free elections.

The objective I propose is quite simple to state: To foster the infrastructure
of democracy - the system of a free press, unions, political parties,
universities - which allows a people to choose their own way, to develop their
own culture, to reconcile their own differences through peaceful means.

Who Will Welcome It?

This is not cultural imperialism; it is providing the means for genuine
self-determination and protection for diversity. Democracy already flourishes in
countries with very different cultures and historical experiences. It would be
cultural condescension, or worse, to say that any people prefer dictatorship to
democracy.

Who would voluntarily choose not to have the right to vote; decide to purchase
government propaganda handouts instead of independent newspapers; prefer
government- to worker-controlled unions; opt for land to be owned by the state
instead of those who till it; want government repression of religious liberty, a
single political party instead of a free choice, a rigid cultural orthodoxy
instead of democratic tolerance and diversity?

Since 1917, the Soviet Union has given covert political training and assistance
to Marxist-Leninists in many countries. Of course, it also has promoted the use
of violence and subversion by these same forces.

A Bipartisan Effort

Over the past several decades, West European and other Social Democrats,
Christian Democrats and Liberals have offered open assistance to fraternal
political and social institutions, to bring about peaceful and democratic
progress. Appropriately for a vigorous new democracy, the Federal Republic of
Germany's political foundations have become a major force in this effort.

We in America now intend to take additional steps, as many of our allies have
already done, toward realizing this same goal. The chairmen and other leaders of
the National Republican and Democratic Party organizations are initiating a
study with the bipartisan American Political Foundation to determine how the
United States can best contribute - as a nation - to the global campaign for
democracy now gathering force.

They will have the cooperation of Congressional leaders of both parties, along
with representatives of business, labor and other major institutions in our
society. I look forward to receiving their recommendations and to working with
these institutions and the Congress in the common task of strengthening
democracy throughout the world.

It is time that we committed ourselves as a nation - in both the public and
private sectors - to assisting democratic development.

Enlisting Others' Help

We plan to consult with leaders of other nations as well. There is a proposal
before the Council of Europe to invite parliamentarians from democratic
countries to a meeting next year in Strasbourg. That prestigious gathering could
consider ways to help democratic political movements.

This November, in Washington, there will take place an international meeting on
free elections, and next spring there will be a conference of world authorities
on constitutionalism and selfgovernment hosted by the Chief Justice of the
United States.

Authorities from a number of developing and developed countries - judges,
philosophers and politicians with practical experience - have agreed to explore
how to turn principle into practice and further the rule of law.

At the same time, we invite the Soviet Union to consider with us how the
competition of ideas and values -which it is committed to support -can be
conducted on a peaceful and reciprocal basis. For example, I am prepared to
offer President Brezhnev an opportunity to speak to the American people on our
television if he will allow me the same opportunity with the Soviet people. We
also suggest that panels of our newsmen periodically appear on each other's
television to discuss major events.

The Possible Soviet Reaction

I do not wish to sound overly optimistic, yet the Soviet Union is not immune
from the reality of what is going on in the world. It has happened in the past:
a small ruling elite either mistakenly attempts to ease domestic unrest through
greater repression and foreign adventure or it chooses a wiser course - it
begins to allow its people a voice in their own destiny.

Even if this latter process is not realized soon, I believe the renewed strength
of the democratic movement, complemented by a global campaign for freedom, will
strengthen the prospects for arms control and a world at peace.

I have discussed on other occasions, including my address on May 9, the elements
of Western policies toward the Soviet Union to safeguard our interests and
protect the peace. What I am describing now is a plan and a hope for the long
term - the march of freedom and democracy which will leave Marxism-Leninism on
the ash heap of history as it has left other tyrannies which stifle the freedom
and muzzle the self-expression of the people.

That is why we must continue our efforts to strengthen NATO even as we move
forward with our zero-option initiative in the negotiations on intermediate
range forces and our proposal for a one-third reduction in strategic ballistic
missile warheads.

Our military strength is a prerequisite to peace, but let it be clear we
maintain this strength in the hope it will never be used.  For the ultimate
determinant in the struggle now going on for the world will not be bombs and
rockets but a test of wills and ideas -a trial of spiritual resolve: the values
we hold, the beliefs we cherish, the ideals to which we are dedicated.
Reasons to Hope for Success

The British people know that, given strong leadership, time and a little bit of
hope, the forces of good ultimately rally and triumph over evil. Here among you
is the cradle of self-government, the mother of parliaments. Here is the
enduring greatness of the British contribution to mankind, the great civilized
ideas: individual liberty, representative government and the rule of law under
God.

I have often wondered about the shyness of some of us in the West about standing
for these ideals that have done so much to ease the plight of man and the
hardships of our imperfect world. This reluctance to use those vast resources at
our command reminds me of the elderly lady whose home was bombed in the blitz;
as the rescuers moved about they found a bottle of brandy she had stored behind
the staircase, which was all that was left standing. Since she was barely
conscious, one of the workers pulled the cork to give her a taste of it. She
came around immediately and said: ''Here now, put it back.  That's only for
emergencies.''

Well, the emergency is upon us.  Let us be shy no longer - let us go to our
strength. Let us offer hope. Let us tell the world that a new age is not only
possible but probable.

During the dark days of the Second World War, when this island was incandescent
with courage, Winston Churchill exclaimed about Britain's adversaries, ''What
kind of a people do they think we are?''

Message for the Future

Britain's adversaries found out what extraordinary people the British are. But
all the democracies paid a terrible price for allowing the dictators to
underestimate us. We dare not make that mistake again. So let us ask ourselves:
What kind of people do we think we are? And let us answer: free people, worthy
of freedom and determined not only to remain so but to help others gain their
freedom as well.

Sir Winston led his people to great victory in war and then lost an election
just as the fruits of victory were about to be enjoyed.  But he left office
honorably - and, as it turned out, temporarily - knowing that the liberty of his
people was more important than the fate of any single leader.

History recalls his greatness in ways no dictator will ever know.  And he left
us a message of hope for the future, as timely now as when he first uttered it,
as opposition leader in the Commons nearly 27 years ago. ''When we look back on
all the perils through which we have passed and at the mighty foes we have laid
low and all the dark and deadly designs we have frustrated, why should we fear
for our future? We have,'' said Sir Winston, ''come safely through the worst.''

The task I have set forth will long outlive our own generation.  But together,
we, too, have come through the worst. Let us now begin a major effort to secure
the best - a crusade for freedom that will engage the faith and fortitude of the
next generation. For the sake of peace and justice, let us move toward a world
in which all people are at last free to determine their own destiny.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan addressing Parliament

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              250 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 9, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW JOHNSON LIBRARY EXHIBIT FOCUSES ON IMAGES OF VIETNAM

BYLINE: By WAYNE KING, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 681 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex.


In the center of the new exhibit at the Lyndon Baines Johnson Library, its first
to cover Vietnam in depth, there is a yellow corduroy armchair that presumably
evokes the habitat of the typical American television viewer.

Two cigarette butts are crushed out in an ashtray on a typical table beside the
chair, under a typical lamp, alongside a typical, for Texas, can of Jax beer. A
copy of Newsweek magazine, dated Aug.  1, 1968, lies on the table, the cover an
anguished American fighting man, its caption ''Men at War.''

On the wall in front of the chair are a series of stark images evoking the trial
by fire that was Vietnam.

Immolation and Gunfire

The images are at once startling and familiar: a Buddhist monk ablaze in a pool
of gasoline, wounded men stacked on top of each other awaiting evacuation, the
chief of the South Vietnamese national police firing a pistol shot into the
temple of a slight, terrified Vietcong soldier on a Saigon street corner.

''War has always been beastly,'' says a caption, ''but the Vietnam War was the
first war exposed to television cameras, and seen in practically every home,
often in living color.'' It goes on, ''Not surprisingly, this close-up view of
devastation and suffering, repeated daily, strengthened the growing desire for
peace.''

The viewpoint that the war was as much one of words and images as one of bombs
and bullets is central to the exhibit, called ''L.B.J.  and International
Affairs.''

In a section on the January 1968 Tet offensive, the theme is struck again that
the war of words decided the fate of South Vietnam.  ''While the President of
the United States was reading reports from the war front which made it clear
that the enemy had suffered a serious military loss, the American people were
reading another kind of report altogether. Newspaper and TV stories gave the
general impression that the loss was ours and that defeat was imminent.''

Harry Middleton, director of the library, commented on the exhibit before its
opening in the renovated library over the weekend. ''For the first time,'' he
said, ''in an expanded exhibit area, we will have an exhibit on Vietnam showing
the papers and documents as well as the anguish and agony which prompted the
decision.''

Change of Focus Discussed

Gary Yarlington, who as curator is in charge of the expanded exhibit, said that
the subject of Vietnam was indeed sensitive. The new exhibit concludes with the
text of Mr. Johnson's stunning announcement in March 1968: ''I shall not seek -
and I will not accept - the nomination of my party for another term as your
President.''

''We did have an exhibit previously, but it scarcely touched the subject,'' said
Mr. Yarlington. ''There were photos of the documents and it didn't go into
depth.''

Why did it take a decade?  ''The answer is that none of us knew how to do an
exhibit,'' Mr.  Yarlington said. ''It was touchy, very difficult. The way it has
come down is to portray it from the point of view of the President.''

Vietnam shares equal billing in the exhibit with the Six-Day War in the Middle
East and the Glassboro, N.J., summit meeting with the Soviet leader Aleksei N.
Kosygin.

Memorandum from Bundy

The Vietnam segment includes statements from Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy
attesting to the importance of defending South Vietnam against Communism, along
with the 1955 Seato defense treaty, the Gulf of Tonkin documents and the
now-declassified 1965 memorandum from the Presidential adviser McGeorge Bundy
warning that the Vietnam situation was deteriorating and urging the President to
''use our military power in the Far East and force a change of Communist
policy.''

The message continued, ''The worst course of action is to continue in this
essentially passive role which can only lead to eventual defeat and an
invitation to get out in humiliating circumstances.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              251 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 9, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

KROL ASSESSES POSITION IN DISARMAMENT MOVEMENT

BYLINE: By WILLIAM ROBBINS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 24, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 1006 words

DATELINE: PHILADELPHIA, June 7


To some leaders, he seems to symbolize broad support for the nuclear disarmament
movement: John Cardinal Krol, a prince of the Roman Catholic Church and an
associate of Presidents, long regarded here as a conservative and autocratic
prelate.

Cardinal Krol, tall and erect, with an athletic physique that belied his white
hair and his 71 years, was an imposing presence this spring when he spoke at
Philadelphia's Interfaith Witness to Stop the Nuclear Arms Race. Addressing
15,000 demonstrators, he called on world governments ''to dismantle existing
nuclear weapons.''

Some leaders of the antinuclear movement here described the Cardinal's recent
role as evidence of a momentum that they hope will bring together conservatives
and liberals, Catholics, Protestants and Jews.

Reputation Added Impact

The Cardinal's reputation as a conservative in the church gave his participation
in the rally here all the more impact, said one local leader, William Grassie.
Mr. Grassie, a Philadelphia Quaker who is a director of the Pennsylvania
Campaign for a Nuclear Weapons Freeze, said, ''I think that was evidence of more
of a commitment.''

But to Cardinal Krol, interviewed in a large but austerely furnished 12th-floor
office with a broad view of the Center City and the row houses beyond, it did
not seem momentous.

Carefully, with many pauses, he enunciated his views on disarmament. And as they
emerged, what was striking was that he could find himself involved in a movement
that also engages such partisans as Raymond G. Hunthausen, Archbishop of
Seattle, who has said he would withhold half of his income tax as a protest
against production of nuclear arms.

Cardinal Krol said his views were accurately reflected in his address at the
rally, which contained this call for a guarded approach in dealing with the
Soviet Union: ''We advocate disarmament - not unilateral but reciprocal or
collective disarmament, proceeding at an equal pace, according to agreement and
backed up by authentic and workable safeguards.''

Does Not Maintain Contact

The Cardinal said that he deliberately made no attempt to maintain relations
with other advocates of disarmament, although he was ''pleased that you have
this variety of people raising the level of interest and concern.''

''I agree with some of them and many of them I do not agree with,'' he said.  He
said that his own views had not changed basically since 1969, when he addressed
the Veterans of Foreign Wars, urging support for disarmament. Over the years, he
noted, he has expressed them on many occasions. He cited testimony in favor of
the second treaty on limiting strategic arms that he gave in behalf of the
National Conference of Catholic Bishops at a Senate hearing in 1979.

''I talk about nuclear disarmament,'' he said, ''but you see the principle is
that massive destruction, whether by nuclear or conventional arms, is a crime
against God and man. In some of the bombing of the cities in the last war, large
elements of the population were destroyed. That exceeds the legitimate right of
self-defense, and I am for self-defense.''

Though the Cardinal sees his present position as only consistent with his past
position, others contrast his presence at the rally of March 27 with his silence
years ago on the war in Vietnam.

'A Lot of Quiet Good Things'

One who disagrees with observers who describe the Cardinal as ''distant'' and
''authoritarian'' is Msgr. John Foley, a frequent companion who is editor of the
archdiocesan newspaper, The Catholic Standard and Times. Like other closer
associates, he finds the Cardinal ''warm and approachable,'' a leader who does
''a lot of quiet good things.''

Monsignor Foley is familiar with the Cardinal's informal respites, when he likes
to play the piano, to harmonize with a good baritone voice on Polish, American
and Irish songs, and to play golf, at which he is said to be very skillful.

At the church-owned mansion on City Line Avenue where he lives with two other
priests, the Cardinal, others say, likes an occasional cigar and a drink of good
bourbon.

In the interview, the Cardinal spoke sparingly with dignity, but he smiled
easily and on occasion injected a touch of restrained humor.  His mother, he
said, did not consider him ''the right material'' for a priest. What evidence
did he give her? he was asked. ''Ample,'' he replied.

Two Sources of Reputation

The Cardinal's reputation as a con-servative in the church rests largely on what
Msgr. Salvatore Adamo, former editor of The Catholic Star Herald in Camden,
N.@J., and others describe as a reluctance to share power and, among church
members, upon his refusal to allow his archdiocese to permit Catholics to
satisfy their Sunday obligations by attending mass on Saturday night.

''He expects obedience and compliance,'' said Monsignor Adamo. ''He may consult,
but he is not bound by the consultation, but nothing in the church structure
requires that.''

And a local member of a national reform organization called the Association for
the Rights of Catholics in the Church, asking anonymity, said: ''But then this
is a very conservative archdiocese.  'Ferment' is not a word you would use about
what is going on here.''

Even among critics, who acknowledge that their numbers were relatively small,
the Cardinal gets high marks for a well-managed archdiocese and well-run schools
and for expansion of the local mechanisms for charity and human relations.

The Cardinal offers no argument to the description of him as a conservative. ''I
view myself as doctrinally absolutely conservative,'' he said. ''On method -
there is no method that cannot be improved or changed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of John Cardinal Krol

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              252 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

IN VIETNAM, AN EX-AIDE SPEAKS OUT

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 805 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


Dr. Quong Quynh Hoa, who says she is Vietnam's only Communist-era Cabinet
Minister to resign, runs a research center at Ho Chi Minh City's Pediatric
Hospital 2.

She says Vietnam is worse off now medically and nutritionally than it was two
years ago, when rice harvests were poorer than last year's.

The reasons for such difficulties, she says, have at least as much to do with
mismanagement, rigid doctrine, disastrous planning and Communist hostility to
bourgeois technicians, administrators, farmers and others as they have to do
with decades of destructive war.

Politically and economically, she said in an interview earlier this month,
Vietnam is ''feudal'' - ''a gerontocracy'' and ''a failure.'' Dr. Hoa offers
such outspoken criticism from a better vantage point than most Vietnamese. A
high-ranking Communist Party member from 1959 to 1979, she was Health Minister
in South Vietnam's Provisional Revolutionary Government from 1969 to 1976.

Taking some visitors on a brief tour of her research center before sitting down
and talking of politics, Dr. Hoa showed them a 3-yearold girl who weighed only
nine and a half pounds. The child slowly scratched her arms and back. Dr. Hoa
said the girl understood what was said to her.

Like 8 percent of all the children in Pediatric Hospital 2, Dr. Hoa said, the
girl is suffering from malnutrition.  Like 45 percent of the hospital's
patients, Dr. Hoa said, the child is the offspring of party members. Less than 2
percent of the population are in the party.

Children With Malnutrition

Dr. Hoa said 28 percent of the 27,000 young children who live in day-care
centers in Ho Chi Minh City suffered from malnutrition.  Malnutrition and the
abandonment of children have become increasing problems over the last year and a
half, she added. Some of the worst cases are returnees from the Government's New
Economic Zone, where many city dwellers were sent to become farmers, according
to Dr. Hoa.

In her office, Dr. Hoa turned to autobiography. She said her father had been ''a
teacher of revolutionaries.'' She studied medicine at the University of Paris,
she said. She came home to Saigon in 1954 with a belief in ''liberty, justice
and equality.''

She said her ''Western attitudes'' had provoked much criticism when she joined
the Vietnamese Communists in 1959 and when she joined the guerrillas in the
jungle in 1968. But they accepted her as a revolutionary, she said. She added,
however, that many of her friends were narrow-minded and did not understand her.

After the war, a Communist official told her that Vietnam had become one of the
world's great military powers. Dr. Hoa recalled that she had asked what good
that prowess would do.

''The hope is that the Vietnamese are a very practical people, and that moving
from failure to failure they will finally learn the lesson,'' she said.

Dr. Hoa was asked where she felt Vietnam had failed - in industry, housing, the
economy, security or some other area. ''Everything,'' she replied.

North and South Still Divided

The north, she said, has not merged successfully with the south.  As an example,
she cited the officials of the old American-backed regime in the south who had
wanted to stay on and take part in the new order. She said they had been
rejected by the northerners for political reasons.

Originally, she said, the south was viewed as part of an ''unliberated''
Vietnam. Ultimately, she said, the south was forced by the north to see itself
as different.

How long, she was asked, would it take the north to absorb the south? ''It will
take more than two generations, and at the present rate it will take much more
than two generations,'' she said.

Dr. Hoa, a southerner, said Communist officials from the north still resent the
advancement of educated southerners. She said the Communist debate over the
possible advancement of former enemies was still in progress. Northerners, on
the other hand, demand privileges regardless of their competence, she added.

Dr. Hoa said she had been allowed the unusual liberty to speak her mind to
Western journalists because she was a former Minister. In addition, she said,
the Communist Party leadership is beginning to see things her way.

She said the official who once glorified the military and called her skepticism
subversive recently acknowledged she was right.  In addition, she said, recent
Communist criticism of bureaucrats, rigid doctrine and party incompetents - such
as those leveled by the Fifth Party Congress last March - have been harsher than
what she was saying in 1976.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              253 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 10, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

NEWSWEEK GETS FIFTH NEW EDITOR IN LAST 10 YEARS

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section B; Page 5, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 774 words


Newsweek, the nation's second largest weekly news magazine, got a new editor
yesterday, its fifth in the last 10 years.  The new editor is William D. Broyles
Jr., a 37-year-old writer and educator who helped to lift Texas Monthly magazine
into a recognized journalistic force in Texas and who has been trying to do the
same thing for California magazine, based in Los Angeles.

He replaces Lester Bernstein, 61, who is credited with enhancing Newsweek's
editorial vigor during the last three years since his appointment to the post.

'A Whole New Dimension'

The announcement of the change was made yesterday by Katharine Graham, chairman
of the board of The Washington Post Company, Newsweek's owner. She said Mr.
Broyles was ''an exciting young editor'' whom she expected to add ''a whole new
dimension'' to what she said was already a talented staff.

Mrs. Graham said the change was not dictated by any concern over the financial
condition of Newsweek, a perennial second in circulation and advertising
revenues to Time magazine.

She said that when she chose Mr. Bernstein to direct Newsweek's 160-member
reporting and editing staff in 1979, ''I viewed it as a transitional
appointment. Three years is a pretty good time for a transition.''

Mr. Bernstein was then at the RCA Corporation, which he had joined in 1972 after
nine years at Newsweek that had led to the managing editorship, the second most
important job, but that fell short of the top post.

A Measure of Success

''We are all extremely grateful to Lester Bernstein for returning to Newsweek to
build a sound foundation for future growth,'' Mrs.  Graham said yesterday. ''The
record number of awards received by the magazine last year, and already equaled
this year, is only one measure of his outstanding success.''

Among Newsweek's prizes have been two of the 11 National Magazine Awards of the
American Society of Magazine Editors, presented in April. Newsweek was honored
for general excellence and for a singletopic issue tracing and explaining the
lasting impact that the Vietnam War had on the United States.

Mr. Bernstein, who noted that he had not decided what he would do after Mr.
Broyles takes over in September, said in a prepared statement, ''In the three
years since Kay Graham gave me the unexpected opportunity to edit Newsweek, I
believe I fulfilled the transitional role she envisaged.''

Mr. Broyles, a native of Houston, earned his bachelor's degree from Rice
University in history and a master's degree from Oxford University in politics,
philosophy and economics. After serving in Vietnam as a Marine officer, he
taught at the United States Naval Academy and then became assistant
superintendent of the Houston public schools.

In 1972, Mike Levy asked him to help in establishing a monthly magazine to cover
Texas. The result, Texas Monthly, was a pictorially arresting blend of reporting
on politics and serious regional topics with gossip, restaurant reviews and
entertainment listings. With a monthly circulation of 278,000 last year, it had
advertising revenues of more than $12 million.

'Many Ideas and Plans'

In 1980, Mr. Levy bought what was then called New West magazine, and, with Mr.
Broyles as editor in chief, began applying the Texas formula. In a brief
telephone interview from his office in Los Angeles, Mr. Broyles said he had ''a
great many ideas and plans for Newsweek,'' but added that he would discuss them
with the staff before talking about them publicly.

Newsweek's average circulation for the last six months of 1981 was 2.96 million,
compared to 4.34 million for Time and 2.06 million for the third-ranked U.S.
News and World Report. Time's 1981 advertising revenues were $253.44 million,
compared to $200.22 million for Newsweek.

Mrs. Graham's search for a successor to Mr. Bernstein has been an open secret in
the publishing industry since early this year. She was said to have felt that
the magazine needed more aggressive direction than she felt he would provide.
Many staff members had hoped she would name someone from within the magazine.

The position of editor has changed hands four times since June 1972, when Osborn
Elliott, now dean of the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism, took over from
Kermit Lansner. Mr. Elliott was succeeded in June 1975 by Edward Kosner, whom
Mr. Bernstein replaced in June 1979.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of William Broyles Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              254 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 11, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

BRITISH TOLL OF 50 FEARED IN ARGENTINE ATTACK

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 10


As many as 50 soldiers and sailors may have been killed in Argentine air attacks
on British landing craft Tuesday, unofficial military sources said tonight. They
described the episode as the most serious setback suffered by Britain in the war
in the Falkland Islands.

For the first time since hostilities began almost 10 weeks ago, the Government
refused to disclose casualty figures. Speaking in the House of Commons this
afternoon, John Nott, the Defense Secretary, asserted that details of British
losses ''could be of benefit to the enemy and put our own men at greater risk.''
His statement lent credence to the belief that the losses were the worst of the
war.

At the meeting of Atlantic alliance leaders in Bonn, Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher spoke of ''quite a considerable number of casualties.''

Mr. Nott dismissed a suggestion from a member of the Labor opposition that the
Falkland conflict was turning into ''Britain's Vietnam,'' characterizing the war
as ''a series of major victories with some setbacks.'' He promised that British
troops would ''go forward with another victory very soon'' - a reference,
presumably, to the long-anticipated attack on the Argentine garrison of about
7,000 bottled up in and near Stanley, the islands' main settlement.

The minister insisted that the plans of the task force commander, Rear Adm. John
F. Woodward, had not been jeopardized by the effects of the devastating
Argentine attacks. But he did not specifically say that there would be no delay,
and Brig. Tony Wilson, commander of the Fifth Brigade, was quoted in
correspondents' dispatches as having said, ''Until we have assessed the
situation we do not know how much this will change our plans.''

Mr. Nott told the Commons that the equipment and supplies lost during the attack
were being made up from stocks on the islands.  Roaring in from behind a ridge
on shore, Argentine Skyhawks and Mirages bombed two 5,674-ton landing ships in
the estuary at Fitzroy, about 15 miles southwest of Stanley. Each of the ships -
the Sir Galahad and the Sir Lancelot, named for knights of King Arthur's Round
Table - had carried 250 to 400 troops to the beachhead.

Both Ships Are Abandoned

Both were set afire and had to be abandoned, military sources indicated, but it
was the Sir Galahad that took the brunt of the attack. With both the ship and
oil-covered water surrounding her afire, with ammunition boxes and fuel tanks
exploding, hundreds of men were burned. An army doctor at Fitzroy, treating
casualties plucked from the burning ship and from the water by daredevil
helicopter pilots, said that he had ''never seen anything as horrifying.''

''The flames from the landing craft lit up the night sky,'' a pooled dispatch
from British reporters said. ''The narrow inlet was filled with rescue craft. As
they were stretchered to a field hospital, some of the casualties were screaming
in agony.''

A smaller landing craft was also hit near Lively Island, to the south, and her
stern was blown off. Mr. Nott confirmed that in that incident two sailors and
four Royal Marines had been killed.

The sole consolation for the British was that Harrier jump-jets reportedly
managed during the day to shoot down six or seven enemy jet and to damage four
others so severely that they were considered unlikely to reach home. But the
Argentine air force has sustained similar losses on several occasions in the
past and still come back for more.

Undercurrent of Criticism

Although few politicians or military men were willing to voice public
misgivings, there was an undercurrent of criticism of Brigadier Wilson for
attempting to land his men in daylight without adequate antiaircraft protection.
There appeared to have been no destroyers or frigates in the immediate area, and
Rapier surface-toair missiles had not yet been installed.

The debacle at Fitzroy also prompted a renewal of complaints about the task
force's lack of airborne early-warning radar. The men aboard the ships had
almost no warning. A corporal from the Welsh Guards, rescued from the blazing
Sir Galahad, said afterward, ''I was told to get down, and the next thing I knew
I was on fire, like.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              255 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 11, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Lawyers Cite Evidence Of Chemical War in Asia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 136 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 10


A group of lawyers and jurists from Asia, Australia and New Zealand said today
that they had found circumstances indicating that chemical warfare had been
selectively applied in Laos and Cambodia.

The Asian Lawyers Legal Inquiry Committee, a nongovernmental body formed last
year, said there was convincing evidence of widespread but selective use of
chemical weapons in the two countries.

The 12-member group, which made a six-day study tour of refugee camps here and
interviewed Laotians and Cambodians believed to have been exposed to toxic
chemicals, said it had found at least three Laotian children bearing scars of
chemical warfare.

Vietnam has denied United States charges that its forces have used toxic
chemicals against rebels in Laos and Cambodia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              256 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 11, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Sports of The Times;
Get It Over With

BYLINE: By GEORGE VECSEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 3; Sports Desk

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: LAS VEGAS, Nev.


THE grubbiest thing about boxing is that people are licensed to hurt each other.
The second grubbiest thing is the money that other people make on pain and
permanent injury. The third grubbiest thing about boxing is the hype, of which
we have seen more than enough in the interminable wait for the Holmes-Cooney
fight.

With little else to do in the weeks before a major fight, everybody plays the
game of ''He Said, He Said,'' trading quotes and labels and symbols as if it
were a parlor game.

The hype has reached dismal and dangerous limits this week, as Gerry Cooney has
been painted as a ''great white hope,'' resented by Larry Holmes, who was forced
to defend himself against the suspicions of racism. Many people have had a role
in this ugly game: the fighters, their camps, the promoters, the hotels and
casinos and restaurants of Las Vegas, the closed-circuit and television people,
and of course some writers who do not seem to understand they are playing with
fire.

The gossip is the byproduct of a ''sport'' that consists of 90 percent waiting
around for something to happen. This fight has been made even more interminable
because of Cooney's shoulder injury, which postponed the fight for three months.

Even the state commissions and the promoters concede that boxers are a
perishable commodity that cannot be sent into the arena every day like jockeys
or baseball players and that cannot even be sent out to bleed once a week like
football players.

Besides, tickets must be sold for major fights. The public's attention must be
captured. A whole sub-culture of publicists has prospered for decades, coming up
with stunts to get their fighters' pictures on the back pages of the daily
papers.

Joe Doakes skips training to go fishing. Joe Blokes runs at dawn with his pet
chihuahua. Joe Pokes trains on pancakes. The gimmicks were often pretty benign
and mostly covered up the fact that many of these guys wound up broke and
permanently damaged, without skills to sustain them the rest of their lives.

Muhammad Ali changed the game irrevocably, coming along as he did in the 60's.
By abandoning his ''slave name'' of Cassius Clay and joining the Black Muslims
and refusing to serve during the Vietnam War, he not only reflected social
change, but also accelerated it.  Ali changed the way boxing was hyped, too. He
didn't need publicists telling him when to mug for the camera, when to eat his
pancakes and run with his pet chihuahua. He went out and attracted the crowds
with live issues - religion, economics, race relations, freedom to dissent,
foreign policy.

He also knew how to hype a fight - putting on that trance face, taunting his
opponents, needling the broadcasters, teasing the press. Ali was often cruel,
particularly to Floyd Patterson, but usually his sense of publicity overpowered
his instinct for cruelty. He was a scamp and a genius, and he took far more
vilification for his beliefs than for his cruelty.

Ali promised, over and over again, that boxing would miss him when he was gone.
How right he was. Tickets must still be sold, headlines must still be grabbed,
fights must still be hyped, but it is all done so grossly without the master
around.

Cooney went out of his way to insult Holmes in Mexico City two years ago.
Apparently, Holmes has been seething ever since. Because Cooney is white,
Cooney's promoters can chatter about turning him into the next Mark Spitz or
Bruce Jenner if he wins this fight. They can get him lucrative commercials,
which Holmes cannot get because he is black.

Holmes resents this, as well he should. Like many blacks coping with inequity,
he has usually managed to temper his bitterness into a survivor's realism. Yet
the waiting, the hype, the gossip of a championship fight has steeped the fires
within Holmes.

All of these developments have been reported by the responsible and the
irresponsible press. While tickets are being sold and the $50,000 gamblers swarm
into Vegas, the boxers and their camps get goaded back and forth with gossip.
Security is expanded. Gifts of fruit are suspected of being poisoned. Dressing
rooms are placed back to back to keep staff members from bumping into each
other.

There is nothing benign about boxing hype any more. Gerry Cooney told somebody
the other day that he loves the movie ''Death Wish'' with Charles Bronson - a
movie about a white man bushwhacking muggers in New York City. Yet it is Larry
Holmes who is having to defend himself against charges of racism.

In all the stories I have ever read about Holmes and in a couple of group
interviews with him, I have never detected any sign of racial antagonism in him.
He seems to be a stable adult who bootstrapped his way into a fortune, who has a
solid place in his community and a good family life. The hype of this fight
seems to be bothering him - and for good reason.

Perhaps he has figured out that the real issue of this fight is not so much race
as exploitation. While Vegas mixes the gamblers and the prostitutes and the food
and the drinks, Larry Holmes and Gerry Cooney are allowed to be goaded for weeks
and months before the fight.

It is like a bullfight, in which the bull is bloodied and weakened before the
matador even prepares for the kill. The money is good for Larry Holmes and Gerry
Cooney. The loss of dignity is rotten.

Too bad they can't just spend a couple of weeks hyping the fight, and then get
it over with. If this went on any longer, Cooney's talk of Charles Bronson and
Holmes's mention of his white in-laws could put the Falklands and Lebanon off
the front pages - if it hasn't already, in some papers.

Too bad they can't just hold the fight, let Cooney see if he can stop Holmes
with his youth and strength and left hook before Holmes stops him with his left
jab and superior agility and experience. My intellect says Cooney is worth the
bet as long as he's the underdog.  My heart says Holmes.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              257 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 11, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 43 words


A dispatch from Hanoi on May 30 transposed the names of two American servicemen
whose identification cards were given to a group of Vietnam veterans by the
Vietnamese Government. The correct names are Roosevelt Hestle Jr. and Woodrow
Frederick Knapp.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 12, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A correction yesterday, referring to a dispatch from Hanoi published on May 30
about missing American servicemen, incorrectly gave one name. It is Fredric
Woodrow Knapp.

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              258 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 11, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

EX-C.I.A. AIDE GLOOMY ABOUT CURB ON WRITING

BYLINE: By B. DRUMMOND AYRES Jr., Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section B; Page 6, Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1068 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 10


''Sometimes,'' said Frank Snepp, ''I think I'm living out a Kafka story. Or
maybe it's '1984.' '' Two years have passed since the Central Intelligence
Agency obtained a court order forbidding Mr. Snepp, a former employee of the
agency in Vietnam, to publish information about the agency without prior
approval from its officials. As the months have dragged by, life under the
landmark order has become harder and harder.

Mr. Snepp wants to make a second career as a writer and lecturer, dealing
primarily with intelligence matters. But he says many publishers, film makers,
broadcasters and university employment offices now avoid him and his work ''like
the plague.''

He debts amount to $50,000; there is $37 in his bank account. Some days, he
reports, he has been so short of cash that he has eaten only one meal.

''I'm trapped,'' he moans. ''I don't see any way out.'' The court order that is
the root of Mr. Snepp's troubles was obtained by the C.I.A. after he wrote
''Decent Interval,'' a book highly critial of agency activities in Vietnam.
Under the order, C.I.A. officials get a pre-publication look at any of Mr.
Snepp's manuscripts that deal with information he obtained as an employee of the
intelligence agency. Every paragraph, sentence, word and comma is subject to
censorship.

'I'm a Patriotic Fellow'

Mr. Snepp, who is 39 years old, finds the order repressive, confining, chilling
and an egregious violation of the concept of free speech. He says he has been
singled out and that some writers with C.I.A. connections who are less critical
of the agency are not required to get pre-publication clearance, assertations
the agency vehemently denies.

''I don't want to reveal any state secrets or any agents' names,'' Mr. Snepp
said. ''I'm a patriotic fellow who believes in a strong America and the need to
have a good intelligence agency. All I ask is that I be allowed to write
uncensored novels or honest analytical pieces and criticism about the world of
intelligence, without Big Brother looking over my shoulder.''

Mr. Snepp's lawyers are as gloomy as he is about finding any light at the end of
his long legal tunnel. ''Frank has to be very careful with every move he
makes,'' said one of them, Mark Lynch of the American Civil Libertities Union.
''The whole thing is an outrage, the way they've treated him. But you don't fool
around with court orders.''

''Decent Interval'' was written by Mr. Snepp after he came home from Vietnam in
1975, one of the last Americans to flee Saigon by helicopter from the roof of
the United States Embassy. Published after he had resigned from the C.I.A., it
charges that American officials bungled intelligence activities during the war
and that they abandoned many secret files and many loyal South Vietnamese agents
during the panicky flight at the end.

High Court Unpersuaded

When the book went on sale, the intelligence agency took Mr. Snepp to court,
charging that he had violated an agreement, signed when he was hired, in which
he assented to get agency approval before publishing any intelligence
information he acquired as a C.I.A.  employee, even if the publication should
take place after he left the agency. The agency did not raise the secrecy issue.
But Mr. Snepp fought the case all the way to the United States Supreme Court
with the argument that he had disclosed no secrets, an argument the Court found
unpersuasive.

Mr. Snepp was also ordered by the courts to give the Government his profit of
$170,000 from ''Decent Interval.'' As a result, he says, his income these days
is meager, coming mainly from a few speeches to college groups.

His writing, other than the first book, has not yet brought in any money. At the
moment, he is struggling to finish two books, one a nonfiction work about his
problems with the C.I.A. and the other a novel about the assassination of
President Kennedy. The novel has been approved by the C.I.A. publication board
with only one hitch, he reports.

''They wanted to cut out something they contended was sensitive but which I
argued had already been in print elsewhere,'' he said. ''They asked me to delete
it voluntarily and not give it any more publicity and I agreed. I could appeal
their decisions, but I don't have the money to do it, which means, in effect
that I'm forced to think twice every time I put down a word, which means they
win.''

'Producers Are Scared'

Mr. Snepp is also is working on a screenplay about his problems with the agency.
''It's been cleared, too,'' he says. ''But producers are scared of it. They say
all scripts inevitably are revised, and that would involve endless neogtiations
with the agency.''

All agency employees sign the same employment agreement that Mr.  Snepp signed,
which covers only written material, not speeches.  Speeches are covered by laws
regarding disclosure of secret information.

Besides Mr. Snepp, several other former employees have been ordered by courts to
abide by the agreements. But Mr. Snepp contends that some former workers have
ignored agreements with impunity and he asserts, bitterly, that ''nobody else,
nobody, has been ordered to turn over every single penny of profit like I
have.''

''They've singled me out because I spoke out of school and embarrassed them,''
he said. ''They're trying to make an example of me to avoid further
embarrassment.''

C.I.A. officials deny Mr. Snepp's charge. They say their only aim is to protect
agency secrets, specifically the identities of agents and details of operations.
They contend that they do not censor material that is critical of the agency as
long as security is not involved.

As for Mr. Snepp's charge that some employees ignore the agency's hiring
agreement and get away with it, Dale Peterson, an agency spokesman, said that
the Snepp case had, if anything, increased compliance. He says that the agency
now goes out of its way to remind writers of the agreement, and he reports that
voluntary compliance is rising, with more than 200 manuscripts submitted for
approval in 1981.

''It's increasing exponentially, year by year,'' he said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Frank Sneep

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              259 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CURBS ON REPORTERS KEEP SOME FACTS ON 3 WARS FROM PUBLIC

BYLINE: By JONATHAN FRIENDLY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 838 words


Governments' restrictions on reporters, including the denial of access to battle
areas and censorship of dispatches and pictures, has kept the public from
getting full and objective reports about the fighting in Lebanon, in the
Falkland Islands and along the Iran-Iraq border.

Officials say the restrictions on such information as the progress of a battle
or the extent of civilian and military casualties are required for security
reasons. Readers and viewers in Western societies, however, have come to expect
such information, which became a staple of war news reporting, notably during
the Vietnam War.

In interviews, executives of news organizations in the United States said they
had not been surprised that Iran and Iraq had kept correspondents from the
battlefront, but that they had been taken somewhat aback by the actions of
Britain and Israel, two democracies with traditions of relatively open access to
information.

Adding to a Complex Problem

News executives said the restrictions on reporters were adding to the already
complicated process of gathering news at a time when three wars were being waged
simultaneously.

The only reporters allowed to accompany the British fleet in the Falklands are
British, and their dispatches are subject to military censorship.

Argentina has also not permitted any foreign reporters to go with their troops
on the islands. Formal military briefings for foreign reporters began in Buenos
Aires just this week.

Israel, departing from its practice in previous wars, including the 1978
invasion of Lebanon, has effectively barred foreign reporters from its side of
the battlefronts until well after the fighting is over. Correspondents say
Israel has intensified its review of dispatches that deal with military or
security matters, with censors authorized to remove material that they find
militarily harmful.

Less Difficulty in Lebanon

Newspaper and news agency editors and officials of television networks noted
said their reporters in Lebanon were able to get within sight of some of the
action from the Arab side, so that the coverage problem there was less severe
than that found in the Falkland fighting.

Karen DeYoung, foreign editor of The Washington Post, said the primary effect of
being denied battlefield access in Lebanon is that ''we don't have a good fix on
the number of prisoners or the number of casualties.''

Craig R. Whitney, the foreign editor of The New York Times, said, ''We have no
idea at all how much damage has been done or what has happened to all those
thousands of people'' who had been living in the Lebanese territory that Israeli
troops seized.

Editors said, however, that reporters were able to see the larger battles from
Beirut rooftops and from their cars, until traveling around became impossible.

A Need for Balance

The editors all said they were conscious of a need to balance conflicting
accounts of fighting, not just in the Mideast or the Falklands but also in
Afghanistan, where the only information comes from guerrillas smuggled across
the border or in secondhand accounts from diplomatic sources, and in El
Salvador, where reporters have had considerable access to the Government and
less to the guerrillas.

''You have to report what they are saying, what they are claiming,'' said Nate
Polowetzky, the foreign editor of The Associated Press. ''Then you have to show
it might be propaganda.''

Richard O'Mara, foreign editor of The Baltimore Sun, said Argentina's reluctance
to say anything for most of the last two months while reports were coming from
British sources and from countries friendly to Britain had created ''an
imbalance in coverage.''

An Example of 'Imbalance'

He said, for example, that his reporter in Buenos Aires felt that the Western
press had been too ready to accept British claims that it could take Fort
Stanley when the 12-day halt in British operations tended to support the
Argentine claim that the attack was stalled.

In 1973 and 1978, the Israelis not only allowed correspondents to go to the
battlefronts, but also provided frequent briefings by ranking military officers.
In the fighting this week, they waited until Thursday before setting up a
communications center for such briefings in Metulla, the northernmost city in
Israel, where reporters had gathered in hopes of being allowed further forward.

Israeli officials said privately that the restrictions had been imposed for at
least one strictly military reason: to avoid revealing data that the Palestine
Liberation Organization could not get without a sophisticated intelligence
capability. But they also say that graphic battlefield accounts could have
increased international pressure for a cease-fire.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              260 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section 2; Page 33, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 29 words


A correction yesterday, referring to a dispatch from Hanoi published on May 30
about missing American serv- icemen, incorrectly gave one name. It is Fredric
Woodrow Knapp.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              261 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 12, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

NEW YORK DAY BY DAY

BYLINE: By Clyde Haberman and Laurie Johnston

SECTION: Section 2; Page 35, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 885 words


Layman's Guide To Counting Crowds

By evening, as sure as the missile silos will still be in place, a dispute will
arise over whether 250,000 or 300,000 or 500,000 people showed up for today's
antinuclear protest on Central Park's Great Lawn. If history is any guide,
especially from the Vietnam era, the police may have one figure, news
organizations another and the rally's sponsors yet a third.

And so here's a guide for the perplexed.  The Great Lawn has 13 acres, or a
total of 566,280 square feet. The Police Department's yardstick - assuming
everyone is standing and excluding people in trees and on the fence - is that
each demonstrator takes up three square feet, the 1-in-3 rule. That yields
188,760 protesters.

But the police are also confident that the rally will spill far from the lawn,
and they have designated 1.2 million square feet as a ''viewing area,'' good for
400,000 people. There's also a section well away from the stage called the
''hearing area,'' encompassing perhaps another 1.5 million square feet. However,
density is not expected to be as great there, and so the 1-in-3 rule does not
apply.

News gatherers, in such matters, have tended to disagree on the best approach.
Some count the number of arms and divide by two.  Others say it is better to
count legs.
A Correction Wrangle S omeone from the city's Correction Department was handing
out recruitment information to passers-by outside 26 Federal Plaza. A correction
officer stood close by, urging, ''Don't listen to him.''

All around the State Supreme Court building, signs plead, ''Become a Correction
Officer.'' Now, fliers are also being posted, saying, ''Being a N.Y.C.
Correction Officer Will Destroy Your Life.''

It's all part of a hard, and very public, campaign by the guards' union for a
pension system equal to that of state correction officers - retirement at
half-pay after 25 years' service. City officers hired since 1976 must now work
until age 62 for pension rights. The State Legislature will decide the issue,
but the union is angry at Mayor Koch's opposition to its demand.

The flier cites, among other prospects for a correction officer, injuries at the
hands of prisoners, stress-produced heart attacks, suicides, alcoholism,
divorce, emotional disorders, burnout and early death. The job, it concludes,
''is not worth having.''

Why trash your own profession? ''We're not trying to keep the city from
recruiting,'' Phil Seelig, the union president, purred. ''We just want recruits
to know the conditions.''
Watching Baseball on TV - At the Stadium

S uccess breeds its own problems, as New York Met fans are discovering.
Suddenly, the Mets are winning, sort of, and attendance at Shea Stadium is up,
sort of. That is good. But it also means longer lines at the refreshment stands.
That is bad.

As any hungry fan knows, it is not one of the joys of summer to miss two or
three innings while waiting to be served - a problem particularly severe across
town at Yankee Stadium, where no line seems to lack at least one unsteady young
fellow who obviously regards beer as a chaser to whatever pills he has just
popped.

The Mets' management has come up with a perfectly modern solution -television
monitors at the stands so that hot-dog buyers can follow the action taking place
a few yards away. Regulars at Shea have noticed a proliferation of TV sets this
season. According to the team's vice president for administration, James
Nagourney, there are 17 in all, with more expected.
Boathouse Restoration Gains in Urgency and Cost

T he Boathouse may well be the most beloved structure in Brooklyn's Prospect
Park. It was built 77 years ago - modeled after Jacopo Sansovino's Library of
St. Mark in Venice - and it stands there in terra cotta, with a roof of red tile
and with graceful columns and arches.

For all this, the Boathouse has been closed for years, used for the humdrum
purpose of storing benches and other park paraphernalia.  Often, kids break in
to steal the boats for a row on the lake.  Security people patrol it every hour
or two. In fact, they had chased out a few youngsters just before the incident
the other night.

At 11:30 P.M. on Tuesday, smoke was seen fluttering from the roof.  Firemen came
at once and found that a fire had been started in a small room on the ground
floor. It was hardly a big blaze, but it managed to spread to the second floor
before it could be put out.

As timing would have it, parks officials are about to seek bids for a $1.1
million restoration of the building, so that it can be converted into a base for
the Urban Park Rangers, among other things. It now looks like the fire will add
some $200,000 to the cost.  Clyde Haberman Laurie Johnston

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              262 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THRONGS FILL MANHATTAN TO PROTEST NUCLEAR WEAPONS

BYLINE: By PAUL L. MONTGOMERY

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1681 words


Hundreds of thousands of peaceful demonstrators opposed to nuclear arms
overwhelmed Central Park and midtown Manhattan yesterday, filling the streets
and groves with echoing songs and hopeful slogans.

The vast parade and rally, organized by a coalition of peace groups, brought
together pacifists and anarchists, children and Buddhist monks, Roman Catholic
bishops and Communist Party leaders, university students and union members.
There were delegations from Vermont and Montana, Bangladesh and Zambia, and from
many other places. The smiling, hand-clapping line of marchers was more than
three miles long, and the participants carried placards in dozens of languages.

''There's no way the leaders can ignore this now,'' said Alex Willentz, who
drove overnight from Utica, N.Y., for the event. ''It's not just hippies and
crazies anymore. It's everybody.''

The demonstration was far larger than any during the antiwar movement of the
late 1960's and early 70's, and was possibly the largest ever in the city. The
organizers said that it was the biggest disarmament gathering in the nation's
history.

Patrick J. Murphy, the Police Department's chief of operations, said at 2:30
P.M. that the crowd on the Great Lawn of Central Park - even without those who
overflowed onto Fifth Avenue and Central Park West - had reached 500,000. Tens
of thousands more were still on the parade route from the United Nations and Dag
Hammarskjold Plazas at 47th Street and First Avenue, waiting for places in the
park.

Late in the afternoon, Alice T. McGillion, a Police Department spokesman, said
there might be as many as 600,000 or 700,000 people around the park. ''There's
so much movement it's hard to be certain,'' she said.

Other estimates of the size of the crowd were even higher. As the marchers
entered Central Park, Michael Siegel, a park ranger, addressed them through a
megaphone. ''You have made the world's largest peace rally ever,'' he said. ''We
estimate three-quarters of a million people.''

Coretta Scott King, the widow of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., spoke of
the acres of people as a political force. ''We have come here in numbers so
large that the message must get through to the White House and Capitol Hill,''
she told the gathering.

''It's great,'' Mayor Koch said. ''I only wish the same thing had happened in
Moscow.'' The Mayor, who was not permitted to make a speech because he is
involved in a political campaign, walked to the United Nations with a group from
Queens and later mingled with the throng. Lieut. Gov.  Mario M. Cuomo, one of
the Mayor's rivals for the Demo-cratic nomination for Governor, marched near the
beginning of the long parade and carried an Olympic torch.

The sponsor of the demonstration was the June 12 Rally Committee, an umbrella
organization of religious and secular peace groups. The groups participating
ranged from radicals seeking immediate unilateral disarmament by the United
States to moderates asking a resumption of negotiations on arms cutbacks.

The rally was to mark the United Nations Second Special Session on Disarmament,
which began last Tuesday. Many world leaders are to give addresses at the
session, including President Reagan on Thursday.

Many of the dozens of speakers during the day urged the participants to continue
the movement when they returned to their homes. ''We shall not suffer silently
the threat of nuclear holocaust,'' said City Council President Carol Bellamy,
who addressed the crowd near the United Nations.

Because of the crush, the rally in the park ended an hour later than its
scheduled 6 P.M. close.  Outside the area of march and rally, the city was
strangely quiet for a Saturday afternoon. The police, who had 5,000 officers on
overtime, had warned motorists to stay away from Manhattan because of traffic
jams. Businesses complained that the rally had cost them millions of dollars.

The demonstrators had massed in blocks between First and Third Avenues from 47th
to 56th Streets for the morning speeches in the Dag Hammarskjold Plaza and the
march across 42d Street, up Fifth and Seventh Avenues and on to the Great Lawn
at 81st Street. In the assembly areas, diverse groups were thrust together. On
one street, the marching units, in order, were the Communist Party U.S.A., the
Kings County Democratic Coalition and Animators Against Armageddon, a
cartoonists' group.

Along the march there were floats and balloons, jugglers and babies in
strollers. Many artists had prepared antinuclear events in the last month and
had brought their creations to the march. There were dancers and scientists,
computer programmers and environmental activists, religious groups of all
denominations.

Perhaps the only dissenters in the huge throng were a group of about 40 people
who stood for a time at 42d Street and First Avenue.  They carried signs saying,
''Build Up or Freeze to Death'' and ''Peace Is a Soviet Weapon of Conquest.''
Leonard Holihan, a businessman based in London, said his organization was called
Coalition for Peace Through Security.

Profusion of Placards

Among the marchers, there was a profusion of placards: ''Choose Life''; ''Bread
Not Bombs''; ''No Nukes''; ''Reagan Is A Bomb - Both Should Be Banned''; ''U.S.
Out of El Salvador''; ''Freeze or Burn''; ''Build Houses Not Bomb Shelters'';
''A Feminist World Is a Nuclear-Free Zone,'' ''Arms Are for Embracing.'' A
little girl carried a sign saying, ''I Hate Nuclear War,'' and one marcher had
an inflated rubber whale with the legend ''Save the Humans.''

Along the way, Clara W. Mayer, 87 years old, was being pushed in a wheelchair up
Central Park West by two private nurses. The nurses were chanting with the
crowd, ''No Nukes! No Nukes!'' while Mrs.  Mayer, wrapped in a shawl, watched
the throng. ''Wild, it's really wild,'' she said.

Andre Shapiro, an optics technician from Springfield, Mass., said he had been
protesting war since 1967. ''This feels like the 60's,'' he said. ''It feels
hopeful, inspiring. I always feel like, even if nothing comes of it, it's like
Custer's last stand. It's good for our souls.''

Many participants recalled the age of protest that slackened after the Vietnam
War ended in 1975. ''I got interested when Reagan was talking about neutron
bombs,'' said Christine Bittel, 30, of Hartford. ''I haven't been that mad since
the 60's.''

Some of the marchers went back to an earlier time. ''Our first demonstration was
on Boston Common in October 1947 to welcome the U.N. to San Francisco,'' said
Eugene Belisle, 72. ''Nineteen fortysix,'' interjected his wife, Ruth. The
Belisles brought their 14-year-old granddaughter, Kate Phinney, for her first
demonstration. ''I think it's great,'' the ninth grader said. ''I told my
mother: 'I'm going. You can come with me or I'll go alone.' ''

The fringe of the rally site in Central Park was a vast bazaar of soda and ice
cream, political publications, T-shirts, protest buttons and a hundred other
items. Hundreds of the demonstrators had camped there overnight, in sleeping
bags and on blankets.

''They're just flopping down by any tree they can find,'' said one officer on
duty in the park Friday night. A small band of campers from Quebec City had been
on the road for seven days, driving and hitchhiking.

''We have only one great special feeling about all of it,'' said Robert Mienard,
one of the Canadians. ''They have to stop nuclear armament - every kind of
armament.''

Others had got up before dawn for the long trip. The 27 buses carrying the
Hartford contingent left at 6 A.M. and parked in Queens to allow the marchers to
come the rest of the way by subway. The rally organizers said 2,000 buses in all
had been chartered for the event.

At the rally, between speeches, entertainment was boomed from the huge stage
over the hundreds of thousands of heads camped on the dusty lawn. Among those
who sang were Jackson Browne, James Taylor, Bruce Springsteen, Joan Baez and
Linda Ronstadt. The old peacemovement songs came back in waves from the throng.

The June 12 Rally Committee had more than 2,000 volunteers in red T-shirts
reading ''Disarm'' to help the crowd, and volunteer doctors and nurses to attend
to fatigue and injuries. The police said 54 participants and five officers had
been treated for sprains and eye injuries, none the result of violence. The
organizers also had 500 collectors soliciting donations for the cause. They
estimated that the rally would cost $700,000.

Norma Becker of the committee staff said communications among various units had
been slowed by the theft of 20 walkie-talkies on Friday. During the parade up to
the rally, gentle anarchy prevailed as some blocks were packed with thousands of
marchers while on others there were only a few dozen.

Miss Becker said the police and other city agencies had been exceptionally
cooperative.  At 42d Street and Seventh Avenue, three of the officers on duty
wore necklaces of folded paper cranes over their uniforms. The crane, the
Japanese symbol for longevity, has been adopted by the disarmament movement.

Further along the route, one policeman stood in the center of a group of
marchers and talked to them. ''I was in the service in the 60's,'' he said.
''You know how they brainwash you there. Well, when I got out, most of the
marching in '69 was over, and there was a new era. But now, it's just like a
resurrection. This march is for everybody. Whatever happens, we're going to get
toasted.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demonstrators on the Great Lawn in Central Park
photo of demonstrators marching north on Fifth Avenue

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              263 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WIDESPREAD EFFECTS ARE FELT FROM POST-WATERGATE REFORM

BYLINE: By JOHN HERBERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 1, Column 2; National Desk

LENGTH: 2205 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 12


The proliferation of reform laws and regulations enacted in response to the
abuses of government authority exposed in the Watergate era have had a profound
effect on the course of government and politics in the United States.

Yet a decade after five men associated with President Nixon's reelection
committee burglarized the headquarters of the Democratic National Committee, an
act that became the symbol for a wide range of illegal actions and misconduct by
high officials, those reforms are far from secure, according to both advocates
and opponents of the measures.

Some of the measures, such as the Freedom of Information Act, which opened many
Federal records to public inspection, are under attack by the Reagan
Administration.

Others, such as the campaign financing laws, have had an unintended negative
effect. Presidential campaigns are now financed largely by public funds, but the
big contributions from special interests that once influenced Presidential
elections have been diverted to Congressional campaigns, and many critics and
members of Congress say the contributions are a major corrupting influence.

Haven't Met Expectations

Still others, such as the change in Congressional budget procedures, have not
lived up to the expectations of their authors.  The budget law has prevented
Presidents from refusing to spend, or impounding, appropriated funds as
President Nixon did, but this year's difficulties in negotiating a budget that
the Congress can live with caused Representative David R. Obey, Democrat of
Wisconsin, who has been at the forefront of the reform movement, to agree with
President Reagan that the procedure was an ''irresponsible, Mickey Mouse
arrangement.'' The budget that the House finally adopted Thursday sets broad
spending limits but leaves specific amounts for programs to be fought out for
the remainder of the year.

At the same time, however, there is agreement that the reforms made the
Government more open to public influence and participation, left the Presidency
with less freedom to exercise executive powers arbitrarily at home and abroad
and subjected such agencies as the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the
Central Intelligence Agency to a greater degree of accountability.

As former Senator Sam J. Ervin Jr., a conservative Democrat who was chairman of
the Senate Watergate committee and who believes in restraining government across
the board except in national defense, said the campaign financing law ''is
better than nothing, I suppose,'' a view widely held in respect to most of the
reforms.

''Each generation is tempted to do evil and has to learn its own lessons,'' said
Senator Ervin from his home in Morganton, N.C., where he practices law.

Historic Conflict Heightened

And the change has heightened the historic dispute between those who believe in
investing the central Government with broad powers to carry out policies on
which it was elected and those who believe in placing it under more restraint.

Fred Wertheimer, the president of Common Cause, the self-styled citizens' lobby
that was formed in the aftermath of Watergate, said the reforms had
''fundamentally changed the rules of the game'' and would prove to be of
historic importance in American government.  Acknowledging that some had fallen
short of the purposes intended, he said constant changes and new approaches were
needed as circumstances in the nation change.

Thomas E. Cronin, a political scientist of Colorado College who has written
widely on the Presidency and describes himself as a centrist, said he believed
the reforms had brought a needed balance between the branches of Government.

''I don't think they have weakened the Presidency,'' he said.

Acting Out a Subterfuge

But opinions vary widely within both major political parties and among scholars.
Michael Malbin, a fellow at the American Enterprise Institute, a
conservative-oriented research organization, said that in the wake of the
Watergate scandals Congress passed ''about anything that came down the pike'' in
the name of reform. ''They would enact it and then find that they had to act out
a subterfuge'' to get around what they had done, Mr. Malbin said.

The Sunshine Law, which called for Congressional business to be done in sessions
open to the public, for example, ''looked terrific at first,'' he said. But then
members found that they could conduct important business in closed, informal
sessions in which they could speak confidentially and get around the law. The
campaign financing amendments, he said, have flaws -favoring special interest
donations over individual contributions, for example -that diminish the
character of Congress but now seem impervious to change by a Congress elected
under them.

The mood for reform was created by an extraordinary crisis of confidence in the
national Government. It began with the break-in of Democratic headquarters in
the Watergate office complex on June 17, 1972, and led to President Nixon's
resignation two years later, when he was on the verge of impeachment after
having tried to cover up the crime.

But the investigations uncovered abuses much broader than the burglary and the
cover-up, some of which had begun under previous Administrations. These included
wiretapping and other invasions of privacy against citizens, perversion of the
C.I.A. and F.B.I. for political purposes, illegal collection and ''laundering''
of campaign contributions, widespread use of ''dirty tricks'' and the
compilation of an ''enemies list'' of political opponents and others who did not
agree with administration policies.

Outcry Over Vietnam War

The disclosures followed the outcry over the Vietnam war, which had been waged
over the opposition of much of the population. A result was a widely held view
in Congress and throughout the country that Presidential powers needed to be
restrained and that all public officials needed to be subjected to increased
public scrutiny and control.

Included in the legislation was the War Powers Act, which required Congressional
review of military action abroad; new standards of ethics for members of
Congress and the Administration; the requirement of appointment of a special
prosecutor to look into charges brought against high Administration officials;
new restraints on and examination of the F.B.I. and C.I.A., and a restructuring
of Congress that tended to remove authority from powerful committee chairmen and
invest it in a large number of subcommittees more sensitive to public pressures.

The reforms extended to state governments, which had a long history of
resistance to change. The majority of states enacted legislation mandating open
meetings of legislative and executive bodies, 39 states enacted
conflict-of-interest laws for elected officials, and 38 states enacted or
tightened ethics codes for officials.

These are some of the major national laws that were enacted in the aftermath of
Watergate, their effect and their current standing:
Freedom of Information Act

Scientists, business people, historians, journalists and many others have
invoked this law to gain access to documents previously closed to public
scrutiny. The Reagan Administration has been moving to restrict the reach of the
law, contending that it compromises national security secrets. However, the
Senate Judiciary Committee recently rejected the proposed changes and voted to
leave the law substantially intact.

The American Civil Liberties Union and other advocates of the law contend that
the Administration has been weakening it anyway by making it easier for agencies
to classify internal documents as off limits to the public. The concensus of
authorities is that the law, though under threat, has become so popular among so
many groups that it is not likely to be repealed or greatly eroded any time
soon.

Campaign financing
The Senate Watergate Committee concluded after its investigation in 1973 and
1974 that abuse in campaign financing was at the root of political corruption.
Extensive changes were made in the law, providing public financing of
Presidential elections and putting limits on contributions to Congressional
candidates. But almost no one is happy with those changes.

Mr. Wertheimer of Common Cause, which failed in its repeated attempts to extend
public financing to campaigns for Congress, said that political action
committees, each interested in some narrow area of legislation, gave
Congressional candidates $55 million in 1980 and will put up $80 million this
year and $100 million by 1984.

Representative Millicent Fenwick, who on Tuesday won the Republican nomination
for the Senate from New Jersey, said contributions from such committees
represent ''the greatest evil that still exists in our whole election process.''

The usual explanation is that when members of Congress vote on an issue they are
frequently influenced by the wishes of heavy contributors to their campaigns.
Herbert E. Alexander, a professor of political science at the University of
California, Los Angeles, and an authority on campaign financing, said one
problem was that the law limits the amount an individual may give to $1,000 for
each campaign while allowing a committee to give $5,000.

''Individuals are often ideologically in the center,'' he said, ''while PAC's
are interested only in some special interest.'' These and other complaints about
the law go on from every segment of the political spectrum. Yet no one sees any
chance of major change by Congress because large contributions have become
essential to winning, and the PAC's are providing it.

Yet most critics agreed that Presidential campaigns are cleaner as a result of
the law, and there was almost universal agreement that the requirement that all
contributions in Federal elections be disclosed has had a positive effect.

Codes of Ethics and Special Prosecutor
During the Watergate investigations many officials said that the Department of
Justice could not be depended on to ferret out corruption in the executive
branch because it operates under the authority of the White House. As part of
its overall changes in ethics requirements, Congress provided for a special
prosecutor in the event that an Attorney General receives information that a
high official has violated a Federal criminal law and decides that the charge is
not frivolous.

No official has been charged under the law but prosecutors have been appointed
and carried out investigations. Both Presidents Carter and Reagan sought to
alter the law, contending that the mechanism permitted full-scale investigations
that were not warranted.

''This Administration has moved to weaken the ethics laws in several respects,''
said Mr. Wertheimer. ''But every time they do, a situation develops which shows
that they are needed.'' He noted, for instance, that Secretary of Labor Raymond
J. Donovan was currently under investigation by a special prosecutor on
allegations that he dealt with organized crime figures in his New Jersey
business before his appointment.

War Powers Act
To prevent long involvement of American troops overseas without direct
Congressional sanction, as happened in Vietnam, Congress in 1973 enacted a law
requiring the President to obtain Congressional approval for commitment of
forces for longer than 60 days and to consult with Congress about shorter
engagements. The consensus is that although no large-scale military effort has
been attempted, the law itself has not had an important effect on American
foreign policy.

President Carter was accused by a number of sources of violating the law in his
aborted rescue attempt of the American hostages from Iran in 1980, and similar
charges were leveled against President Reagan when he sent military advisers to
El Salvador. In both cases, the Administration denied that the law applied.
Nevertheless, members of Congress and executive branch officials said the law
has had some restraining effect on the White House.

Other legislation enacted in the wave of reforms but not connected with official
corruption has been under attack, also. A few days ago a number of businesss
lobbyists urged the House to amend the 1977 Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which
was enacted after it was disclosed that American corporations were bribing
foreign officials to obtain business. American businessmen objected to what they
called ambiguous and unnecessarily restrictive language in the measure. The
Senate voted for the amendments last year. It is uncertain whether the House
will follow suit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Fred Wertheimer, Sam J. Ervin Jr.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              264 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A SPECTRUM OF HUMANITY REPRESENTED AT THE RALLY

BYLINE: By ROBERT D. McFADDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 42, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1928 words


It was a kaleidoscope of humanity - young people and old, rich and poor, the
famous, the forgotten and countless thousands in between.  They spoke in Western
twangs and Southern drawls, in the accents of Appalachia, New England, New York
and the Middle West, as well as in the tongues of Asia, Europe and Latin
America.

They represented a rainbow spectrum of religions, ethnic groups, trades,
professions, unions, cultural and educational institutions, political
organizations and other interests. And there were many who turned out to express
just their own deeply held feelings.

The seas of people who poured through the canyons of Manhattan and rallied on
the greenswards of Central Park to protest the nuclear arms race yesterday may
have been the largest, most diverse gathering for a single cause ever to
assemble in the city.

There were poets, actors, corporate executives, transit workers, teachers,
students, housewives, doctors, store clerks, sanitation workers, civil servants,
cooks, lawyers, ministers, rabbis, engineers, musicians, nurses, politicians and
legions of people from other walks of life.

Some were veterans of the antiwar activity of the 1960's and 1970's, schooled in
confrontation and street politics. But many were neophyte demonstrators,
ordinary people who have shunned radical ideas and never dreamed of joining a
protest but who were brought together by visions of nuclear holocaust and a
barren, lifeless earth.

One of the largest contingents in the line of march up Fifth Avenue was the
Bread and Puppet Theater of Glover, Vt., a collection of bands, marchers and
bobbing puppets that depicted The World, The End of the World and The Fight
Against the End of the World.

Out front, portraying the days before nuclear war, hundreds of marchers, draped
and masked all in white, carried placards depicting sunrises and sunsets.
Two-man horses cloaked in white sheets romped among them. Overhead, white doves
with 10-foot wingspans fluttered atop poles.

Next came the postwar creatures, a grotesque coterie of skeletons, dragons,
ghastly faces of orange and green, garish monsters with twisted limbs, demons of
Dante's Inferno splotched with blood-red, foretelling the destruction of
mankind. At the rear were forces of salvation, including washerwomen on 12-foot
stilts with flower-decked aprons and a peace boat of children in white.

Heidi Broner, a 30-year-old cook and occasional singer from Plainfield, Vt., was
part of the group. She had not been to a rally for a long time. ''I don't like
the chanting,'' she said. ''I don't like being swept away like that in a crowd,
that mob feeling. But I'm getting desperate.''

The blue and gold banner of the Vietnam Veterans of America was billowing
overhead, and Thomas Brinson, who served as a lieutenant in the war, was
carrying it for a group of 50 members of an Albany area chapter.

''We experienced the horror of war, and we don't feel that it's justified for
any means,'' he said. ''It's not just our country. It's all the major countries
of the world. It's the Soviet Union, it's France, it's China.''

Mr. Brinson said that he and his wife, Sarah, were marching not so much for
themselves but for their 2-year-old child and for the future of the world.

It was 9-year-old Gregory Barger's first demonstration. He came with his mother
and sister and took it quite seriously.  ''This is very important,'' he said.
''If there is a nuclear war, a lot of us children will die, and some of us could
be very important to the future of America.''

Nearby, Judy Saurman said she had been participating in peace marches since the
1950's. ''I grew up with demonstrations,'' she said. ''But this is quite
different. It's a really mixed group - all ages, all kinds. It's taken 30 years
to build this kind of response.  It's just got to make the difference now.''

Timley Akar, a 30-year-old Manhattan man who works in the Office of Tibet in the
city, marched with 25 members of Tibetans for World Peace, one of the thousands
of groups that attended the rally.  Wearing green T-shirts emblazoned with
''Free Tibet,'' they handed out leaflets and carried a banner demanding: ''China
Stop Nuclear Testing in Tibet.''

Mr. Akar, who said he was a representative of the Dalai Lama, said: ''We are not
actually anti-Communists. We are against the bullying of small nations by big
nations.''

William J. McGrath, a lawyer, and his 12-year-old son, Billy, flew into town
from Evanston, Ill., yesterday to join the demonstration.  Both wore ''peace
proxy'' tags with the names of friends back home, 10 members of Mr. McGrath's
law firm and 10 of Billy's classmates at the Nichols School.

The United States should take the lead in nuclear disarmament, Mr.  McGrath
said. ''As the only user, and the first to have the bomb, we should take the
leadership,'' he declared. Billy was more sanguine.

''We all want to be here in 10 years,'' said the boy.

''I am very worried about war accidentally happening,'' said Sylvia Brandt, a
gray-haired woman carrying a flower. ''We have too many mad people who have
access to the button.''

Attending the rally with a West Side group, the Peace and Nuclear Disarmament
Alliance, she said she had been marching in protests for many years. ''We got
rid of Lyndon Johnson - we stopped the war,'' she said. ''This movement is much
bigger. It combines the issues of bread and bombs.''

Alongside her, Bernice Price nodded in agreement and said the day's protest was
only the beginning.  ''This is the first statement,'' she said. ''How to do it
is not clear. It is a phenomenon that so many ordinary people have developed
such consciousness for survival against extinction. A solution can be found if
the alternative is extinction.''

Miss Price noted that she was a teacher of emotionally handicapped children in
New York.  ''They understand these things,'' she said solemnly. ''The image
filters down.''

Judy Hinds was with three busloads of members of the Meeting of the Society of
Friends who were loading up in Montclair, N.J., to go to the demonstration.
Quakers have advocated nonviolence for more than four centuries and they were
carrying on the tradition.

Mrs. Hinds recalled the well-known Quaker declaration to Charles II in 1661:
''We utterly deny all outward strife and fightings with outward weapons, for any
end or under any pretense whatsoever.''

These days, the argot of the peace movement in the Quaker community is no less
earnest. ''What we're really working for,'' Mrs. Hinds said, ''is a total
transformation of the power structure.''

Their accents were Australian, their T-shirts proclaimed ''Australians for
Peace,'' and Ernest A. Boatswain, an official of the Building Workers Industrial
Union of Australia, confirmed that they had come from Melbourne to join the
protest on behalf of his country's trade-union movement.

Standing in the crowd at 47th Street and First Avenue, Mr.  Boatswain looked up
at the green-glass and white-stone monolith of the United Nations headquarters
and then at the swelling crowd around him. ''This should guarantee that those
blokes in the big house will do the right thing this time,'' he said, adding:

''We've been to the mission. They blame the Americans, only they're very quiet
about it. They blame the Russians and they're a bit louder. We just told them to
move it.''

For Wayne and Dorothy Cook of West Hartford, Conn., the decision to join the
march was the expression of a long-held feeling, brought into the open when
their son, Geoffrey, had to register for the draft when he reached the age of 18
six months ago.

''You don't have to be anti-Establishment to protest,'' said Mr.  Cook, a
teacher at Central Connecticut State College in New Britain.  ''You just have to
have convictions.''

At 9 A.M., long before the huge crowds appeared, a couple jogged down Fifth
Avenue, marveling at the traffic-free space and the eerie quiet. ''It's kind of
like those movies where they bomb New York and there's no cars left,'' the man
said.

Elsewhere in the city, tens of thousands of residents who did not participate in
the protest went about their Saturday business without ado. But many noted that,
with the crowds concentrated elsewhere, the streets seemed strangely quiet, with
only here and there a few people rushing to get to the scene of the action.

In and around the Great Lawn: Orson Welles came through the police barricades in
a Cadillac. Jill Clayburgh and James Taylor strolled in under the trees.

Some 200 to 300 National Urban Park rangers were scattered about, being helpful.
For Ranger Mike Watkins, it was the first day on the job. He looked warily at
the people hanging in the trees with dangling legs, cameras, radios and sacks of
lunch.

The scene backstage: a mass of scaffolding, trunk lines, cameras, radios,
snaking wires, vans, portable toilets, tables laden with coffee, people running
about, radio and television technicians plugging and unplugging things, hordes
of reporters taking notes and talking into microphones and cameras, celebrities
giving interviews.  It is chaotic euphoria.

Norma Becker, one of the organizers of the rally, noted ''an absence of an
antagonism and a hostility we got in the antiwar movement during the Vietnam
War.''

''It is a very different kind of attitude today,'' she said.  ''That's because
everyone agrees on the issue. The policemen, like all the rest of us, are
concerned about their families.''

Expressing a common theme of the day, she added: ''What we are seeing today is
the beginning only. We have started and we are going to continue to emphasize
the fact that we want our children to live - and we will fight for that.''

In the cool morning air on the Long Island Rail Road platform at Baldwin
station, Richard V. Grulich and his wife, Mary, waited for the 7:52 train to
take them to the protest. There were many people in jeans, with long hair and
bizarre hats, but Mr. Grulich wore a gray, three-piece suit and carried a
placard under his arm.

''Nuclear War Is the Height of Arrogance,'' it proclaimed.  ''I'll be 70 next
month,'' he said. ''I've been protesting since 1925.'' Mr. Grulich was a member
of the 28th Infantry in World War II. In 1966, he joined the Veterans for Peace
and opposed the Vietnam War.  Now, he does not view the Soviet Union or any
nation as an enemy.  ''It is a great sea of humanity, just like us,'' he said.

Sign around the neck of a little girl walking into Central Park: ''Ray guns ...
Yucchy!''

A banner: ''Omaha, Nebraska, Home of Strategic Air Command Headquarters, says
Freeze the Arms Race.'' A sign: ''Don't Blow It - Good Planets Are Hard to
Find.'' A children's chant: ''One, two, three, four, We don't want a nuclear
war.  Five, six, seven, eight, We don't want to radiate!''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of surviviors of atomic bomb explosion in Japan
photo of mother marching with infant photo of demonstrators aboard chartered bus

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              265 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

About New York;
EARNESTNESS AND WHIMSY IN A COLORFUL PANORAMA

BYLINE: By Anna Quindlen

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 43, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1216 words


Any public demonstration is a leap of faith, evidence of an optimistic belief
that the sound of one hand clapping, given sufficient hands, will be applause,
that a single human being, if there are enough of them, can make a difference.

That is, that there is such a thing as democracy in action.Yesterday, a crowd
the size of a fair-sized city jammed into this large one to demonstrate that
optimism at a nuclear disarmament rally. If there was one single symbol of their
effort, it was a small child. There were hundreds, perhaps thousands of them,
pushed in strollers, peering out from backpacks, carried in their mothers' arms,
toddling along beside their parents, a testimonial to the oftstated belief that
marching for an end to the nuclear arms race meant marching for a future for
future generations. ''For our children, for your children, for their children,''
said one of the largest banners in the moving line to Central Park, ''stop the
madness.'' And another said, ''Bear babes, not arms.''

If there was any one slogan in a day jampacked with them, it was this one, on
little squares looped with string round shirt buttons everywhere: I Made
History, June 12, 1982.

In this cynical city, which has at its soft center the belief that everything is
possible and everything allowed, the marchers met. One person came walking along
a street and found himself amid clots of people, then crowds of people, and,
just after noon, part of a great pointillist panorama, reds and blues and
yellows, hundreds of thousands up Fifth and Seventh Avenues.

Most of them walked, but some of them danced and bee-bopped to drums and kazoo
tunes, and they were at once earnest and whimsical.  For every person chanting
''Fight Nuclear Weapons, Fight Imperialism,'' there was one with a sign like the
one that read ''Mushrooms Are for Quiche, Not Clouds'' or the man who walked
with a wolfhound with ''Dogs for Disarmament'' around its neck.

And this is not to say that some people standing on the sidewalk did not feel
excluded. People passed by and said they thought the emotional appeals, the
children and the doves painted on posters and banners, did not address the hard
questions of the behavior of the Soviet Union or America's response to
aggression. ''I think they're oversimplifying the issue,'' said a young lawyer.
''To say let's disarm is simply naive.''

There have been demonstrations something like this in the past.  Peter, Paul and
Mary have sung time after time, and the Yippies have gathered in the park, and
people have talked about peace and love.  ''Make love, not war,'' people said
yesterday, as they have for years. ''All we are saying is give peace a chance.''

And there was no doubt that some people were reliving that past, wearing long
hair and bandannas, Indian prints and T-shirts from antiwar protests of a decade
gone by. There were people who marched yesterday who marched to ban the bomb in
the 1950's, who marched for civil rights 20 years ago and an end to the Vietnam
War a decade after that.

But some things were different yesterday, and everyone seemed to feel it. Mary
Travers, whose voice has risen full and clear through many a demonstration, who
is 45 years old now but still wears her blond hair flowing, who marched in Selma
with her mother and was with her mother and her daughter yesterday, recalled the
rage of the antiwar demonstrations and said: ''This is not an angry day. This is
very loving.''

And a police officer named Sal Delrosario added: ''The big thing in the 70's was
to get locked up or scars on your head getting beat up by a cop. These people
are peaceful.''

And they were every kind of person, there for many reasons. Perhaps that
contributed to the atmosphere. There were demonstrations in the past that seemed
implicitly exclusionary. Many citizens of a nation recently at war felt they
would belie the meaning of that conflict if they marched to ban the bomb in the
1950's. Some whites felt excluded from the civil rights movement de facto. The
antiwar protests had a symbiotic relationship with the youth movement and
cataclysmic social changes; no parents need apply.

But yesterday there were parents and children, whites and blacks, veterans and
conscientious objectors, Montana Cowboys Against Nuclear War and the Puerto
Rican Socialist Party, Gray Panthers and a punk contingent with Mohawk hair
tinted fuschia.

On one block, massing before the rally, were members of groups from Cleveland,
Nashville, Oberlin College, the Jewish Peace Fellowship, and the Sikh sect. On
every block were people saying it was their first demonstration. The issue
seemed simple to most of them: ''Choose life,'' said the signs. ''March for
peace and justice.''

''I never thought I'd be at something like this,'' said Edwin Hernandez, 20, a
student at City College. ''Demonstrations are usually a political issue -
pro-Communist, pro-socialist. But this is pro-existence. I have a future to take
care of. That's the most basic issue there is.''

''We're Christians, we're followers of the Prince of Peace,'' said Faith Lytle,
who came from San Antonio with her husband, Bill. ''This is where He would want
us to be. We have four children and two grandchildren. We care about what
happens to them.''

That is not to say there were not the usual political squabbles.  Ideological
arguments drifted on the breeze: whether the representative of the homosexual
contingent should have been male or female and, in addition, from the third
world; whether a freeze could ever be as satisfying as total disarmament;
whether nuclear war was a racial issue. Two elderly women sitting at the corner
of 42d Street and Fifth Avenue, watching the marchers moving past, talked
quietly.

''There's a great feeling you should disarm and then use the money for human
needs,'' said one. ''But there's a great hesitancy to say that in our group. I
think there's some feeling that it's clouding the issue.''

There were people who passed by the rally on their way to work, and people who
snorted in exasperation at the congestion on the streets, and people who said
they simply didn't understand what all the fuss was about.

''I don't need to be reminded that we're all going to die,'' said a woman to her
companion. ''We're all going to die,'' he said, poking her in the ribs. ''Yeah,
of boredom,'' she said.

But some who stood by and watched shouted encouragement, and applauded, and some
jumped in. ''This is great,'' said Kathleen Banks, who was here from
Massachusetts visiting friends. ''This is really people getting together to work
for good things.''

At the front of the line of march there were many people from Vermont, and when
they paused once to let the others catch up, a woman knelt and began to
breast-feed the infant she was carrying with her. The people around her smiled
with their eyes, and one of the marchers cried, ''That's what this is all
about!'' and the bystanders, behind the police line, broke into applause and
cheers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demonstrators on the Great Lawn of Central Park

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              266 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RALLY SPEAKERS DECRY COST OF NUCLEAR ARMS RACE

BYLINE: By ROBIN HERMAN

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 43, Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 957 words


Asserting that the nuclear arms race, while threatening mankind with extinction,
already damages life on the earth, scores of speakers at yesterday's disarmament
rally sought to show how their individual constituencies were suffering.

There were black and Hispanic leaders pointing out the connection between big
military budgets and reduced social programs for the poor, union leaders asking
for jobs instead of costly weapons, doctors voicing concern about current
radiation levels and mothers worrying about their children's future.

Addressing the marchers as they filed quietly past a platform at Dag
Hammarskjold Plaza on East 47th Street and later in Central Park, the speakers
celebrated the democratic ideal that permitted such a demonstration and urged
delegates to the United Nations Second Special Session on Disarmament to reach
concrete agreements. They also assailed the military and social policies of the
Reagan Administration.

''Don't believe what the politicians are saying; watch what they do,'' said Dr.
Helen Caldicott, the Australian pediatrician who is president of Physicians for
Social Responsibility. ''We're thinking of our babies. There are no Communist
babies; there are no capitalist babies. A baby is a baby is a baby,'' she said.

Office-Seekers Barred

There was a notable lack of campaigning politicians on stage, the result of a
policy decision by the rally's planners. Instead, grassroots political
organizers like Randall Forsberg, originator of the nuclear weapons freeze
campaign, and clergy and regional union leaders, such as the Rev. William Sloane
Coffin Jr., senior minister at the Riverside Church, and Victor Gotbaum, head of
District Council 37 of the American Federation of State, County and Municipal
Employees, took their turns at the microphone.

The hours of speeches were interspersed with performances by rockmusic stars,
such as Bruce Springsteen, and Peter, Paul and Mary, a group long associated
with peace activities.

The nuclear arms race was not the sole theme of the speeches but rather was
cited as the larger cause of a number of the world's problems. Marchers were
told of deprivation among America's poor, oppression of the country's women,
racist wars in Africa and turmoil in El Salvador. All were related to a buildup
of nuclear arms.

The Rev. Herbert Daughtry, head of the National Black United Front, said
programs for the poor were being cut in favor of military spending. A member of
the African National Congress charged that South Africa was developing nuclear
weaponry for use against blacks on that continent. Rubin Zemora of the
Revolutionary Democratic Front of El Salvador said the delivery of arms instead
of food to El Salvador was killing that country. Bella S. Abzug, the former
United States Representative and now head of Women USA, said women, so sparsely
represented among United States elected officials, outweighed men in their
disapproval of the Reagan Administration's military policies.

Turnout Called a Record

Miss Forsberg looked out over the crowd of marchers at Dag Hammarskjold Plaza
and exulted: ''We've done it. The nuclear freeze campaign has mobilized the
biggest peacetime peace movement in United States history. The politicians don't
believe it yet. They will. They think this is a fad. It's not. The American
people are fed up with the nuclear arms race. We're scared of the nuclear arms
race, and we should be. Until the arms race stops, until we have a world with
peace and justice, we will not go home and be quiet. We will go home and
organize.''

Elizabeth Holtzman, Brooklyn District Attorney, was optimistic about the
political effect of the gathering. ''And if any of you think that people don't
have power, I say to you you're wrong,'' she said.

''It was the people of this country,'' she continued, ''that forced the
Government to end the war in Vietnam. It was the people of this country that
forced the Government to remove a President who committed crimes in high places.
The people of this country - yes, the people of this world - will make their
governments listen.''

Mayor Koch, prevented from joining the speakers because of his gubernatorial
candidacy, sauntered up near the stage at Dag Hammarskjold Plaza, leaned on a
police barricade and spoke to reporters there about his support for a bilateral
nuclear freeze.

'A Face in the Crowd'

''While I suppose most rallies would like to have the Mayor welcome them, that's
all right with me, and I said I understand it,'' said Mr. Koch. ''I'm happy to
be just a face in the crowd. What I did was to march across the 59th Street
bridge with a Greek-American group that started on the Queens side, and we
marched down here to the U.N.''

Instead of the Mayor, Carol Bellamy, President of the City Council, welcomed the
marchers to New York and then offered a graphic vision: ''Look around you for
just one moment, my friends, at the beauty of New York's urban landscape, then
consider that the detonation of a single one-megaton bomb would flatten every
building in sight,'' she said. ''The flash of white light, the force of the
fireball, would within seconds char, batter and crush every living being within
a nine-mile radius, the winds spreading radiation and fire far beyond.''

''Paper treaties are not enough,'' Miss Bellamy said. ''We must together leave
the negotiating table, enter the silos and dismantle this weaponry.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of demonstrators on the Great Lawn of Central Park

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              267 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

ECONOMICALLY, VIETNAM IS LOSING THE PEACE

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1221 words


The Vietnamese economy is in a shambles and Communists and Western economists,
in varying degrees, cite war and the huge military establishment as primary
causes. But even Vietnamese leaders are beginning to concede that part of the
blame must be placed upon government mismanagement, rigid policies, lack of
popular support, official corruption and general weariness.

Signs of deep trouble are everywhere. City streets are full of people with
little to do but walk, sit or ride their bikes. Consumer goods are
extraordinarily scarce, even more so in orthodox Hanoi than in Ho Chi Minh City,
an incorrigible center of enterprise. The best hotels cannot find light bulbs.
Apartments in a six-year-old housing complex lack running water.

Vietnam reported it produced 15 million tons of food grains last year. The
performance, largely a result of allowing some private farmers in the south to
sell in an expanded free market, was an improvement over previous years, when
floods and other calamities necessitated millions of tons of rice and wheat
imports. But imports were sharply reduced to pay the suddenly tripled price of
Sovietsupplied oil and Vietnamese nutrition suffered - the people are thin.
United Nations experts report most get insufficient calories.

The Socialist Republic of Vietnam has suffered repeated failures in industrial
projects. Lack of raw materials, spare parts, competent managers and engineers
has caused even Communist aid missions to demand fundamental changes.
Non-Communist aid missions voiced similar complaints before World Bank, Japanese
and much other aid was frozen after Vietnam invaded Cambodia in December 1978.

The most frustrated donor may be Sweden, after a decade of trying to get a
computerized $500 million paper mill going at Bai Bang, north of Hanoi. Despite
the labors of more than 600 Swedes billeted in an air-conditioned village, the
facility is still not fully operational and Sweden is absorbing the costs.
Vietnam has extensive forests but pulp is being shipped in from Sweden, Western
diplomats said.

Technicians and diplomats from Eastern Europe have lately admitted to similar
frustrations. A Hungarian-backed shoe factory reportedly turns out shoes too
shoddy for export. East German technicians at a textile project in Da Nang, a
European diplomat said, were arrested after coming to blows with Vietnamese
co-workers over how to run things. Nikolai K. Baibakov, chairman of the Soviet
state planning committee, is said to have demanded unsuccessfully in Hanoi last
fall that Soviet managers be placed in charge of all Soviet projects.

Money and Oil Shortages

Exports last year dropped while prices increased for imported oil, fabric for
the textile industry, machinery and most other necessities. Hanoi's foreign
currency reserves stood at exactly zero by February of this year, according to a
confidential April 29 report by the International Monetary Fund. As of last Dec.
31, it was $38 million behind in payments to non-Communist lenders.

After sharp economic declines in 1979 and 1980, last year was a good one for
rice, light industry and some cash crops. But ''such key industries as steel,
fertilizer, textiles and cement showed significant declines, mainly because of
poor management and continued shortages of raw materials and spare parts,'' the
fund said. For lack of payment, Iraq has stopped supplying oil. Aviation fuel is
short; flights between Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City have been cut back. Loans from
Libya and Algeria have been rescheduled. A $30 million textile project financed
by Italy, Belgium and West Germany is near collapse.

Official statements continue to blame the grim picture on ''30 years of war,''
American bombings, the destruction of agricultural land by defoliants and the
death or dislocation of millions of people. They also point to hostile China,
requiring Vietnam to keep large numbers of troops (as many as 40 divisions,
intelligence sources say) on the Chinese border and in Cambodia. Hanoi also
blames its troubles on United States actions in drying up international aid and
on domestic ''reactionaries,'' including ethnic Chinese and southerners
irreparably corrupted, it says, by the former United States presence.

But Western analysts, increasingly joined by European Communists, stress
managerial difficulties. The state-run economy, although less centralized and
less fond of heavy industry than before 1979, they say, is still clumsy, slow to
make decisions, inflexible on prices, indifferent to export opportunities based
on cheap labor, oblivious to quality controls and innocent of the rigors of
international trade. Managers are said to be unwilling to take responsibility;
workers lack incentives. Western governments, defending their aid cutoff, point
to the drain on the economy of the Cambodia occupation. The military absorbs
much of the scarce supply of administrators and technicians. (Unlike the
Vietnamese, few Western analysts believe that hundreds of thousands of soldiers
could easily be transformed into useful workers.)

Criticism by foreign Communists, Western creditors and many angry Vietnamese may
be taking effect. The longtime officials and old warriors who run the country
may be ready to loosen the economic reins a bit. Vietnamese officials have
admitted to Western visitors, moreover, that ''socialist transformation'' of the
south - including collectivized farming - will take longer than expected. And
Sweden reportedly is being allowed to take control of its monumental paper mill.

Officials have also been telling Westerners that poor countries, socialist or
not, lack economic and technical expertise, and that the earlier political
purges of experts in the south may have been a mistake. They speak of dreadful
bureaucrats, opportunists in the party, the importance of family planning (the
population is 55 million and growing at least 2.4 percent a year) and the need
to recruit young party members. Occasionally, they even acknowledge what
impresses many visitors as widespread weariness behind their good cheer and good
manners - cynicism toward the Government and impatience to reap the benefits of
peace. ''They are on their kness,'' said a European diplomat in Hanoi. ''I think
they will have to make changes soon, to become less rigid.''

His opinion is widely shared among Westerners in Hanoi. But other observers
point to the entrenched realities of state planning and poverty, and the
declaration at the Fifth Communist Party Congress in March that the socialist
transformation of the south must inevitably, albeit more carefully, proceed.
Nearly all analysts, Vietnamese and foreign, well-wishers and enemies, agree
that the economic crisis is authentic. Most believe that mastering it will
require profound reforms.
Colin Campbell, a correspondent for The New York Times based in Bangkok,
Thailand, recently accompanied a group of American veterans on a visit to
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of workers at the Reunification Electric Fan
Factory

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              268 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

MRS. THATCHER DRAWING MORE FIRE ON THE HOME FRONT

BYLINE: By R.W. APPLE Jr.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 903 words


LONDON "The strong wind fanned the flames, enormous flames, and as the fuel
tanks exploded the ship was half enveloped in thick, black smoke, but the Royal
Navy helicopter pilots and their crews ignored it. They ignored the explosions
and ignored the ammunition erupting around them, and they flew their machines in
to lift the queues of men waiting calmly below. The casualties and survivors,
many suffering from shock and burns, were picked up from the beach by soldiers
who had run from their trenches. Some carried men on their shoulders, struggling
in the waves, then went back for more.''

That vivid account of the carnage in Port Fitzroy, broadcast by Michael
Nicholson of Independent Television News, snapped Britain out of a certain
complacency about the war in the Falkland Islands last week. What the nation had
expected to hear was news of the long anticipated British assault on Stanley and
of rapid victory. Indeed, the newspapers had so thoroughly discounted the coming
battle that they were devoting most of their attention to postwar arrangements.

The battle would still come, and yesterday amid reports of heavy combat, Defense
Secretary John Nott announced predawn advances in a surprise attack near
Stanley. It may come sooner, if the generals conclude that further delay would
expose their troops to intolerable Argentine air attacks. It could come later,
if the disruption of men and equipment was greater than admitted. But it wwould
not come a second before Maj. Gen. Jeremy Moore, the Bible-toting ground
commander, was convinced he had two, three, four times the amount of ammunition
and supplies he might need. A friend said, ''He is not the sort who runs out of
artillery shells.''

It is now 10 weeks since the Argentine invasion of the Falklands, three weeks
since the landings in San Carlos Bay and 10 days since the go-ahead was given by
London for the assault on Stanley. There has been ample time for the Queen
Elizabeth 2 to return from a cruise, undergo conversion to troopship duties and
complete a 14,000-mile round trip to South Georgia. There is no sign, however,
that public support for the enterprise is waning.

The military men and some of the politicians know that the attacks at Port
Fitzroy mean the Argentine Air Force retains the capacity to inflict severe
losses on the British. They know that means more casualties in the final phase
of the war and probably afterward.

But the public seems unmoved by such considerations. And despite the counsel of
the opposition and some of her Cabinet colleagues, Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher appears to be growing more determined to find some means of keeping the
Falklands British for the foreseeable future, regardless of what is seen as
inevitable long-term Argentine raids and harassment.

She found little support from either President Reagan or Secretary of State
Alexander M. Haig Jr. for her plans, but she has not changed them. And after the
Americans had left London last week, she told an American television interviewer
something she had not said before - that the Falklands had to be defended
because they could become strategically vital if the Panama Canal were to fall
into unfriendly hands. In the past, Mrs. Thatcher had always justified defending
them because their inhabitants were British and deeply desired to remain
British. ''Even now, you know, some very big oil tankers have to go around Cape
Horn to get to Alaska,'' she said. ''The islands have a very enormous strategic
value. They are also to some extent the gateway to the Antarctic, which will
become progressively more important in terms of resources to the world.''

For Michael Foot, the leader of the Labor Party, the Prime Minister's approach
is woefully misguided. He agrees that the Argentines must be got off the
islands, but he wants a pledge from Mrs. Thatcher to Buenos Aires that
negotiations will reopen the minute an enemy withdrawal is complete. Any other
approach, he says, ''will make the islands untenable for their inhabitants and
impose an expensive and risky burden on Britain'' for many years to come. It is
not a popular position, and Mrs. Thatcher, who can read the polls and the
by-election results, knows it. Her argument, that it would be a betrayal of
British fighting men to negotiate, strikes a chord with the kind of Britons who
went to Southampton to cheer the QE2 to her pier.

But that was last week, with the fighting still going on, with heroes coming
home and the bands still playing. What if the Falklands become a second Ulster,
much smaller and much farther from home, tying up British troops, costing
hundreds of thousands of pounds, claiming a steady but undramatic toll of lives,
for five or 10 years?

Tam Dalyell, a mildly eccentric Scottish Labor M.P., thinks the Falklands could
turn into Britain's Vietnam. The war, he insists, ''is a process which for
Britain has no favorable end.'' That may or may not be the case. But there are
few here who would argue with the proposition that victory at Stanley, to use
Churchill's phrase, will be only ''the end of the beginning'' for Britain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of British marines manning a mortar on slopes

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              269 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

A NUCLEAR FREEZE FAVORS THE RUSSIANS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 22, Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 396 words


To the Editor:

The Union Theological Seminary statement, ''To End the Arms Race''
(advertisement, Week in Review, May 30), sheds little light on the role of arms
in the quest for peace and freedom.

It calls for a nuclear freeze, which would confer a significant, perhaps
fateful, advantage upon the Soviet Union, the most powerful and expansionist
tyranny the world has seen. The freeze would simultaneously weaken the capacity
of the U.S. and its allies to defend themselves.

The statement also calls for the reduction of nuclear arms, an objective shared
by President Reagan and virtually all Americans. The President has made honest
proposals to reduce European theater and strategic arms on both sides under
appropriate verification safeguards. Moscow scoffed at these proposals, but has
agreed to start strategic arms talks on June 29.

Ever since the Soviet Union became a nuclear power, it has steadfastly refused
on-site inspection of its missiles. This is the chief problem of any control
agreement with Moscow. Verification is a substitute for trust.

The statement seems to assume that all expenditures for arms are wasted and all
arms are evil. The fact is that arms are neutral. They can be used to impose
tyranny, as in Eastern Europe today, or they can be used to roll back tyranny as
the Allies did in liberating Europe from the Nazi yoke.

The responsible way to ''end the arms race'' is to pursue President Reagan's
proposals. The United States needs a nuclear capability sufficient to deter a
Soviet strike and strong enough to induce Moscow to negotiate reductions
seriously. Under present circumstances and as a minimum, this means upgrading
our deterrent in Europe and protecting our deterrent in the United States.

At this crucial point in history, when Soviet power has imposed its will on
Eastern Europe, Afghanistan, Vietnam, Ethiopia and Cuba, and is atto do so in a
dozen other countries, it is hardly the time for the leader of the free world to
let down its guard in the name of ending the arms race.

The writers of the Union Theological Seminary statement will have to be more
attentive to verifiable facts as well as the accepted canons of Christian ethics
if they want their words to be taken seriously by any conscientious citizen or
statesman.
ERNEST W. LEFEVER, President, Ethics and Public Policy Center, Washington, June
1, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              270 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 13, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

FOLK FESTIVAL: A REVERENCE FOR TRADITION

BYLINE: By SAMUEL G. FREEDMAN

SECTION: Section 11; Connecticut; Page 2, Column 1; Connecticut Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 786 words


THIS weekend, Connecticut celebrates an ethnic legacy as new as the 126 persons
who were naturalized as American citizens on Friday.  The mass ceremony began
the 27th annual folk festival sponsored by the International Institute of
Connecticut. The festival, held at Sacred Heart University on Park Avenue in
Bridgeport, concludes between noon and 8 P.M. today.

Since 1918, the not-for-profit institute has helped settle and acclimate
newcomers to America. In 1981, its annual report shows, it provided such
services as translation, job counseling and courses in English to immigrants
from 67 countries, from Afghanistan to Yugoslavia.

The annual festival, however, is a time to put aside the travails and indulge.
Last year, 8,000 people attended. Although one full day of the festival is now
done - and with it such events as an Irish musical and a performance by the
Matusz Polish Dancers - much remains today.

There will be food from Vietnam, the Carpatho Mountains area of Russia, Pakistan
and a dozen other regions; crafts from the Ukraine, Ireland and Hungary, among
other lands, and Lao, Israeli and Cape Verdean folk dancing and music, from
among nine performances scheduled for today.

One of those will be the Berzelis Lithuanian Folk Dancers, a troupe whose story
illustrates both the route to America and the reverence for tradition that
animate much of the folk festival.

''The tradition is a part of me,'' said Laima Simanskis, a student at the
University of Connecticut who has been in the troupe for seven years. ''Culture
is a part. And dancing is a part.''

The Berzelis group, while directed by an adult, Dalia Dzikas, is composed of
younger people. Many have never been to Lithuania; few, if any, were born there.
Immigration has been difficult since the Soviet Union took control of the Baltic
state after World War II.

Most of the Lithuanian immigration occurred in two waves, said Mrs. Dzikas. The
first, at the turn of the century, brought farmers fleeing conscription into the
Czar's army; many came to Connecticut to work in the tobacco fields. The second
wave, largely an educated urban population, fled after the Russian takeover,
Mrs. Dzikas said.

''At first, people hoped it was just temporary,'' Mrs. Dzikas said. ''But they
soon realized return to Lithuania was impossible - unless you wanted to go to
Siberia.''

Between the two waves of immigration, about 2,000 and 3,000 Lithuanians landed
in Connecticut, Mrs. Dzikas estimated. They founded their own churches in many
of the state's major cities - Hartford, Bridgeport, New Britain, New Haven,
Waterbury -and opened local chapters of national organizations like the Knights
of Lithuania and the Lithuanian-American Community.

In Hartford, using a curriculum developed and books printed by the Community,
Lithuanian parents opened a school. Its mission was evident in its name
''Svyturys,'' or ''Lighthouse.''

The Berzelis troupe grew out of that school, and out of Mrs.  Dzikas's
experience dancing with a folkloric group in New York City.  The troupe started
10 years ago with 16 members; it now has 14 dancers between the ages of 4 and
12, and 40 who are in high school or college.

''One can understand fairly easily why the earlier generation set up their own
churches or clubs,'' Mrs. Dzikas said. ''But those who came after World War II
had hoped to return home and wanted to keep the traditions up. Instead of
borrowing, they wanted some kind of background.''

For the youngest generation - the dancers - Berzelis represents part of what
Miss Simanskis called ''the dual culture we live in.'' ''I go out and speak
English and I come home and we speak Lithuanian,'' she said. ''There are amber
and carvings from Lithuania there. My mother's constantly telling me about my
great-grandparents and my cousins and aunt and uncles still there.''

The dances of the Berzelis group reaffirm the tie and are based not only on
traditional Lithuanian steps, but on the cultural renewal that occurred in the
country between the two world wars, Mrs. Dzikas said.

Freed from czarist rule and the attempts to impose a Russian culture on them,
Lithuanian intellectuals of the time sought out the folk traditions of the
countryside, she said. The dances they discovered, sometimes incomplete and
sometimes very simple, were made more ornate - similar dances sometimes being
combined -for public performances. Decades later, the synthesis has become its
own tradition in Connecticut.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Berzelis Lithuanian Folk Dancers

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              271 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Hanoi Makes an Offer To Send Inmates to U.S.

BYLINE: By Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 240 words


Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam offered in a television interview
broadcast yesterday to free all inmates of his country's labor detention camps
if the United States would accept them.

''I can give all of them to America if America would like to have them - all of
them!'' Mr. Thach said in an interview that took place in Vietnam last week and
was broadcast last night on the CBS News program ''60 Minutes.''

Asked if his offer was a promise, Mr. Thach said: ''Yes. Today you can sign with
me an agreement and you could bring them back to the United States.''

The London-based human rights organization Amnesty International has said that
tens of thousands of Vietnamese are detained in labor re-education camps.

Most are believed to be Vietnamese who had ties to the United States or to the
South Vietnamese Government.  CBS News quoted a State Department official as
saying the United States had indicated a readiness to accept a thousand eligible
Vietnamese refugees each month under a program negotiated by the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees.

''Many Vietnamese now held in re-education camps probably would be eligible and
many have been accepted for this program because of their special ties to the
U.S.,'' the official said, ''but Hanoi has not issued them exit permits.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              272 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Asian Non-Communists Meeting in Singapore

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 133 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, June 13


The foreign ministers of five non-C@ommunist Southeast Asian countries are
scheduled to meet here Monday to seek a way to break an impasse in their
diplomatic efforts to get Vietnamese forces out of Cambodia.

The three-day meeting will be followed by a meeting, also mainly on the
Indochina situation, among officials of countries belonging to the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations and representatives of the United States, Canada,
Japan, Australia, New Zealand and the European Common Market.

Also expected to be discussed are global and regional economic issues, including
the effects of recession in the West on the association's members -Thailand,
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia and the Philippines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              273 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

NEEDED: A PACIFIC VERSAILLES

BYLINE: By Bernard K. Gordon

SECTION: Section A; Page 19, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: DUR HAM, N.H.


With Versailles behind us, Washington should talk soon with Tokyo and other
Asian capitals about a much-needed Pacific conference.

Our Asian friends are confused about our goals in Asia and often don't like the
ones we seem to have. The Japanese are beginning to resent our defense-spending
pressures, the Southeast Asians worry that we have too rosy a view of China, and
even the usually hawkish South Koreans think we beat the anti-Soviet drum too
hard.

In Asia, all these problems are interrelated, but there is no framework, other
than that provided by Washington, for considering all the parts together. It is
as if America were the hub in a wheel with many spokes: Each one separately is
well-connected, but out there on the rim things are less tight and many are
uncertain where the wheel is headed. If not attended to, this could generate the
same sort of disarray in Asia that afflicts our relations with Europe.

The causes though are not the same, for unlike European nations East Asia's
generally are in an upbeat mood. The region now leads the world in economic
growth rates, and its peoples buy and sell so much in this country that more
American trade moves across the Pacific than the Atlantic. This situation
reflects both the American stake in Asia and changes in Asia since World War II.
From Japan and Korea in the north to Australia in the south, today's Asia and
Pacific are in most respects an important success story.

The irony is that America has difficulty adjusting to the success, and to many
leaders in Asia our stance toward Moscow reflects that problem. South Koreans,
for example, worry that too harsh an anti-Soviet stance will cause Moscow to
loosen restraints on North Korea. New fighting in Korea might tempt the Russians
because of the dilemma it would pose to China: To do nothing might bring a
South-dominated Korea to China's borders but to help the North would destroy
Peking's ties with Washington and Tokyo. It is a troubling scenario, and Seoul
hopes for moderation in United States-Soviet relations.

Japan, too, suspects our harsh anti-Soviet rhetoric. Some Japanese think it is
simply intended as pressure on Tokyo for more defense spending and perhaps a
wider military role. A few think its real purpose is to sell Japan more American
weapons to help reduce the trade imbalance. While some Japanese do want to spend
more on defense, many more believe this will lead to both an enlarged Soviet
military presence and a generally higher level of tension in the region.

Apprehensions about American policy are most pronounced in Southeast Asia.
Leaders there worry that America, insensitive to China's propensity for regional
trouble-making but anxious to reassure Peking on the Taiwan issue, will provide
China both with light military equipment and political support.

It is on the Vietnam issue that differences with Washington are particularly
evident. Members of Asean (the Association of Southeast Asian Nations) strongly
oppose Vietnam's occupation of Cambodia but want nevertheless to loosen
Vietnam's dependence on Moscow. Among other things, that dependence has provided
the Soviet Union with naval and air facilities in Vietnam. China, however,
insists on ''bleeding'' Vietnam, and at the United Nations last year the United
States did not support an Asean formula on the issue of the occupation of
Cambodia. The effect was to side with Peking, leading an Asean foreign minister
to complain that Washington ''betrayed'' Asean's interests. Those are strong
words, indicative of strains present in our Pacific policy. There will be more
strains as Washington seeks to enlarge Japan's defense role in the region,
partly because Tokyo already so heavily dominates Asia's economic scene.
Moreover, what would be the Soviet response to a more heavily armed and perhaps
increasingly independent Japan?

But not all in the region are so obsessed with World War II memories that no
Japanese security role is acceptable - if it comes about through genuine and
intensive consultations. As is the case with most other issues in the region,
this is one where Washington must avoid unilateral action. Now that America has
carefully promoted social, economic and political development in Asia to the
point that its countries are vital and prosperous and want to retain strong ties
with America, it would be one of the great tragedies of the postwar era if our
policies fouled that nest.

Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. can help avoid that outcome by invoking
what he said on arrival in Versailles. No amount of trans-Atlantic telephoning,
he remarked, could substitute for the face-to-face meetings that would take
place there. He should now urge President Reagan to begin plans for a similar
effort among our Pacific associates.
---------------------------------------------------------------------
Bernard K. Gordon is professor of political science at the University of New
Hampshire. This is adapted from his article ''Asian Angst'' in the summer issue
of Foreign Policy magazine.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Cartoon

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              274 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 15, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE BLAME CHINESE FOR WOES

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


''Do you know that 85 percent of the people in Bangkok are Chinese?'' asked a
low-ranking Vietnamese official. ''This is a fact,'' he said.

His ''fact'' was a considerable exaggeration, but it was typical of the sinister
power and menace that Vietnamese authorities still impute to China and to the
Chinese. In the last few years, the Vietnamese have lumped them together as an
ethnic and international conspiracy, and they are still doing so.

One of their purposes, according to non-Vietnamese here, is to explain to the
world, and to the Vietnamese people, why their economy is in such a mess.

Tens of thousands of Vietnam's ethnic Chinese fled the country in boats after
the Government abolished Ho Chi Minh City's private trading companies in the
spring of 1978 and after enmity on all fronts later broke out between China and
Vietnam. Vietnam overthrew the Chinese-backed Pol Pot regime in Cambodia,
strengthened its ties with the Soviet Union, and, after Vietnam's border war
with China in 1979, outdid the Russians in anti-Chinese rhetoric.

Cracks in Anti-Chinese Line

Some Western diplomats in Hanoi now say they see small cracks in Vietnam's
anti-Chinese line. By one reckoning, Vietnam objected to only 30 or so ''Chinese
acts of aggression'' along their common border over the course of a recent month
- down from an earlier average of about 100 a month.

A ''positive'' documentary film about Shanghai, they report, was shown not long
ago on Vietnamese state television. The Chinese Ambassador, they point out, is
still ensconced in his elegant Hanoi embassy and still calls on Vietnamese
officials. And in the south, not only have the ethnic Chinese stopped fleeing in
boats, but the Vietnamese Government has also allowed some semiautonomous
importexport companies in Cholon, the Chinese quarter of this city, to expand
their trade with Hong Kong and other ethnic Chinese ports.

Sharp Vietnamese criticisms, however, of China and the Chinese still fill the
Vietnamese atmosphere.  In the north, one recent evening, after a foreigner
mentioned to his Government guide that he heard no music - no sound of radios -
from the open doors of the houses their car was passing in the crowded suburbs
of Hanoi, the guide instructed his driver to switch on the car radio.

Case of Counterfeiters

What emerged was a Vietnamese-language broadcast from China so the guide told
the driver to change the station, which he did, and soon the car was filled with
a broadcast from Hanoi detailing the day's ''acts of Chinese aggression.'' The
guide smiled as if the sound were music to his ears.

From the south, the Government is still reporting regularly on Chinese
treachery. Consider the case of the counterfeiters.  According to an account
published April 25 in the daily Quan Doi Nhan Dan, Hanoi's army newspaper, the
security forces of Ho Chi Minh City began noticing ''a few years ago'' that some
of the five-dong notes then circulating were fakes.

A five-dong note today is worth slightly more than 50 cents at official rates,
and less than 10 cents at unofficial rates. But it was worth more than that a
few years back.

Ethnic Chinese Reactionaries

Who had printed the notes? Ethnic Chinese reactionaries, said the article, and
their plot stretched from here to Hanoi.  Later the conspirators - Ly Hoat, ''a
shady character of Chinese origin,'' Ly Tam Chau, ''his cell leader,'' and some
others - explained why they did it.

They had, they confessed, ''been executing an order from the Chinese
reactionaries to take counterfeit money to state stores to buy goods - thus
robbing these stores of their assets and using these materials for hoarding
purposes - and to pump counterfeit money into the free market by buying gold and
goods at exhorbitant prices, thus causing market prices to soar and creating
difficulties for the livelihood of the people.''

Their crimes went further, the newspaper said. They forged official documents,
which they used to buy up more goods, and they counterfeited papers ''to give to
those wishing to flee abroad in exchange for gold.''

'Serious Lack' of Vigilance

Not yet content, the reactionaries counterfeited food stamps to make ''the
Vietnamese people's life more difficult, thus causing them to lose their
confidence in their party and state.''

At the Fifth Communist Party Congress, held late in March, Le Duc Tho, the
Politburo's fifth-ranking member, complained that the party's officials still
showed a ''serious lack'' of vigilance against China's hostile policies and
''reactionary nature.'' The struggle against China, he said, was Vietnam's
''most pressing political task.''

Like other tales in Vietnam these days, the story of the ethnic Chinese
counterfeiters not only condemns ethnic Chinese duplicity and treason, but also
attempts to explain the country's inflation, food shortages, evident official
corruption and, perhaps also, lack of confidence in the nation's leadership.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              275 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 15, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
U.S. Accuses Vietnam Over Exit Permits

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 151 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 14


The State Department accused the Vietnamese Government today of foot-dragging on
the expatriation of thousands of inmates at labor detention camps, many of whom
are eligible to come to the United States.

A spokesman, Dean Fischer, addressed the issue after Foreign Minister Nguyen Co
Thach of Vietnam said over the weekend that all such inmates would be freed if
the United States would accept them.

Mr. Fischer suggested the Vietnamese had been less forthcoming in their dealings
with United Nations refugee officials who have been serving as intermediaries
between Hanoi and Washington.

Many Vietnamese now held in re-education camps probably would be eligible for
consideration and many have been accepted for United States resettlement ''but
Hanoi has not issued them exit permits,''Mr. Fischer said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              276 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 16, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK: THE PAST HAUNTS VIETNAM

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1257 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam


A pedicab pusher, noticing two curious young men walking alongside his small
vehicle, tells his passenger, ''Watch.'' He means the wristwatch: keep it out of
sight.

You look around and in many ways the people resemble those in any number of
sprawling cities in poor hot countries where there aren't nearly enough jobs,
where even the apartment houses built in the 1960's are decaying, where clothes
are simple and where, in the crowded market districts, the world seems a sullen
hubbub.

But few people wear watches.

The Cuu Long Hotel here still serves cold Pabst Blue Ribbon beer.  At Hanoi's
best hotel, the Thang Loi, the beer is mostly warm and nameless.

The Cuu Long is still known widely as the Majestic. And some Government
officials still start to say ''Saigon.'' There are no rats in the Cuu Long's
fifth-floor dining room, as there are in the dining room of the Thang Loi in
Hanoi. And the view from the fifth floor is magnificent up and down the Saigon
River.  When a squall comes up, the palms shake, and the rusting ships beside
the quay look almost shipshape behind gray sheets of rain.

Even the hotel's telex works much of the time. When it doesn't work, according
to a Western communications expert in Hanoi, the reason is often that Ho Chi
Minh City's central telex office has stuck stubbornly to the same radio
frequency despite a change in atmospheric conditions.

Switching frequencies requires formal approval from Hanoi.

In a public park a poor woman cooks her lunch over a tiny fire. She seems
oblivious to anyone watching her.On the steps of a stone statue inscribed ''An
Duong Vuong,'' a band of gap-toothed youths and sprawling women in hair curlers,
laughing, call out mockingly to a stranger.

''This is the society you created,'' a Government official comments later,
referring to the United States.  Apart from oblivion, however, and come-hither
mockery, reactions to an American range from stares, to winks, to lifted
eyebrows and a funny greeting like ''hey.''

An amused cowboy on his motorcycle, the bill of his cap pulled squarely over his
dark glasses, gave an inexplicable thumbs-up.  But the strangest look comes from
a young man sitting on a curb. He is dressed in fatigues and wears the
floppy-brimmed green hat once worn by American and South Vietnamese soldiers.
His cheeks are hollows, his face expressionless, his eyes black. He looks like a
ghost, and may be no less unhappy for his self-consciousness.

Young ladies wear gloves, despite the heat, as they ride their bicycles down the
boulevards. Others appear to have camped out semipermanently on the boulevards'
roundabouts and medians.

A parked line of American cars, with tailfins, circa 1957, painted red, wait for
something along Nguyen Hue Street. Some of the city's public buses are Dodges.

The Coca-Cola signs, by contrast, have been painted over, but you can still buy
fresh Kodak film on the black market.

At the low tables in innumerable small coffee houses, opened to the street,
people sit for hours, as if rooted to their chairs.  Six months ago, according
to one resident, some cafes here offered music at night, but then the musical
cafes closed down. Like an estimated 80 percent of southern Vietnam's economic
life, they were privately owned. Recently, new versions of the same cafes have
opened, and under many of the same managers - but under Government auspices.

By day the shabby cafes are quiet places, and although their customers are known
to tell tales in them against the Government, they also sit and watch.

On the street, there is a motorcycle accident, and then a brief traffic jam of
trucks and bicycles and pedicabs. A child is arrested by a plainclothes
policeman, apparently for shoplifting. The citizens pass by. Women chat with
their friends in front of a vegetable stand before buying a few small items.
Cigarettes are being offered from countless glass-topped boxes on legs. Cookies
for sale from pushcarts.

Madame Dai's restaurant is out of the ordinary. It is tucked into the back room
of a once-elegant house along a side street shaded by tall trees during the day
and sunk in extraordinary gloom at night.  The Vietnamese are small users of
electricity.

But Madame Dai, portly, brilliant and gray-haired, greets her visitors as if
they were ambassadors, and her well-lit dining room is so unabashedly ancien
regime that even a Communist Party visitor from Hanoi soon softens.

Dusty leather-bound lawbooks line the walls. Most are in French and her copies
of ''The Palace Journal of Jurisprudence and Legislation'' date back to at least
1909.

''I am a lawyer,'' Madame Dai says civilly. She adds, when pressed, ''until
1975,'' when she opened her restaurant.  She would rather not speak English,
which she says she speaks badly and which the man from Hanoi speaks well, and
instead she rattles on graciously with some European customers.

There are five customers altogether, plus a boy who is studying intently at a
table stacked with books, plus many cats. The glasses sparkle.

The man from Hanoi - amid so much worldliness, and after a bowl of soup, a
lobster taxied in fresh from the sea, a shish kebab, flan, coffee and several
drinks - asks an American what the Americans - ''the people'' - really think
about Vietnam.

Not much these days, in his interlocutor's opinion.  ''Are they repressing the
war?'' asks the man from Hanoi.  Some, no doubt; but most probably have more
immediate things to think about.  Plainly curious beneath his certainties, the
man suggests that his country may be somewhat isolated.

One thing that makes a visitor feel that Ho Chi Minh City is somehow occupied
territory - even Hanoi admits that ''integration'' has been difficult - is the
petitioners. They are everywhere, they want to get out, and there are more of
them than the Vietnamese mothers who bring you their photostats of American
identification cards.

Male. Thirty-six. A former reporter for South Vietnam's news agency. No longer
allowed to work. Married. Two children.  A man who says he is Chinese, with a
Nationalist Chinese passport.  ''There is no future,'' he says hoarsely. He
points to his wife across the street.

A former South Vietnamese soldier. Photograph: himself, his wife, his six
children. He writes of ''the difficulty of my family situation.''

A man lurking outside the French Consulate. Former custodian at the American
Embassy. Has a calling card. Has an identification number.  Says he lacks the
gold to buy his way out.

A woman whose relatives fled by boat. Will she join them? She draws a finger
across her throat and says, ''The Vietnamese,'' but she is Vietnamese herself.

A visitor, having located the dark quarters of an old Vietnamese friend of an
American friend, and having learned from the old man's four children and stunned
widow that he had died a few weeks ago, is soon asked to lend his pen to a
neighbor. She scribbles her name. She worked for the United States Government;
1966-1975; ''Joint Economic Office''; ''U.S.A.I.D.''; ''ID card number 2390.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Vietnam

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              277 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 16, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRITONS ARE TAKING DELIGHT IN THEIR VICTORY IN THE FALKLANDS

BYLINE: By STEVEN RATTNER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 22, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 840 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 15


A wave of pride and elation cascaded over Britain today as joyous citizens
delighted in the news of victory over Argentina on the Falkland Islands.

For many, the spirit was established last night when, in most un-British
fashion, hundreds gathered outside 10 Downing Street to sing ''Rule, Britannia''
and ''God Save the Queen.'' At one point, they were greeted by Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher, her cheeks radiant and her smile broad.

''Today has put the Great back in Britain,'' she told the group. As much as
anything, Mrs. Thatcher's lofty language and frequent invocation of the
principles of democracy have helped instill into Britain its new sense of
self-adulation.

For Britain, dispirited by years of economic decline, the success in the
Falklands has almost single-handedly stimulated a renewed sense of pride and
patriotism, an outpouring of feeling in a nation not given to such
demonstrations.

''Somehow we had come to accept second best as our national status,'' the
conservative Daily Mail said. ''Every back in Britain is a little bit straighter
today.''

Plans to Celebrate Announced

In cities across the country, plans were announced for celebrations, many of
them to commemorate the return of the Falkland forces. In Plymouth, home of many
of the servicemen, there was dancing in the streets until early this morning.
Speculation has begun that there will be the first victory parade to the City of
London, the financial district, since 1949.

''I'm proud of my country and now that we've got something to celebrate, I think
we should,'' said Alan Morse, a young accountant, as he walked briskly along The
Strand today. ''So many countries don't stand up for these sorts of principles
anymore and we did.''

More than at any time since the dispute erupted, the streets were alive today
with talk of the Falklands. In pubs, in offices, at bus stops and at home,
conversations almost universally centered on the victory. Newsstands sold
uncommonly large quantities of evening papers.

''After all, we won the war,'' responded one young lady to a companion offering
a favorable comment on a British product, as they walked along Adelaide Street
late this afternoon. Places like Tumbledown Mountain and Moody Brook have
suddenly become household words.

Increased Support for War

The belief in what was done in the Falklands was far more universal today than
at any point during the fighting. Even liberal politicians and newspapers, from
whom mutterings of discontent have occasionally come in the last 10 weeks,
offered nothing but praise for Prime Minister Thatcher and her handling of the
crisis.

Inquiries will now be started into how the Falkland crisis started, but if
sentiments today are any guide, only modest appetite exists for recriminations.
This afternoon, when Tony Benn, a leftist Member of Parliament, called the
episode a ''tragic and unnecessary war,'' he was ridiculed by some and ignored
by just about everyone else.

Similarly, public sentiment appears firmly behind Mrs. Thatcher's refusal to
contemplate transferring sovereignty over the islands to Argentina. For the
moment, practical considerations such as cost and distance have been suspended
in favor of the new emotional attachment to the Falklands.

''Our boys died down there so that the Falklands could remain under British
rule, as the islanders wanted,'' said Mary Holmesford, a middle-aged woman from
the suburbs who was in London to shop. ''For us to give the islands to Argentina
would be a disgrace to their memories.''

A Crop of Military Heroes

Zealous efforts are already being directed toward idolizing Britain's first
group of military heroes in 25 years. In this military-conscious country,
success on the battlefield is a particularly gratifying form of achievement.
Unseared by an experience like Vietnam and partial to anything involving
uniforms, Britons accord their soldiers unusually high respect and, in turn,
attract unusually well-qualified men into their all-volunteer forces.

Tales of heroism in the South Atlantic have enjoyed mass audiences. Earlier this
week, when victory appeared imminent, speculation even arose that Queen
Elizabeth II would make Rear Adm. John F. Woodward, the commander of the task
force, a Knight of the Garter, the most distinguished accolade the Queen can
bestow. Vast numbers of other awards and medals appear certain.

For Britain, the conflict brought its share of anxious moments, such as on the
day when two important ships were destroyed.  ''We showed the aggressor that
invasions just don't pay,'' said Paul Donovan, a clerical worker, as he waited
for his train to suburban Meopham tonight. ''We've set a good example for
everyone else.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of rsidents of Stanley

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              278 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 16, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 28, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 823 words


Salutes for Addabbo

W hen the United States Marine Corps holds its weekly band concert and marching
demonstration at its Hill barracks Friday evening, the honorary reviewing
officer will be one of the most outspoken doves in Congress, Representative
Joseph P. Addabbo of New York.

No one in the House of Representatives will be surprised by this seeming
anomaly, for Mr. Addabbo is also chairman of the House Defense Appropriations
Subcommittee, and the Marines, like any other service, know which side their
budget is buttered on.

So the Queens Democrat will take the smart salutes of the precision marchers
just as though he had never opposed the war in Vietnam, voted to cut off aid to
Cambodia or fought the B-1 bomber and the MX missile system. Power, as they say
in the Marine Corps, breeds respect.
Vintage Jordan

T he wine carries a prominent ''Jordan'' label when the Ambassador of the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, Abdul Hadi Majali, entertains at his official
residence. Not an import from the Middle East or a vanity brand, but products of
the Jordan Vinyard and Winery of Healdsburg, Calif., one of the rich gifts of
Sonoma County.
Some Things Never Change

E ven in a city whose institutions seem achingly slow to change, the
Metropolitan Club stands out as a symbol of absolute immobility.  Founded in
1872, its clubhouse built in 1907, the club has had no female members, only a
few Jews and even fewer blacks on its roster of wealthy businessmen, lawyers and
Government leaders. Stability is the watchword; the Metropolitan Club will not
be moved, or even ruffled.

Thus a member was startled the other day to receive a letter apparently chiding
him for transgressions against the spirit if not the bylaws of the institution,
the sort of thing that simply doesn't happen. It cited ''an unwritten law,
mellowed now into tradition, that business between members or with their guests
was not to be conducted in the public rooms of the Club.''

''Recently,'' the letter continued, ''complaints have come to the board of
governors of instances in the main dining room and the lounge where papers and
documents were passed across tables and obviously discussed. Whether the
business being done was that of the hard-pressed finance committee of a worthy
charity, or of lawyer and client or of business men in an informal conference is
immaterial.''

The threat of imminent scandal dissolved rapidly, however. The letter proved to
have been written in January, 1966, but is still being circulated as a reminder
that behavior at the Metropolitan Club never changes.
Silver Cactus for Goldwater

S enator Barry Goldwater has survived with remarkable aplomb most of the
indignities that well-meaning admirers seem to heap upon a losing Presidential
candidate. Last night it was a group of 150 selfstyled Young Republicans of the
1960's who saluted the Arizonan as their ''Ole Friend of the Century'' and
presented him with a sterling silver cactus mounted on petrified wood whose
prongs formed the letters ''Y.R.''
Antinuclear Cocktails

W hat costs $100 a ticket, overlooks Rock Creek Park, provides early comers with
a limited edition silkscreen print and promises valet parking? Answer: What is
likely to be the most elegant fundraising cocktail party of the political
season, held next Monday in support of the Nuclear Weapons Freeze Initiative on
the District of Columbia ballot in November.

The glittering list of sponsors includes W. Averell Harriman and his wife,
Pamela; Senators Edward M. Kennedy, Mark O. Hatfield and Claiborne Pell;
Representatives Ronald V. Dellums, Edward J. Markey and Walter E. Fauntroy, and
Paul C. Warnke, former director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.

The invitation offers ''a discussion of the Nuclear Weapons Freeze'' with the
sponsors, to take place at the home of Donald and Ann Brown in the Forest Hills
section of northwest Washington. On its cover, the invitation observes: ''In our
short time on earth, we are given a choice about the kind of world we leave
behind,'' a quotation from Mr. Harriman whose time has been longer than most.
'Made in Korea'

S enator Howard H. Baker Jr. had a bad moment during his recent trip to China.
In his unofficial capacity as a Tennessee promoter, he was distributing
matchbooks advertising the Knoxville World's Fair among mainland natives and
suddenly realized they might be inflammatory products of Taiwan. An
international incident was avoided, however, when he discovered they carried the
imprint ''Made in Korea.'' Phil Gailey Warren Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              279 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Asian Bloc Bids Hanoi Pull Out of Cambodia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 148 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, June 16


Non-Communist countries in Southeast Asia urged Vietnam again today to support a
political solution to the Cambodian crisis and blamed Hanoi for endangering
peace in the area.

Foreign ministers from the Association of Southeast Asian Nations ended their
three-day conference by blaming Hanoi for endangering peace and stability in the
region but made no new proposals for ending the four-year conflict.

Vietnam has maintained 200,000 soldiers in neighboring Cambodia since January
1979, when Vietnamese-led troops toppled the Pekingbacked Government in Phnom
Penh.

In a joint communique, the ministers from Thailand, Singapore, Indonesia, the
Philippines and Malaysia warned Vietnam that they would keep up diplomatic and
political pressure until Vietnam withdrew its troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              280 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
FRIEND OF THE FALKLANDERS

BYLINE: By WILLIAM BORDERS, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 953 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 16


When Rex Masterman Hunt, the British Governor of the Falkland Islands,
surrendered them to the invading Argentines last April, he made this defiant
declaration, as he and his wife boarded the plane at the Stanley Airport:
''We'll be back.''

Now, triumphantly, Mr. Hunt is making good on his promise, going back - probably
within days - to an island territory that is once again in British hands, and he
is ''absolutely delighted.''

A 55-year-old career diplomat who has spent most of his time in British
embassies and consulates in Asia, Mr. Hunt has received a good deal of praise
for his conduct during the Falkland crisis.  People here were very pleased to
read, for example, that after his surrender, to an overwhelming force, Mr. Hunt
refused to shake hands with the Argentine commanding general.

''I do not shake hands with an invader of British territory,'' he told the
general. The Argentine said that it seemed ungentlemanly behavior, to which Mr.
Hunt replied, ''I think it very uncivilized to invade our country.''

'Don't Lose Heart'

During the two and a half months that followed, Mr. Hunt has remained in
Britain, his role somewhat ambiguous and his future uncertain. In general, he
avoided public attention, though he did make an occasional attempt to raise
morale back in the Falklands. For example, in an Easter message broadcast by the
World Service of the BBC, he said: ''Don't lose heart. I'm looking forward to
coming back soon.''

At one point in Britain's negotiations with Argentina, it seemed that his job,
with its colonial connotations, might be eliminated as a concession to the
Argentines. But no one in the British Government is talking about conceding
anything to the Argentines any more, and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher,
announcing on Tuesday that Mr. Hunt would be going back to the Falklands, said
that he would be ''in effect'' a kind of civil commissioner, working in concert
with Maj.  Gen. Jeremy Moore, who commands the British military force there.

While the Prime Minister was speaking in the House of Commons, paying tribute to
the British servicemen who had died ''that others may live in freedom and
justice,'' Mr. Hunt was listening from the gallery. And the tears that he
occasionally wiped from his eyes were a reminder of the close ties that have
built up between the Governor and his island territory in the two years that he
has served there.

''He is the most popular governor we have had in years and years,'' said a
longtime resident of the Falklands, who is in London.  ''Well before this crisis
started, Rex Hunt was known as a man who really had the islanders' interest at
heart.''

A Former R.A.F. Pilot

An affable, gregarious man with the blunt, direct manner often associated with
his native Yorkshire, Mr. Hunt likes to drive himself in a Land-Rover across the
marshy Falkland countryside. For longer trips, he flew his own Cessna Skyhawk,
using skills learned as a Royal Air Force pilot in the closing days of World War
II, when he was still a teen-ager. (He thinks the plane was destroyed during the
war.)

He and his wife, the former Mavis Buckland, often entertain in Government House,
their roomy, green-roofed residence on the west side of Stanley, on the
waterfront, and their 20-year old daughter and 18-year-old son, on visits from
England, are also well known to the 1,800 islanders.

''Rex is the kind of unpretentious chap who, instead of telling someone else to
do something, will pull on his Wellington boots and march across the bogs to do
it himself,'' a friend from the Falklands said.

In an interview with a British newspaper early in the confrontation, Mr. Hunt
said that he would like to be aboard one of the ships in the naval task force,
so as ''to be with them when they land'' in the Falklands.

But he also attaches importance to the ceremonial side of his job.  For formal
occasions, he rides around Stanley in the official governor's car, a maroon
London taxicab with the Union Jack flying on the front fender. And for his
expulsion by the Argentines, he insisted on wearing the full regalia of his
office, which includes a sword and a hat with ostrich plumes.

In Saigon at the Fall

In response to a question, he said Tuesday that he is taking these symbols of
the Falklands' colonial status back to Stanley with him.  But it was a
reflection of the ambiguous nature of his new status that he added, in reference
to the plumed hat, ''I will wear it if I am authorized to wear it.''

Mr. Hunt, who has a degree from Cambridge University, joined the overseas civil
service in 1951, and served a long tour in Uganda, retiring from there as a
district commissioner in 1963. He then joined the diplomatic corps, in which his
posts have included Indonesia, Malaysia and Vietnam.

He was in Saigon at the time of its fall in 1975 and was evacuated to Singapore,
an experience that he said was ''very similar'' to his departure from the
Falklands last April.

Today, he said that he was all packed to return to Stanley, and would be going
as soon as the Defense Ministry could arrange it. And he said there would soon
be other arrivals on the islands. Six hundred people have applied to settle in
the Falklands - not only from Britain, but also from Australia, New Zealand and
Canada.

''They say they want a new life helping to rebuild the islands,'' Mr. Hunt
declared, saying that skilled immigrants would be very welcome. ''The Falklands
have a very bright future indeed.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              281 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

ABROAD AT HOME;
OUT OF THIS NETTLE

BYLINE: By Anthony Lewis

SECTION: Section A; Page 27, Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 857 words

DATELINE: BOSTON, June 16


The events in Lebanon provide a historic opportunity for American leadership: so
analysts on all sides agree, those who welcome Israel's military triumph and
those who worry about its cost. The United States, it is said, should seize the
moment to help restore a united Lebanon and to move for a wider Arab-Israeli
settlement.

But the first question is not what American diplomacy should do but who will do
it. There is no one in the present State Department machinery with the ability,
the time and the presence to carry off such an assignment. The situation calls
for an imaginative political appointment, a new special negotiator for the
Middle East. In my judgment the man for the job is Henry Kissinger.

To understand why the present challenge cannot be met by diplomatic
business-as-usual, consider what happened after the last Middle East war. That
was the October war of 1973, which left Israel desperately frightened and did
terrible damage to the Egyptian Army. Yet from that trauma skilled diplomacy and
inspired political leadership drew the beginnings of peace.

While the fighting went on, Mr. Kissinger understood the necessity of preserving
two things if there was to be a chance of peace: the safety of Israel and the
pride of Egypt. The war ended with Egypt defeated but not humiliated, and Mr.
Kissinger seized the opportunity. With single-minded commitment and patience, he
negotiated the arrangements for partial withdrawal of forces in Sinai and the
Golan Heights.

The strongest critic of Henry Kissinger on Cambodia and Vietnam and other issues
cannot properly deny the greatness of what he did in the Middle East after 1973.
But the point is not to praise that performance, which already has a sure place
in history. It is to consider what followed then and compare the challenge now.

Anwar Sadat was the next crucial actor after 1973. He had the vision to see that
there was a better way to advance his country's interests than renewed military
confrontation with Israel. He had the courage to go to Jerusalem. He had the
tenacity to stick with the negotiating process through long months of
disappointment afterward.

Then there was Menachem Begin, who responded in kind to Sadat's initiative. He
had the imagination to see what peace with Egypt could mean. He had the
toughness to resist bitter opposition from his own political ranks and agree to
withdraw from all

Egyptian territory in return for peace and security arrangements.  The final
necessary ingredient was American leadership. That was supplied by President
Carter, who made an extraordinary personal contribution at Camp David to
bridging the last differences between Israel and Egypt, and intervened crucially
again in the actual drafting of the peace treaty.

What distinguished the actors in that process was that they were able to take
the long view. Sadat, for example, emphasized the need for psychological change
to establish trust and true peace. The others also looked ahead to more lasting
ways of vindicating national interests.

To say that is to indicate how much more formidable the task in the Middle East
is today. Long-range vision is a missing quality.  Everyone acts as if the only
concern is to get past today's crisis, to make it to tomorrow morning with
minimum political damage.

On the Arab side there is no sign of a leadership willing to take great risks
for peace. What is happening to the Palestine Liberation Organization is not
just a physical disaster but a tragic comment on past failures to act with
political vision. If the P.L.O. had been willing to come out openly for the idea
of living in peace with Israel, it would be in a far stronger moral and
political position now.

In Israel the dominant characteristic is military opportunism: seize the target
for the day, define a new objective tomorrow, do not worry about the human
consequences. It is the opposite of the longrange wisdom and magnanimity that
make peace possible. Mr. Begin still speaks as Prime Minister, but the hands are
the hands of Arik Sharon.

The need for American leadership is thus even more urgent than it was in 1973.
Yet so far the Reagan Administration has shied away from that role. Secretary of
State Haig, who understands the various Middle East interests, is too pressed by
other problems in a troubled world. Philip Habib is a superb professional but
does not have the stamina or political standing. The President has shown no real
interest.

If anything positive is to come from the wreckage of Lebanon, the American
Government will have to transform its attitude - as indeed it awoke from
somnolence in 1973. There are obvious objections to a role for Mr. Kissinger,
notably the suspicion of him on the Republican right. But if the United States
is serious about this challenge, President Reagan could pick no other personal
representative as effective as Henry Kissinger.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: OP-ED

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              282 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 17, 1982, Thursday, Late City Final Edition

BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Phil Gailey and Warren Weaver Jr.

SECTION: Section B; Page 12, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 796 words


V.A. Problem on Hold

A lmost from the day he was sworn in as head of the Veterans Administration,
Robert P. Nimmo has proved to be a public relations problem for President
Reagan.

Among other things, he compared the effects of Agent Orange to teen-age acne,
spent more than $50,000, in violation of a Presidential directive, to refurbish
his office while proposing cuts in veterans benefits, and froze construction of
politically popular V.A. hospitals. More recently, he rejected a recommendation
by subordinates that V.A. employees here be given an hour off to attend
groundbreaking ceremonies for a Vietnam veterans' memorial. Mr.  Nimmo himself
skipped the event to play golf.

This week, on the advice of his inspector general, Mr. Nimmo reimbursed the
Government $6,441 for the overtime pay of his chauffeur, who drove him to and
from work in violation of the law. He also announced that he would give up the
lease on a Buick Electra, which cost taxpayers $708 a month, and fold himself
into a Government compact car. At one point, representatives of a veterans'
group filed an official complaint because it said Mr. Nimmo's Buick was being
parked in one of four parking places at V.A. headquarters reserved for the
handicapped.

Even before these latest developments, veterans' groups, members of Congress and
other critics had been telling the White House that Mr.  Nimmo must go if the
President valued the support of the veterans' constitutency. They decided to
take their case to Edwin Meese 3d, counselor to the President, after learning
that the agency's deputy administrator, Charles T. Hagel, a Vietnam veteran, had
informed the White House earlier this month of his intention to resign because
of policy differences with Mr. Nimmo.

White House officials asked Mr. Hagel not to submit his resignation for at least
30 days to give the President time to decide what to do about Mr. Nimmo, who has
said all along he did not want the V.A. job and accepted it only to carry out
budget cuts Mr. Reagan wanted.
Wood for the Oval Office

T he Oval Office is about to get a new floor. The present floor, which was
installed in 1969, looks like wood, but it's not. It's vinyl. Aides persuaded
President Reagan that a President should be able to walk on real wood. So, this
summer a California company, Rode Brothers, will install a solid floor of
Kentucky walnut and oak.
Presidential Role Model

''J anet Brown?'' said the secretary in Vice President Bush's office. ''Never
heard of her. Let me ask around.'' She came back on the phone. ''Sorry, nobody
seems to know her.''

Janet Brown is the role model chosen by the British author Jeffery Archer for
his new best seller, ''The Prodigal Daughter,'' about the first female President
of the United States. The publisher's promotion package said that the
30-year-old Miss Brown works in the office of Vice President Bush. Perhaps her
name is not known in the front office because she is tucked away in the Old
Executive Office Building working on the Vice President's regulatory reform
project.

Several years ago, when Mr. Archer, a former member of the House of Commons,
began the book, he asked Elliot L. Richardson, who has held a number of Cabinet
positions in Republican administrations, and former Vice President Nelson A.
Rockefeller to suggest a young woman who they thought might someday be
President. Each independently came up with the name of Miss Brown, who had
worked for both.

Miss Brown, a native of the capital who describes herself as a public policy
junkie, said she had done research on the American political system for Mr.
Archer and had ''tried to share with him the thoughts of a woman committed to
public service.''

Naturally, she said, her part in the book has caused her to think about a
political career of her own, although she is not ready to predict that she will
go all the way to 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.
Democrats Report Break-In

T oday is the 10th anniversary of the break-in at the Democratic National
Committee offices in the Watergate complex. The committee now leases space in
the Air Line Pilots Association building, which, unfortunately, is no more
burglar-proof than the Watergate. A few nights ago thieves took a television set
from the office of Robert Neuman, the committee's communications director. This
time, said Mr.  Neuman, the only thing third rate about the burglary was the
television set.  Phil Gailey Warren Weaver Jr.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              283 of 330 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 1982 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

STEALING 'FIREFOX'

BYLINE: By VINCENT CANBY

SECTION: Section C; Column 5; Weekend Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 801 words


THE Russians have developed a superweapon code-named ''Firefox.'' It's a fighter
plane that flies six times the speed of sound and whose armament can be
activated by the brain waves of the pilot, though the pilot must think in
Russian. It isn't fair if he thinks in English and then transposes those
thoughts into Russian. The possible effects of this estimated two- to
three-second advantage over conventional weaponry boggles the minds of British
and American intelligence officials. Says one grimly, ''It will change the shape
of the world.''

The only thing to do, they agree, is to steal the plane from its hangar deep
inside the Soviet Union and fly it out to the ''free world,'' a job for which
there is just one man. James Bond? Superman? Of course not.

It's Mitchell Gant (Clint Eastwood), self-described as ''the best there is,'' a
former Army pilot living in seclusion in Alaska and still trying to cope with a
hideous Vietnam flashback that appears every time he hears a helicopter. If Gant
lived in Manhattan, he'd be a basket case.

The Allied intelligence people aren't aware of his problem. Luckily it's a tiny
one and scarcely figures in the rest of the film. His superiors know only that
Gant is a superpilot and that because his mother was Russian, he speaks the
language, as they say, like a native.

This is not only the beginning of ''Firefox,'' which opens today at the National
and other theaters, it's also pretty much the middle and the end of it, though
the film does move around a lot, from Alaska to the continental United States
and, eventually, to the Soviet Union and a small patch of polar icecap.

In addition to starring in ''Firefox,'' Mr. Eastwood also produced and directed
it. He should have been tougher on everybody, especially on Alex Lasker and
Wendell Wellman, who adapted the screenplay from a novel by Craig Thomas.
''Firefox'' is only slightly more suspenseful than it is plausible. It's a James
Bond movie without girls, a Superman movie without a sense of humor.

Mr. Eastwood has directed himself a number of times with far more entertaining
results, most notably in ''The Gauntlet.'' In ''Firefox,'' he treats himself
with such solemnity he seems to forget that action must be demonstrated, not
just talked about.

Mitchell Gant carries off his mission with so little interference that you can't
believe someone hasn't already stolen the Kremlin from Moscow, brick by brick,
and reassembled it in southern California as an amusement park. Mr. Eastwood
takes a dim if reassuring view of the Russians and the cold war. The
superweapon, we learn, is the work of Soviet-Jewish superscientists, who play a
key part in the Allied intelligence plan.

''What is it with you Jews?'' Mitchell Gant asks one of the men who aids him
inside the Soviet Union. ''Don't you ever get tired of fighting city hall?''

''Firefox'' expresses a most cavalier attitude toward the lives of its
supporting characters. Nearly everyone who assits in the planenapping is
promptly bumped off. They die in such numbers, and with so little emotion, that
even the screenplay seems to become selfconscious about it.

''Why are you prepared to die?'' Mitchell Gant asks one fellow. The answer:
''It's a small thing compared to my resentment of the K.G.B.''

That little matter out of the way, ''Firefox'' lurches toward its climactic
sequence, the flight out of the Soviet Union with the Communist Party's First
Secretary directing the pursuit from the ground. At a crucial point, Mitchell
Gant must activate the plane's weapons by his brain waves. It's not easy.

''Firefox,'' which has been rated PG (''Parental Guidance Suggested''), contains
some not very convincing violence and some vulgar language.

Plane-Napper

FIREFOX, produced and directed by Clint East- wood; screenplay by Alex Lasker
and Wendell Wellman, based on the novel by Craig Thomas; director of
photography, Bruce Surtees; edited by Ferris Webster and Ron Spang; music by
Maurice Jarre; released by Warner Bros. At the National, Broadway and 44th
Street; Loews 83d Quad, at Broadway; Gemini, 64th Street and Second Avenue; 86th
Street, at Lexington Avenue; 34th Street Showplace, near Second Ave- nue, and
other theaters. Running time: 136 minutes. This film is rated PG.

Mitchell Gant . . . . . Clint Eastwood
Kenneth Aubrey . . . . . Freddie Jones
Buckholz . . . . . David Huffman
Pavel Upenskoy . . . . . Warren Clarke
Semelovsky . . . . . Ronald Lacey
Colonel Kontarsky . . . . . Kenneth Colley
General Vladimirov . . . . . Klaus Lowitsch
Pyotr Baranovich . . . . . Nigel Hawthorne
First Secretary . . . . . Stefan Schnabel
General Brwon . . . . . Thomas Hill
Major Lanyev . . . . . Clive Merrison
Lieutenant Colonel Voskov . . . . . Kai Wulff
Natalia . . . . . Dimitra Arliss
Walters . . . . . Austin Willis
Captain Seerbacker . . . . . Michael Currie


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2004

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: photo of Clint Eastwood

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper


                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              284 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

TRANSCRIPT OF REAGAN'S U.N. SPEECH ON THE NUCLEAR ARMS RACE

SECTION: Section A; Page 16, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 3891 words


Following is a transcript of President Reagan's address yesterday to the United
Nations second special session on disarmament, as recorded by The New York
Times:

Mr. Secretary General, Mr. President, distinguished delegates, ladies and
gentlemen.  I speak today as both a citizen of the United States and of the
world. I come with the heartfelt wishes of my people for peace, bearing honest
proposals and looking for genuine progress.

Dag Hammarskjold said 24 years ago this month, ''We meet in a time of peace,
which is no peace.'' His words are as true today as they were then.

More than a hundred disputes have disturbed the peace among nations since World
War II and today the threat of nuclear disaster hangs over the lives of all our
people. The Bible tells us there will be a time for peace. But, so far this
century, mankind has failed to find it.

The Tide of Belligerence

The United Nations is dedicated to world peace. And its charter clearly
prohibits the international use of force. Yet the tide of belligerence continues
to rise. The charter's influence has weakened even in the four years since the
first special session on disarmament.

We must not only condemn aggression. We must enforce the dictates of our charter
and resume the struggle for peace.  The record of history is clear. Citizens of
the United States resort to force reluctantly and only when they must. Our
foreign policy, as President Eisenhower once said, is not difficult to state. We
are for peace, first, last and always for very simple reasons. We know that only
in a peaceful atmosphere, a peace with justice, one in which we can be
confident, can America prosper as we have known prosperity in the past, he said.

He said to those who challenge the truth of those words, let me point out at the
end of World War II we were the only undamaged industrial power in the world.
Our military supremacy was unquestioned. We had harnessed the atom and had the
ability to unleash its destructive force anywhere in the world. In short, we
could have achieved world domination but that was contrary to the character of
our people.

New Chapter for Mankind

Instead, we wrote a new chapter in the history of mankind.  We used our power
and wealth to rebuild the war-ravaged economies of the world, both East and
West, including those nations who had been our enemies.

We took the initiative in creating such international institutions as this
United Nations where leaders of good will could come together to build bridges
for peace and prosperity.

America has no territorial ambitions.  We occupy no countries and we have built
no walls to lock our people in. Our commitment to self-determination, freedom
and peace is the very soul of America. That commitment is as strong today as it
ever was.

U.S. in Four Wars

The United States has fought four wars in my lifetime. In each, we struggled to
defend freedom and democracy.  We were never the aggressors.  America's strength
and, yes, her military power, have been a force for peace, not conquest. For
democracy, not despotism. For freedom, not tyranny.

Watching, as I have, succeeding generations of American youth bleed their lives
on the farflung battlefields to protect our ideals and secure the rule of law, I
have known how important it is to deter conflicts.

But since coming to the Presidency, the enormity of the responsibility of this
office has made my commitment even deeper. I believe that responsibility is
shared by all of us here today.

The Normandy Landing

On our recent trip to Europe, my wife, Nancy, told me of a bronze statue 22 feet
high that she saw on a cliff on the coast of France.  The beach at the base of
that cliff is called St. Laurent. But countless American family Bibles have
written it in a flyleaf and know it as Omaha Beach. The pastoral quiet of that
French countryside is in marked contrast to the bloody violence that took place
there on a June day 38 years ago when the Allies stormed the Continent. At the
end of just one day of battle, 10,500 Americans were wounded, missing or killed
in what became known as the Normandy landing. The statue atop that cliff is
called ''The Spirit of American Youth Rising From the Waves.'' Its image of
sacrifice is almost too powerful to describe.

The pain of war is still vivid in our national memory. It sends me to this
special session of the United Nations eager to comply with the plea of Pope Paul
VI when he spoke in this chamber nearly 17 years ago. ''If you want to be
brothers,'' His Holiness said, ''let the arms fall from your hands.''

Well, we Americans yearn to let them go. But we need more than mere words. More
than empty promises before we can proceed.  We look around the world and see
rampant conflict and aggression.

Sources of the Conflict

There are many sources of this conflict - expansionist ambitions, local
rivalries, the striving to obtain justice and security.  We must all work to
resolve such discords by peaceful means and to prevent them from escalation.  In
the nuclear era, the major powers bear a special responsibility to ease these
sources of conflict and to refrain from aggression.  And that's why we're so
deeply concerned by Soviet conduct.  Since World War II, the record of tyranny
has included Soviet violation of the Yalta Agreements leading to domination of
Eastern Europe, symbolized by the Berlin wall, a grim, gray monument to
repression that I visited just a week ago. It includes the takeovers of
Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Afghanistan and the ruthless repression of the proud
people of Poland.

Guerrillas at Work

Soviet-sponsored guerrillas and terrorists are at work in Central and South
America, in Africa, the Middle East, in the Caribbean and in Europe, violating
human rights and unnerving the world with violence. Communist atrocities in
Southeast Asia, Afghanistan and elsewhere continue to shock the free world as
refugees escape to tell of their horror.

The decade of so-called detente witnessed the most massive Soviet buildup of
military power in history.  They increased their defense spending by 40 percent
while American defense actually declined in the same real terms.  Soviet
aggression and support for violence around the world have eroded the confidence
needed for arms negotiations.  While we exercised unilateral restraint, they
forged ahead and today possess nuclear and conventional forces far in excess of
an adequate deterrent capability. Soviet oppression is not limited to the
countries they invade.

Buttons Snatched in Moscow

At the very time the Soviet Union is trying to manipulate the peace movement in
the West, it is stifling a budding peace movement at home. In Moscow, banners
are scuttled, buttons are snatched and demonstrators are arrested when even a
few people dare to speak about their fears.

Eleanor Roosevelt, one of our first ambassadors to this body, reminded us that
the high-sounding words of tyrants stand in bleak contradiction to their deeds.
Their promises, she said, are in deep contrast to their performances.

My country learned a bitter lesson in this century. The scourge of tyranny
cannot be stopped with words alone.  So we have embarked on an effort to renew
our strength that had fallen dangerously low.  We refuse to become weaker while
potential adversaries remain committed to their imperialist adventures.

Americans Are World Citizens

My people have sent me here today to speak for them as citizens of the world,
which they truly are.  For we Americans are drawn from every nationality
represented in this chamber today.  We understand that men and women of every
race and creed can and must work together for peace.  We stand ready to take the
next steps down the road of cooperation through verifiable arms reduction.
Agreements on arms control and disarmament can be useful in reinforcing peace,
but they're not magic. We should not confuse the signing of agreements with the
solving of problems. Simply collecting agreements will not bring peace.
Agreements genuinely reinforce peace only when they are kept. Otherwise we are
building a paper castle that will be blown away by the winds of war.

Deeds, Not Words, Wanted

Let me repeat. We need deeds, not words, to convince us of Soviet sincerity
should they choose to join us on this path.  Since the end of World War II, the
United States has been the leader in serious disarmament and arms control
proposals. In 1946, in what became known as the Baruch Plan, the United States
submitted a proposal for control of nuclear weapons and nuclear energy by an
international authority. The Soviets rejected this plan.

In 1955, President Eisenhower made his open skies proposal, under which the
United States and the Soviet Union would have exchanged blueprints of military
establishments and provided for aerial reconaissance. The Soviets rejected this
plan.

In 1963, the limited test ban treaty came into force. This treaty ended nuclear
weapons testing in the atmosphere, outer space or under water by participating
nations.

In 1970 the treaty on the nonproliferation of nuclear weapons took effect. The
United States played a major role in this key effort to prevent the spread of
nuclear explosives and to provide for international safeguards on civil nuclear
activities.

U.S. Deeply Committed

My country remains deeply committed to those objectives today and to
strengthening the nonproliferation framework. This is essential to international
security.

In the early 1970's, again at United States urging, agreements were reached
between the United States and the U.S.S.R. providing for ceilings on some
categories of weapons. They could have been more meaningful if Soviet actions
had shown restraint and commitment to stability at lower levels of force.

The United Nations designated the 1970's as the first disarmament decade. But
good intentions were not enough. In reality that 10-year period included an
unprecedented buildup in military weapons and the flaring of aggression and use
of force in almost every region of the world.

We are now in the second disarmament decade. The task at hand is to assure
civilized behavior among nations, to unite behind an agenda of peace.

Four Points Cited

Over the past seven months the United States has put forward a broad-based,
comprehensive series of proposals to reduce the risk of war. We have proposed
four major points as an agenda for peace:

- Elimination of land-based intermediate-range missiles.

- A one-third reduction in strategic ballistic missile warheads.

- A substantial reduction in NATO and Warsaw Pact ground and air forces.

- And new safeguards to reduce the risk of accidental war.  We urge the Soviet
Union today to join with us in this quest. We must act, not for ourselves alone,
but for all mankind.  On Nov. 18 of last year, I announced United States
objectives in arms control agreements. They must be equitable and militarily
significant. They must stabilize forces at lower levels and they must be
verifiable.

The United States and its allies have made specific, reasonable and equitable
proposals.

U.S. Proposal Described

In February, our negotiating team in Geneva offered the Soviet Union a draft
treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces. We offered to cancel deployment of
our Pershing 2 ballistic missiles and groundlaunched cruise missiles in exchange
for Soviet elimination of the SS-20, SS-4 and SS-5 missiles. This proposal would
eliminate with one stroke those systems about which both sides have expressed
the greatest concern.

The United States is also looking forward to beginning negotiations on strategic
arms reductions with the Soviet Union in less than two weeks. We will work hard
to make these talks an opportunity for real progress in our quest for peace.

On May 9 I announced a phased approach to the reduction of strategic arms. In a
first phase, the number of ballistic missile warheads on each side would be
reduced to about 5,000. No more than half the remaining warheads would be on
land-based missiles. All ballistic missiles would be reduced to an equal level
at about onehalf the current United States number. In the second phase, we would
reduce each side's overall destructive power to equal levels, including a mutual
ceiling on ballistic missile throw-weight below the current U.S. level.

We are also prepared to discuss other elements of the strategic balance.

Meeting of NATO Leaders

Before I returned from Europe last week I met in Bonn with the leaders of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organizaton. We agreed to introduce a major new Western
initiative for the Vienna negotiations on mutual balanced force reductions. Our
approach calls for common collective ceilings for both NATO and the Warsaw
Treaty organization. After seven years, there would be a total of 700,000 ground
forces and 900,000 ground and air force personnel combined. It also includes a
package of associated measures to encourage cooperation and verify compliance.
We urge the Soviet Union and members of the Warsaw Pact to view our Western
proposal as a means to reach agreement in Vienna after nine long years of
inconclusive talks. We also urge them to implement the 1975 Helsinki agreement
on security and cooperation in Europe.

Let me stress that for agreements to work, both sides must be able to verify
compliance.  The building of mutual confidence in compliance can only be
achieved through greater openness.

Importance of Principles

I encourage the special session on disarmament to endorse the importance of
these principles in arms control agreements.  I have instructed our
representatives at the 40-nation committee on disarmament to renew emphasis on
verification and compliance. Based on a U.S. proposal, a committee has been
formed to examine these issues as they relate to restrictions on nuclear
testing.

We are also pressing the need for effective verification provisions in
agreements banning chemical weapons. The use of chemical and biological weapons
has long been viewed with revulsion by civilized nations. No peace-making
institution can ignore the use of those dread weapons and still live up to its
mission.

Issue of Chemical Warfare

The need for a truly effective and verifiable chemical weapons agreement has
been highlighted by recent events. The Soviet Union and their allies are
violating the Geneva protocol of 1925, related rules of international law and
the 1972 biological weapons convention. There is conclusive evidence that the
Soviet Government has provided toxins for use in Laos and Kampuchea and are
themselves using chemical weapons against freedom fighters in Afghanistan.

We have repeatedly protested to the Soviet Government as well as to the
Governments of Laos and Vietnam their use of chemical and toxin weapons.

We call upon them now to grant full and free access to their countries or to
territories they control so that United Nations experts can conduct an effective
independent investigation to verify cessation of these horrors.

Evidence of noncompliance with existing arms control agreements underscores the
need to approach negotiation of any new agreements with care.

Openness of the West

The democracies of the West are open societies. Information on our defenses is
available to our citizens, our elected officials and the world. We do not
hesitate to inform potential adversaries of our military forces and ask in
return for the same information concerning theirs.

The amount and type of military spending by a country is important for the world
to know as a measure of its intentions and the threat that country may pose to
its neighbors.

The Soviet Union and other closed societies go to extraordinary lengths to hide
their true military spending not only from other nations, but from their own
people. This practice contributes to distrust and fear about their intentions.

Conference on Arms Outlays

Today the United States proposes an international conference on military
expenditures to build on the work of this body in developing a common system for
accounting and reporting. We urge the Soviet Union in particular to join this
effort in good faith, to revise the universally discredited official figures it
publishes and to join with us in giving the world a true account of the
resources we allocate to our armed forces.

Last Friday in Berlin, I said that I would leave no stone unturned in the effort
to reinforce peace and lessen the risk of war. It's been clear to me steps
should be taken to improve mutual communication, confidence and lessen the
likelihood of misinterpretation. I have therefore directed the exploration of
ways to increase understanding and communication between the United States and
the Soviet Union in times of peace and of crisis.

We would approach the Soviet Union with proposals for reciprocal exchanges in
such areas as advanced notification of major strategic exercises that otherwise
might be misinterpreted, advanced notification of I.C.B.M. launches within as
well as beyond national boundaries and an expanded exchange of strategic forces
data. While substantial information on U.S. activities and forces in these areas
already is provided, I believe that jointly and regularly sharing information
would represent a qualitative improvement in the strategic nuclear environment
and would help reduce the chance of misunderstandings.

I call upon the Soviet Union to join the United States in exploring these
possibilities to build confidence and I ask for your support of our efforts.

Program of Disarmament

One of the major items before this conference is the development of a
comprehensive program of disarmament. We support the effort to chart a course of
realistic and effective measures in the quest for peace.

I have come to this hall to call for international recommitment to the basic
tenets of the United Nations charter, that all members practice tolerance and
live together in peace as good neighbors under the rule of law forsaking armed
force as a means of settling disputes between nations.

America urges you to support the agenda for peace that I have outlined today. We
ask you to reinforce the bilateral and multilateral arms-control negotiations
between members of NATO and the Warsaw Pact and to rededicate yourselves to
maintaining international peace and security and removing threats to peace.

We who have signed the U.N. charter have pledged to refrain from the threat or
use of force against the territory or independence of any state.

In these times when more and more lawless acts are going unpunished, as some
members of this very body show a growing disregard for the U.N. charter, the
peace-loving nations of the world must condemn aggression and pledge again to
act in a way that is worthy of the ideals that we have endorsed.

How to Make the Charter Live

Let us finally make the charter live.  In late spring, 37 years ago,
representatives of 50 nations gathered on the other side of this continent in
the San Francisco Opera House. The League of Nations had crumbled and World War
II still raged. But those men and nations were determined to find peace. The
result was this charter for peace that is the framework of the United Nations.
President Harry Truman spoke of the revival of an old faith. He said the
everlasting moral force of justice prompting that United Nations conference,
such a force remains strong in America and in other countries where speech is
free and citizens have the right to gather and make their opinions known. And
President Truman said if we should pay merely lip service to inspiring ideals
and later do violence to simple justice we would draw down upon us the bitter
wrath of generations yet unborn. Those words of Harry Truman have special
meaning for us today as we live with the potential to destroy civilization. We
must learn to live together in peace, he said. We must build a new world, a far
better world.

What a better world it would be if the guns were silenced, if neighbor no longer
encroached on neighbor and all peoples were free to reap the rewards of their
toil and determine their own destiny and system of government whatever their
choice.

During my recent audience with his Holiness Pope John Paul II, I gave him the
pledge of the American people to do everything possible for peace and arms
reduction. The American people believe forging real and lasting peace to be
their sacred trust. Let us never forget that such a peace would be a terrible
hoax if the world were no longer blessed with freedom and respect for human
rights.

The Words of Hammarskjold

The United Nations, Hammarskjold said, was born out of the cataclysms of war. It
should justify the sacrifices of all those who have died for freedom and
justice. It is our duty to the past, Hammarskjold said, and it is our duty to
the future so to serve both our nations and the world.

As both patriots of our nations and the hope of all the world let those of us
assembled here in the name of peace deepen our understandings, renew our
commitment to the rule of law and take new and bolder steps to calm an uneasy
world.

Can any delegate here deny that in so doing he would be doing what the people,
the rank and file of his own country or her own country want him or her to do.
Isn't it time for us to really represent the deepest, most heartfelt yearnings
of all of our people.

Let no nation abuse this common longing to be free of fear. We must not
manipulate our people by playing upon their nightmares. We must serve mankind
through genuine disarmament.

With God's help, we can secure life and freedom for generations to come.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of President Reagan addressing U.N.

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              285 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

ANTINUCLEAR MOVEMENT AND ITS GOALS;
News Analysis

BYLINE: By FOX BUTTERFIELD

SECTION: Section B; Page 8, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1180 words


As thousands of marchers inched past a platform in front of the United Nations
at last Saturday's huge disarmament march, Elizabeth Holtzman, Brooklyn's
District Attorney, told those in the crowd that they constituted a message to
President Reagan and the Soviet leader, Leonid I. Brezhnev.

''If you don't listen to us now, we will be five million people the next time,
and 50 million the next time and 500 million after that,'' Miss Holtzman shouted
over a battery of loudspeakers. ''We won't stop until we win, because we are for
the forces of life.''

This week, with the fading of the euphoria over what has been described as the
nation's largest rally on a political issue, the leaders of the movement against
nuclear arms are trying to assess how great an impact they had and whether Miss
Holtzman's suggestion that the movement can muster growing strength will prove
correct.

Prayer Vigil Is Planned

In the weeks ahead, the movement's supporters plan an array of activities, such
as a rally in Oregon, a demonstration in Nebraska, a conference in New Hampshire
and, in August, a nationwide prayer vigil. And the Union of Concerned Scientists
is organizing a series of teach-ins on university campuses for next Veterans
Day.

The movement itself is an amorphous one aimed at seeking an end to the arms
race. The freeze idea has proved popular, but is only one of several proposals
and has drawn criticism even within the movement as being simplistic. Some
question whether the movement can make real progress without a sharper focus.

But the movement's supporters say their real goal is educational, to raise
public concern about the issue. They believe that the key question is whether
they can convert the rapidly growing public concern about the nuclear arms race
into votes in Congress.

The first test of whether last Saturday's demonstration will carry any political
influence may come next Tuesday, when the House Foreign Affairs Committee is
scheduled to vote on a resolution calling for a mutual and verifiable freeze on
nuclear arsenals in the United States and the Soviet Union. A similar freeze
proposal, considered to be the most politically acceptable organizing device
that the movement has come up with, was rejected by the Senate Foreign Relations
Committee last week, before the rally, on a strict party-line vote, 9 to 6.

They Volunteer for Campaigns

Representative Edward Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, one of the original
sponsors of the freeze idea in the House, says: ''Everyone in the House that
I've spoken to recently who has talked to their constituents about the nuclear
arms issue ends up walking out of the room with 15 or 20 more volunteers for
their campaign next fall.''

Whatever the outcome of the committee vote, the leaders of the disparate peace
groups are clearly ecstatic about the size, composition and good behavior of
last weekend's marchers, who were estimated by the police to number 600,000 to
700,000.

''It was far more people than we expected,'' said Dr. James Muller, secretary of
the International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War and an assistant
professor of cardiology at the Harvard Medical School.

Dr. Muller, who traveled to New York by bus with a group organized by the
Wellesley Freeze Committee in suburban Boston, noted that, unlike earlier
protest marches he had been in, there were many middle-aged and elderly people
with middle-class backgrounds.

'Like the Abolition Movement'

''I think we are going to be stronger and more broad based than the anti-Vietnam
War movement,'' Dr. Muller predicted. ''This is going to be more like the
abolition movement that ended slavery.''

Patrick H. Caddell, the Carter Administration's poll-taker, said that last
weekend's demonstration tended to confirm his impression that ''the anti-nuclear
arms movement is the most significant movement since the environmental movement
in the late 1960's.''

One of its key features, he said, is that ''most of the impetus has come inside
the political process, from things like town meetings and state-wide
initiatives.''

''This is not just a protest movement, which leads you to believe in the end it
will have some political impact,'' Mr. Caddell went on.

He Sees Peak After November

In Mr. Caddell's view, it is still hard to tell what shape the movement will
eventually have. In this November's Congressional elections the antinuclear
movement may still be a secondary issue to the economy, he said, ''but I think
you should look at it as a longterm movement that will come to a head after
November.''

On the other hand, Lance Tarrance Jr., a poll-taker who works mainly for
Republicans, said that when he measured public attitudes toward the freeze in
states from Maine to Wyoming, he found support for it not firm.

Although many polls show that 75 percent of the population favor a moratorium on
nuclear weapons, he said, when people are asked if they want a freeze that would
leave the United States militarily behind the Soviet Union, ''many people fall
off the bandwagon.''

For example, a New York Times/ CBS News Poll conducted May 19 to 23 found 72
percent of those responding favored ''putting a stop to the testing'' of nuclear
arms, but half that group said they would oppose a moratorium if it would give
the Soviet Union a nuclear advantage over the United States.

He Sees No Threat in Issue

Mr. Tarrance has advised his clients not to be afraid of being hurt by the
freeze issue. ''It is not going to have a detonator affect in national
politics,'' he said.

White House officials are very concerned about the impact the movement might
have. But they have decided that the best approach is to put forward proposals
for arms reductions rather than criticize the movement.

Officially, Defense Secretary Caspar W. Weinberger says last weekend's
demonstration will not influence the Reagan Administration. But it has already
affected Mr. Reagan's public statements, if not his private thinking.

After years of arguing that arms control was wrong, Mr. Reagan has now put
forward a series of sweeping and dramatic arms control proposals to Moscow.

Some skeptics have asked whether the movement has concentrated on stopping the
buildup of arms in the United States while ignoring the Soviet threat. But Dr.
Muller of Harvard said that he and two colleagues from the International
Physicians group had been invited to appear on Russian television for an hour on
June 30.

They will discuss the medical consequences of nuclear war, and Dr.  Muller, who
studied in the Soviet Union, plans to speak in Russian appealing to the Russian
people to join the United States as allies against the arms race just as the two
countries fought together against the Nazis in World War II.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: analysis

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              286 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 18, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

ART: SHOW AT DRAWING CENTER OFFERS A DOZEN NEW NAMES

BYLINE: By VIVIEN RAYNOR

SECTION: Section C; Page 26, Column 5; Weekend Desk

LENGTH: 971 words


FAILING the sunshine, there are always group shows to mark the arrival of
summer, and as usual, the lineup at the Drawing Center is among the more
noteworthy. The 12 participants are all new names, the center's policy being to
concentrate on artists who have not soloed in New York and who are not
affiliated with galleries anywhere else.

Although the center at 137 Greene Street has mounted several fine historical
shows, its most important contribution, in this opinion, has been on behalf of
unknowns. The Drawing Center, supported by private subscriptions and by Federal
and state funds, isn't the only place to keep a file of slides submitted by
artists available for inspection by visitors. But it is special in having a
program in which artists can make appointments to have their work viewed and
discussed by the curatorial staff with the aim of having it chosen for one of
the gallery's four annual group shows. No one with an inkling of the amount of
art being produced can fail to appreciate the heroism of such an effort.

The current selection is a judicious mixture of styles, from straightforward
scenes of pastoral New Jersey by Howard Nathenson - graphite vignettes on large
sheets of white paper - to large black and white oil-stick abstractions by Kevin
McGrath. These are angrylooking images composed of thick black lines suspended
against a chicken-wire mesh of thinner lines. The show's emphasis, though, is on
the figurative, with a bias toward that blend of ingenuousness (real or
contrived), humor and lostness that characterizes much New Image art.

In this category, Marilyn Holsing stands out with her series in black and
metallic chalks, ''Divers Disasters.'' Each drawing portrays a man and a woman
heading for certain doom. They skate on ice that's cracking, embrace in a house
that's apparently being swept away by a flood, paddle a canoe that's about to be
bisected by a falling tree, and so on. The symbolism is a shade obvious, but the
drawings themselves, so densely hatched as to look embroidered, are authentic
nightmares, the kind that linger long after the dreamer awakens.

John Knecht's ''Aspects of a Certain History'' are a little weird, too, because
they are the artist's memories of the Vietnam War couched in a style that is
part Disney and part nursery-tale illustration in the manner of the 19th-century
Englishman Walter Crane. Most of these gouaches in beautiful clear colors are
backgrounds for a 16-millimeter film of the same title that the artist is
working on. They include scenes of sandbagged bunkers and rice paddies, as well
as two story boards involving such images as Christ crucified, a palm tree
against a red sky and a prettily striped, many-legged insect out for a stroll.

Almost all the work in the show is ambiguous: Sandra Moore's huge ''A Violent
Kind of Delightfulness'' could, at a distance, be a synthetic Cubist composition
(the title refers to the Gertrude Stein ''Hidden Therein''); Michael Katz's
airbrushed black and whites could be blown-up photographs of landscapes, except
that each contains a form or two that is unintelligible. Some of Michael
Newhard's vivid gouaches seem on the way to becoming designs for handsomely
patterned and textured costumes; others are more like architectural ornaments
reminiscent of Art Nouveau and Art Deco.

As in previous Drawing Center groups, there is evidence of at least three
curatorial tastes (Martha Beck heads a staff of five), but they blend smoothly.
(Through June 26.)

Also in the galleries this week: ''The Atomic Salon'' (Feldman, 31 Mercer
Street): ''The Atomic Salon'' show opens with a statement by Buckminster Fuller
proposing that atomic holocaust can be prevented ''only by individual humans
demonstrating uncompromising integrity in all matters.'' How true.  The trouble
is, however, that one person's integrity so often looks like another's
opportunism. Besides, it seems as if modernism is so mired in flipness, irony
and self-centeredness as to be unable to address itself seriously to the end of
the world, a subject that admittedly is as hard to grasp as eternity itself.

In short, the ''Salon'' consists of artists, many of them celebrities, going on
record as being against nuclear war, while in most cases continuing to do their
thing. Accordingly, it's hard to picture anyone in favor of Armageddon being
converted by Robert Morris's bed with pillows bearing information about the
problems of distributing fallout evenly around the globe or, for that matter, by
Chris Burden's ''Atomic Alphabet.'' Rather, the effect is like that of an
actor's benefit for a good cause.

Sandy Skoglund's photograph of what appears to be a sculptured tableau involving
an elderly couple and a swarm of supposedly radioactive cats is amusing enough,
but for those who relish gallows humor, one of Ben Sakoguchi's paintings
mimicking orange-crate labels will be an absolute scream. It depicts a Vietnam
veteran with all limbs amputated save the arm that encircles the beauty queen
beside him. There are drawings by Bronx schoolchildren, for whom war can
scarcely be any more real than television, and there are nine different-colored
skulls by Andy Warhol. Art, even that by the survivors of H@iroshima and
Nagasaki, is simply not equal to this occasion. For this observer, the most
memorable pieces are barely noticeable in this display of creative solidarity -
Roger Brown's map showing where the dumps for nuclear and other toxic wastes are
situated in New York State and a small, ghostly drawing about devastation by
Joseph Nechvatal, an artist as preoccupied with the continued existence of
stockpiles as he is by their use.  Interestingly, Mr. Nechvatal had a show last
year in Hartford supported in part by United Technologies, which manufactures
military hardware. (Through July 2.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 21, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
A review in Weekend on Friday of an art show at the Feldman Gallery
misidentified the artist who made a mixed-media collage showing toxic waste
dumps in New York State. The collage is by Alan Sonfist.

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              287 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 19, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
                              Correction Appended

TOP GENERAL QUESTIONS POLICY ON PROLONGED A-WAR

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 18


Gen. David C. Jones, retiring as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,
expressed skepticism today about the Reagan Administration's policy of preparing
for protracted nuclear war. He said financing the policy could lead to unending
military expenditures.

''If you try to do everything to fight a protracted nuclear war, then you end up
with the potential of a bottomless pit,'' said the General, who is leaving the
Army after 40 years of service.

General Jones also told reporters that fighting a global war against the Soviet
Union in several places simultaneously would take a much larger military force
than the Administration has planned.

A Question of Risk

The United States could send large forces to the Korean and Vietnam wars without
risk elsewhere, he said, because of nuclear superiority and a limited Soviet
ability to project military power. ''Now you can't rob Peter to pay Paul without
putting Peter at risk,'' he said.

He also suggested that internal economic, political and social problems in the
Soviet Union might tempt Soviet leaders to exert military power abroad.

In a two-hour discussion during and after breakfast, General Jones expressed his
views on a wide range of subjects but was still within the bounds of the caution
that has marked his four years as the nation's senior military officer.

Among his other points were these:

- The President is too constrained by Congress in executing national security
policy. ''I think we've gone too far in restricting the power of the
Presidency,'' he said, suggesting that the restrictions emboldened Moscow and
its allies.

- Soviet and American military officers might soon hold talks that could lead to
better understanding.

- Nobody was the victor in the war over the Falkland Islands. ''I don't think
anybody won the Falklands war in the sense that they came out ahead,'' he said.
''From the military standpoint, the British prevailed, but it would be hard to
say they won.''

- The United States erred in the Vietnam war by turning it into an American
rather than a Vietnamese war, by escalating slowly rather than going all out to
win and by lacking coordination. As an example of the last error, he cited
dividing the air war over North Vietnam among Air Force units in Thailand, other
Air Force units in Guam, the Navy and the Marines.

3 Types of Nuclear War

Specialists in nuclear strategy define limited war as involving tactical
warheads fired over scattered areas, protracted war as one of intercontinental
missiles or bombs exchanged over several weeks or months in a controlled manner,
and all-out war as a spasm in which both sides fire large portions of their
nuclear arsenals over a few hours.

In a recent Defense Guidance, a document through which civilian leaders instruct
the armed forces on basic policy, the Administration said that ''the United
States nuclear capabilities must prevail even under condition of a prolonged
war'' and must be capable of ''controlled nuclear counterattacks over a
protracted period.''

General Jones, who said the policy had evolved over the last decade, did not
directly disagree with the Administration. He said he supported plans to make
weapons and communications systems well enough defended to survive a nuclear
attack and to retaliate.

But he said that ''I don't see much chance of a nuclear war being limited or
protracted'' without ''a tremendous likelihood of it escalating.'' He said
limited or protracted nuclear war would lead to ''great devastation'' in both
the United States and the Soviet Union.

'We Can't Do Everything'

The general said the concept of protracted nuclear war should be examined, but
he added: ''In defense, we are in the priority business. We can't do everything.
I personally would not spend a lot of money on a protracted nuclear war.''

He suggested that priority be given to conventional combat readiness, to
ammunition and supplies and to transportion to places where the forces can
protect American interests.

Soviet officials, General Jones said, have said they do not believe that nuclear
war can be limited or that a nuclear war can be won by either side. But internal
Soviet documents, he said, speak of the Soviet Union's ''prevailing'' in nuclear
war, and Soviet forces have trained for protracted war.

In conventional war, according to the Defense Guidance, American forces must be
capable of fighting simultaneously in Western Europe, the Persian Gulf and South
Korea. But coping with

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: June 21, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION:
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday gave the wrong service
affiliation of Gen. David C. Jones, retiring Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff. General Jones was an Air Force officer.

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Gen. David C. Jones

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              288 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Index;
International

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 2, Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 332 words


U.S. arms negotiator in Paris is ''guardedly optimistic'' 3
Vietnam making its case on Cambodian invasion 3
A mayor in South Philippines challenges Marcos 4
Around the World 5
Soviet pianist, barred from emigrating, gives concert at home 6
Caribbean leaders fear for life of U.S. aid plan 7
Costa Rica orders 40 Nicaraguans to leave the country 8
Anti-Americanism appears to rise in El Salvador's right 9
Peking promises P.L.O. $1 million in emergency aid 11
Israeli ally in Lebanon is expanding his enclave 12
Welshman fights London for rights to a mountain 13
Italian banker tied to $790 million fraud is found dead in London 14
Diego Garcia's ex-residents keep issue alive in Mauritius 16

Government/Politics
Congressional quarrel stalls buildup of military airlift 16
California Senate race gets off to quick start 19
Budget accord to have sharp impact on domestic programs 24
Carey signs bill on special property loans for the elderly 30

General
Appalachia banks unite to modernize home financing 21
Around the Nation 22
California surfers clash over who gets the best waves 22
Parents may get a lower student-loan rate 28
Press Notes: Papers studying gains of merged operations 29
A Roman Catholic priest is found shot dead in Bridgeport, Conn.  32
The aircraft carrier Intrepid is being converted to a museum 34

Education/Welfare
City students raise scores on national math tests 38

Arts/Entertainment
John Hirsch's first productions at Canada's Stratford Fesitval 44
Mostly Mozart to open July 12 45
City Ballet ends Stravinsky Festival 48
10-day jazz festival begins Friday 49
Music debuts in review 50
''The Postman Always Rings Twice,'' an opera in St. Louis 50
19th-century parlor music in Washington Square series 50

Style
Fatherhood: expanding role and expanding joys 52

Obituaries
Djuna Barnes, a poet, playwright and novelist 32

Features/Notes
Man in the News: Melville Peter McPherson, A.I.D. director 10

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              289 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

RELEASE OF VIETNAMESE SOUGHT

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 302 words

DATELINE: SINGAPORE, June 19


The Reagan Administration is seeking the release of up to 100,000 Vietnamese
prisoners for possible resettlement in the United States, the United States
Deputy Secretary of State, Walter E. Stoessel Jr., said today.

He said the United States was working with the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees on a response to an offer by Hanoi to release Vietnamese being held
in ''re-education'' camps.

The offer was made by Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach of Vietnam in an
interview with CBS News aired last week. The United States last year accepted
nearly 700,000 refugees from throughout the world.

If Vietnam agrees to release the prisoners, Mr. Stoessel said, Washington is not
likely to allow all of them to resettle in the United States, but appeals would
be examined on a ''case-by-case'' basis.

Mr. Stoessel, in Singapore to meet with foreign ministers of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations, made the remarks before leaving for Australia for South
Pacific security talks.

He also said the United States is considering providing material support -not
including military supplies - to Cambodian rebels opposing Vietnam's occupation
of Cambodia.

But the future of the coalition of groups fighting to oust Vietnamese troops
from Cambodia was in doubt a day after its formation was announced.

Diplomatic sources in Bangkok, Thailand, said a malaria attack may stop Khieu
Samphan, leader of the Pol Pot group, from attending the signing of an alliance
with Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Son Sann. One Western analyst said a delay in
the scheduled June 21-23 meeting of three anti-Vietnamese Cambodian leaders in
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, could even lead to the collapse of the shaky coalition.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              290 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAM PRESSING ITS CASE ON INVASION OF CAMBODIA

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 3, Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 984 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 19


In the three and a half years since Vietnam invaded Cambodia, a stalemate has
developed between Hanoi and most other governments around the world, which have
adamantly refused to accept the invasion's legitimacy or results.

Vietnam, with as many as 200,000 troops in Cambodia, maintains a government in
Phnom Penh and says it liberated the country from the atrocious rule of Pol Pot.
It defends its occupation as a necessary defense against China and has often
termed its action ''irreversible.''

With China's aid, however, Mr. Pol Pot's guerrillas still opppose the Vietnamese
from strongholds on the Thai border. The United Nations continues to seat Mr.
Pol Pot's representative in the General Assembly. An international conference on
Cambodia has demanded that Vietnam withdraw its troops and let the United
Nations supervise a Cambodian election. And since 1979 Vietnam's critics -
including the United States, much of Western Europe, Japan and, not least, the
non-Communist Association of Southeast Asian Nations -have denied it economic
aid.

Vietnamese Initiative Sighted

Recently international pressure, threats, frustration and diplomatic initiatives
have shown signs of jiggling the Cambodian chessboard. One of the most closely
watched of these developments has been the growing evidence that Vietnam is
starting a full-scale diplomatic initiative designed to advance its view on the
Cambodian question.

Whether Vietnam's efforts can succeed is unclear. But that they have already
made a mark became clear last week when most of the Asean foreign ministers
announced that they welcomed - though in some cases skeptically - a proposed
tour of non-Communist Southeast Asian nations later this summer by Vietnam's
Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach.

Whether that announcement in turn prodded the three major factions of
anti-Vietnamese Cambodians to talk again of uniting after years of suspicion and
hatred is also not certain. Diplomats in Bangkok, however, said Thursday that
after a year of effort a formal coalition had been arranged among Cambodia's
former chief of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk; his former Prime Minister, Son
Sann, who commands a few thousand Cambodian guerrillas, and the Pol Pot group,
which commands as many as 30,000 troops and has avoided Vietnam's attempts to
destroy it.

Today, in a statement monitored here, the Vietnam press agency denounced Asean's
pledge of support for the coalition of resistance groups. saying ''the Asean
countries are doing only harm to their organization.''

U.N. Vote Due in September

The effect of these developments on Cambodia may not be known until September,
when the General Assembly will again vote on whether to seat a Cambodian
Government that does not govern. By then, Vietnam's critics hope, Mr. Pol Pot
will have gained more standing through formal ties with nationalist leaders who
are untainted by his murderous record.

It is largely in anticipation of the United Nations session in September, as
well as out of an interest in any shift in Hanoi's attitude concerning Cambodia,
that Western and Asian officials have been carefully following the Vietnamese
diplomatic initiative.

Since last fall Vietnameese officials, and particularly Mr. Thach, have argued
that Vietnam is sincerely interested in peace and that Hanoi remains its own
master despite its military and economic dependence upon the Soviet Union.

Vietnam Cites China

Vietnam has consistently asserted that it wants to withdraw its troops from
Cambodia but that it has not done so out of fear that the Chinese would fill the
vacuum and reinstate Mr. Pol Pot.

And fundamentally, perhaps, Hanoi has been saying that it needs Western economic
aid.  These arguments, though eliciting skepticism in some quarters, have led to
increasing contacts between Hanoi and its critics. These contacts have been
mostly with Mr. Thach, a diplomat who earlier this year was appointed to the
Vietnamese Politburo. Through such contacts, some Western diplomats believe,
Vietnam's goal is to end its isolation.

After Vietnam's defeat at the United Nations last fall, Hanoi has pressed its
arguments wherever it could - during a visit to Japan by the Mayor of Ho Chi
Minh City, in the United Nations during debates over humanitarian aid to
Vietnam, to visiting delegations of American war veterans and to reporters.

France Sending Credits

Last year, President Francois Mitterrand of France indicated that $23 million in
French credits that had been held up under his predecessor would be given to
Vietnam despite France's continuing opposition to Vietnam's presence in
Cambodia. France has since sent high-level delegations to Hanoi.

In February, Indochina's foreign ministers, meeting in Laos, issued a low-key
statement suggesting that Thailand might help reduce the tension caused by the
presence by warring troops on its border with Cambodia. Thailand replied that it
had no interest in dealing on strictly bilateral terms with Vietnam, and it
responded cooly to a proposal that it join Vietnam in disarming Cambodian
guerrillas.

In April, Mr. Thach visited West Germany, France, Sweden and Belgium, all of
which have provided economic aid to Vietnam but none of which approves its
Cambodian policy. Chinese and most Western diplomats later called the visit a
flop, since Mr. Thach's Chinese-Cambodian arguments were blandly received, and
he came away with no new financial commitments. Mr. Thach, however, said in an
interview in Hanoi last month that, despite differences ''on our military
presence in Cambodia,'' the European foreign ministers ''understood better than
before.''

3-Step Plan for Peace

Last month Mr. Thach summoned the Western ambassadors in Hanoi to brief them on
his European trip and to outline a three-stage plan for peace in Cambodia. In
the first stage, he said, Hanoi would unconditionally withdraw some troops.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Foreign Minister Nguyen Co Thach

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              291 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Around the Nation;
Man With Gun Forces Evacuation of Monument

BYLINE: UPI

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 22, Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 143 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


A man kept the police at bay inside the Washington Monument today by pointing an
antique pistol at his head for more than two hours.

After he surrendered, the National Park Service police identified him as Paul
Milo Gundlach, 34 years old, of Flint, Mich.  Kenney Green, a police negotiator,
said that the standoff took place at the 460-foot level of the 560-foot
monument. However, Officer Green said, the flintlock pistol contained no flash
powder and could not fire.

No shots were fired. About 90 tourists were cleared from the monument.  Officer
Green said that Mr. Gundlach had been here to talk with Veterans Administration
officials about help for ''delayed stress'' from his experience as a soldier in
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Paul Gundlach

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              292 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CARRIER INTREPID BEING REFITTED FOR DUTY AS MUSEUM AT PIER 86

SECTION: Section 1; Part 1; Page 34, Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 547 words


The conversion of the 43,000-ton aircraft carrier Intrepid into a floating
naval, aeronautics and space museum has begun.  Propelled by four tugboats, the
carrier - freshly painted and refurbished at the Bethlehem Steel Plant in
Bayonne, N.J. - arrived last Sunday at its permanent home on the Hudson River at
Pier 86, at the foot of 46th Street. The museum is to open in mid-July.

''We hope it becomes one of the greatest international attractions in the City
of New York,'' said James Ean, president of the Intrepid Museum Foundation. The
foundation, a nonprofit organization, was instrumental in obtaining the vessel
from the Navy and will operate the museum.

The Intrepid, launched on April 26, 1943, at Newport News, Va., served in the
Pacific in World War II, made three combat tours off Vietnam and twice was a
prime recovery ship for returning astronauts during the Mercury and Gemini space
programs. It is one of the most decorated ships in the history of the United
States Navy.

Suffered Heavy Damage

On three occasions during World War II, the ship sustained heavy damage and was
nearly sunk by Japanese bomber and torpedo planes.  Air crews from the carrier
are credited with the sinking of more than 80 enemy ships and the downing of
more than 600 planes.  The museum section of the ship will include the flight
deck, superstructure and main hangar deck. The 900-foot-long hangar deck will be
divided into four historical halls, devoted to the history of naval and space
aeronautics from the turn of the century to the present.

Each hall will have slide presentations and artifacts of various periods in
American naval history. Many World War II carrier-based planes, jet aircraft,
helicopters and prototypes of Mercury and Gemini space capsules will be on
display.

Educational Resource

In addition to regular tours of the ship, foundation officials hope the carrier
will be used as an educational resource.  ''There are over five million
school-aged children in the New York area,'' said John Iannone, assistant to the
president of the foundation. ''Offering courses here on such diverse topics as
the basics of flight, navigation and jet and rocket propulsion just might
provide the right environment to get kids get fired up.''

Negotiations are under way between the foundation and the Board of Education to
offer such courses on the carrier.  Foundation officials also hope to rent
facilities on board for business seminars, naval reunions, receptions and
overnight stays of groups of out-of-town children.

A Three-Year Effort

The carrier arrived here after a three-year effort by foundation and city
officials to obtain the vessel from the Navy and to preserve her as a museum.
She had been towed from the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard to Bayonne in February
for refitting.

Foundation officials plan to spend $22 million to convert the carrier to a
museum, and expect to draw more than four million tourists a year.

Nearly 200 former crewmen were invited aboard the vessel for the journey to her
new home on Manhattan's West Side.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              293 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

Catherine Barre Is Wed to Ralph Isham

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 54, Column 2; Society Desk

LENGTH: 200 words


Catherine Barre, daughter of Dr. and Mrs. Rene Barre of Paris, was married in
the Roman Catholic Church of St. Etienne du Mont there yesterday to Ralph
Heyward Isham, son of Heyward Isham, former Ambassador to Haiti, and Mrs. Isham
of Washington and Sagaponack, L.I. The Rev. Alphonse de Menton and the Rev.
William Sloane Coffin of the Riverside Church officiated.

The bride is a research associate at the Harvard Graduate School of Business
Administration and vice president of Verreries Brosse et Cie., a French
crystal-bottle manufacturer. She was graduated from the European Business School
and the University of Paris, where she is a doctoral candidate in international
economics. Her father, a biologist, is president of Verreries Brosse et Cie and
a member of the French National Academy of Pharmacy.

Mr. Isham, a graduate of Yale College and a former associate with the Boston
Consulting Group, expects to receive an M.B.A. degree from Harvard next year.
His mother is a painter. His father, a career member of the Senior Foreign
Service, was deputy chief of the United States Delegation to the Paris Talks on
Vietnam.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              294 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

John English Jr., Mary White Wed

SECTION: Section 1; Part 2; Page 54, Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 195 words


Mary Frances White, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Skinner White Jr. of Durham,
N.C., was married yesterday to John Earle English Jr., son of Mr. and Mrs.
English of Guilford, Conn. The Rev. Daniel Riggall performed the Episcopal
ceremony in the Chapel of the Cross in Chapel Hill, N.C..

The bride was graduated from Chatham (Va.) Hall, and the University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa. The bridegroom
was graduated from the Hopkins Grammar School in New Haven and from Dartmouth
College. He served as a lieutenant in the Navy in Vietnam and was awarded the
Bronze Star, Combat V.

The bride's father is senior vice president in the Durham office of Wheat-First
Securities Inc. of Richmond. She is a granddaughter of Mrs. Carl C. Council of
Durham and the late Mr. Council, who was president and publisher of the Durham
(N.C.) Herald Company, publishers of daily newspapers.

The bride was, until recently, manager of the Ships Inn in Nantucket, Mass., and
her husband is a former independent builder in Nantucket and Vermont.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              295 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE PLAYWRIGHT VANISHES: REFLECTIONS ON TODAY'S THEATER

SECTION: Section 2; Page 1, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2513 words


--------------------------------------------------------------------
Margaret Croyden, the author of ''Lunatics, Lovers and Poets: The Contemporary
Experimental Theater,'' writes frequently about the arts.

By MARGARET CROYDEN

By some standards, the theater appears to be flourishing: Broadway box office
grosses are reportedly at record highs; the Dramatists Guild has a membership of
over 5,000, a substantial increase over the past year, and, nationwide,
thousands of stagestruck young people have been studying theater arts in college
and trying out their skills on campus stages and with regional companies. On the
other hand, attendance is down, ticket prices have reached levels that seem
likely to discourage younger audiences, and Broadway's theaters are surviving on
a diet of holdovers from previous seasons plus a scattering of newcomers and
revivals. There is little to challenge or stimulate the serious theatergoer.

Once, playwrights were pivotal figures in the American theater.  Writers such as
Clifford Odets, Eugene O'Neill, Athur Miller and Tennessee Williams dealt
powerfully with important social and moral themes. Their new plays were eagerly
awaited events that formed the backbone of American drama.

Today the situation is quite different. The serious play is being edged out to
the margins by the musical, the revival and the revue.  Summing up the 1981-82
season, for example, Variety listed 20 new American plays produced on Broadway;
but only two of those (''West Side Waltz'' and ''Crimes of the Heart'')
qualified as successes, with the status of two more (''Agnes of God'' and
''Master Harold ...and the Boys'') still undetermined.

Moreover, the business of serious playwriting today is beset by so many
uncertainties - both creative and economic - that careers have become stymied.
Observers of the theater speak of ''promising'' playwrights who have remained
promising for more than a decade. But no one is able to point to a finely
constructed and memorable body of work that could take its place alongside the
output of, say, an O'Neill, a Williams or a Miller.

What accounts for this situation? Where have all the playwrights gone? And are
those who are writing worthy of being produced?  The condition of playwrights
and playwriting is inseparable from the structure and economics of the
contemporary theater, which has over the past decade become increasingly a
business, less and less an art form. It is a business dominated by investors,
production companies and theater owners, many of them less involved in
developing playwrights than in merchandising productions.

Of course, Broadway has always been commercial, but the new merchandising favors
the easily marketed product - mainly the blockbuster musical. Today's theater is
notably inhospitable to serious drama. Independent producers - men and women
with a flair for the theater and love for the drama - are being nosed out by
corporate investors. Many of these new powers in the theater are linked to
television and film companies eager for assured hits and easily adaptable
properties. They are not interested in the long-term nurturing of a developing
playwright.

There is a four-letter word haunting the small core of producers sincerely
interested in fine drama, said Claire Nichtern, herself a producer for Warner
Communications. That word is ''fear'' - the fear of financial failure. Such
producers must cover their very high expenses, most of them dictated by union
contracts, and then try to show a profit in a notoriously unpredictable
business. Taking interesting risks in such circumstances can seem tantamount to
economic suicide. ''When we did 'Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?' in 1960, it
cost $40,000,'' said the producer Richard Barr. ''Now it would be ten times
higher.''

With economic conditions what they are, the Broadway that once supported a
Eugene O'Neill is, for now at least, gone. Except for British imports, the few
serious plays that appear each season tend to begin Off Broadway and in the
regional theaters around the country, from which they then go to the highest
bidder on Broadway.  There had been hopes that such theaters would nurture new
playwrights and encourage innovative, serious work. But many observers now feel
that the regional theaters have been a disappointment. ''Instead of going after
less sure-fire material that is different and provocative,'' said Edward Albee,
''some of the regional theaters have been deliberately choosing plays that are
safe enough to attract commercial management.''

Off Broadway and the noncommercial theater, while offering new plays a showcase,
cannot support the playwright. As a rule, the author gets 6 to 10 percent of the
gross box office receipts, so that unless his play runs a long time, an unlikely
prospect in a small Off Broadway house, he can't make much money. From the
nonprofit theaters, he may receive a small lump sum at the outset, but almost
nothing from the box office because these theaters generally run a play for
their subscribers for only six weeks.

Small wonder, then, that many promising playwrights have turned to other, less
risky and more lucrative fields. Jason Miller, who won a Pulitzer Prize for
''That Championship Season'' and who was once acclaimed as another Arthur
Miller, has virtually disappeared into acting for films and television. Paul
Zindel, another Pulitzer Prizewinner for ''The Effect of Gamma Rays on
Man-in-the-Moon Marigolds,'' has been writing television scripts and children's
novels. Still another Pulitzer playwright, Charles Gordone (''No Place to Be
Somebody'') has been working as a director and lecturer in community theaters
around the country. And Frank Gilroy, Pulitzer Prize-winner for ''The Subject
Was Roses,'' acknowledged in a discussion recently at the Dramatists Guild that
he had ''given up his dream of having a financial success on Broadway.''

''Those of us who started out on Broadway 20 years ago no longer fit in,'' said
Murray Schisgal, speaking at the same meeting. ''We have not evolved
associations with repertory companies so that we can work with them in a
mutually advantageous way. We find ourselves in a bit of a bind.'' Mr. Schisgal
himself has solved this problem by giving ''the bulk of my time to writing
novels and screen plays.''

The younger generation of writers has followed its elders in turning to film and
television for a livelihood. When the pay is anything from $25,000 to $100,000
for first drafts and revisions (regardless of whether the script is actually
used), many writers may be happy to ''sell out'' to Hollywood. John Guare
acknowledges that if not for the success of ''Atlantic City,'' for which he
wrote the screenplay, he would not be around the theater. Michael Weller, author
of the screenplays for ''Hair'' and ''Ragtime,'' says he writes for the movies
''because it supports my bad habit of playwriting.'' Marsha Norman, Christopher
Durang and Wendy Wasserstein, recognized playwrights Off Broadway, are all
writing for films as well, as are David Mamet, David Rabe, Ted Talley and Steve
Tesich.

The attractions of film and fiction notwithstanding, some young writers continue
to turn out plays. But here we come to another problem - the disappointing
quality and texture of what gets written. ''It's true that plays are not as good
as they were in the past,'' said Flora Roberts, a longtime agent. ''Young
playwrights know what they're against, but they don't know what they're for.
They don't have a credo.''

The producer Emanuel Azenberg suggested that the effects of the Vietnam war,
Watergate and the threat of nuclear war have made playwrights feel insecure and
powerless. The playwright Michael Weller says he has not seen any compelling
work recently: ''The language is poor, the structure is weak, but the main
problem is that playwrights are writing about small things.''

''It's true that there are no American plays today that equal 'A Streetcar Named
Desire,' 'Death of a Salesman' or 'Virginia Woolf,' '' said Andre Bishop,
artistic director of Playwrights Horizons.  ''It's true that people are writing
mostly about themselves. Personal expression was the cornerstone of the 60's and
70's. Young people like us were self-absorbed and we thought we were special,
but I believe the next 10 years in playwriting will be different.''

Whatever the future may hold, currently playwrights tend to avoid the great
issues of our time. They are less interested in ideas than in investigating the
Self. There are neither heroes nor anti-heroes, just interpersonal
relationships. Old-age crises, marriage crises and handicapping illness or
infirmity have been among the favorite themes, and these subjects are often
handled on a very small scale and in sentimental, melodramatic ways. Characters
often are inarticulate and passive, and rarely transcend the mundane. The young
are kooky or kinky adolescents with unresolved parental and sibling conflicts.

Some observers contend that the problem is not so much a matter of subject as of
craft. Julia Miles, associate director of American Place Theater and organizer
of its ''Women's Project,'' said that in searching for new American plays, she
finds that ''either you get a well-made TV script or a play that has a mixture
of styles and that doesn't work. But young people think that structure is a
dirty word.  It needs to be brought back into the playwright's mind.''

Not all playwrights agree with such judgments. ''My plays do have structure,''
said Wally Shawn, ''but they don't develop the way an Ibsen play develops. In my
plays people just get up, have their breakfast, they may do something, and have
lunch. They show one day in the life of two people and their relationship to
each other. I hope when you see that one day, you know everything you need to
know about them and the society they live in.''

The artistic problems of today's playwrights have to be seen as part of a
continuum, a heritage from the experimentation and rebellion of the 60's. Those
playwrights who started out in the Off Broadway theater of the 60's, in places
such as Ellen Stewart's La Mama in the East Village, in Caffe Cino, Theater
Genesis and the Judson Poets Theater, tried to synthesize realism with the
techniques of the newly discovered absurdists. Writers like John Guare and Sam
Shepard (along with Rochelle Owens, Rosalyn Drexler, Irene Fornes, Paul Foster,
David Rabe and Arthur Kopit) dispensed with the wellmade play, the conventional
plot structure, in favor of nonlinear construction. They mixed real and dream
worlds, the grotesque with the commonplace, obscenity with philosophy, and media
images with comic strip characters and mythic figures.

A few of these playwrights have since returned to traditional, often nostalgic,
autobiographical plays, such as Lanford Wilson's ''Talley's Folly'' and ''Fifth
of July,'' which please the public.  Others, like Rosalyn Drexler, Irene Fornes,
Rochelle Owens and Paul Foster, who were popular in the 60's but who have not
changed their style, have little chance of reaching a wider audience. John Guare
and Sam Shepard, for instance, have received critical acclaim (Mr.  Shepard won
a Pulitzer for ''Buried Child,'' produced Off Broadway), but their work remains
out of the theatrical mainstream.

However, the influence of these writers has been felt by a new generation, which
also rejects conventional structure. Writers like Albert Innaurato, David Mamet
and Christopher Durang are trying to weld non-linear structures with a new
small-scale realism or with comic strip cartoon characters. A new synthesis may
emerge from these efforts, although the results are so far open to question.

Another legacy of the 60's has been the weakening of theatrical language. The
non-literary theater of that decade was a theater of sound, movement and image
rather than literature; the primacy of the playwright was challenged by the
director, who worked out a collaborative ''piece'' together with the actors.
''The turning point for playwrights and for the theater was when Tom O'Horgan
staged 'Futz,' 'Tom Paine' and then 'Hair' on Broadway,'' said La Mama's Ellen
Stewart. ''He opened up the director's theater and started a trend. Maybe the
work of the playwright became secondary. Then there were Peter Brook and Jerzy
Grotowski - they made the piece, not the playwright.'' Although these directors
created exciting theater, a whole generation of writers may have been lost in
the process.

Not to be overlooked in the evolution of today's playwright is the influence of
television. Not only have some playwrights gone to work for television (Tom
Eyen, who made a reputation as one of Off Broadway's most unorthodox playwrights
before going on to co-author the musical ''Dreamgirls,'' wrote ''Mary Hartman''
for four years), but young dramatists today are children of the television age.
Its sit-coms, stereotypical melodramas, trite situations and pat resolutions all
find their way into the tone and texture of today's plays.

''How can young playwrights not be affected by television?'' asks the veteran
Broadway producer Morton Gottlieb. ''For the first 17 years of their life, they
have been watching television for at least five hours a day starting at the age
of six months. It is quite obvious that the structure of their plays has to come
out of television watching. They write one-hour plays; short 20-minute spans of
conversation, short stories and revues. Then after watching TV for 17 years they
go into the universities and study with failed Off Broadway writers who also
rejected structure.''

The life of the writer has never been easy and fine writing has always been
rare, but the current state of American theater raises the question whether the
serious playwright can ever be an artistic force again. On the other hand, we
may be in a fallow period with a fertile one to come. In any case, if serious
drama is to survive, it must combine grand themes and emotional depth with new
visual and aural techniques. The task of creating new forms is difficult, but as
long as young people continue writing there is hope for that one brilliant play
that may come to light and be followed by others. And then - who knows? - a new,
genuine renaissance for the drama may begin.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Steve Tesich, Sam Shepard, John Guare photo of
Lanford Wilson

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              296 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DISSOLUTION, REVOLUTION AND MOSCOW'S INTENTIONS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4, Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 2395 words


YUGOSLAVIA'S Communists will hold their 12th party congress next weekend at a
time of economic and political strains that have grown more severe since
President Tito died two years ago. Milovan Djilas, who was once one of Tito's
closest associates and subsequently one of his severest critics, candidly
assessed his country's future in a recent interview with John B. Oakes of The
New York Times.

Mr. Djilas, Marshal Tito's companion in arms and in politics during and
immediately after World War II, became a leading member of the Yugoslav
Politburo and Vice President of Yugoslavia. He played a major role in Tito's
historic break with the Soviet Union in 1948 and was Yugoslavia's most prominent
intellectual critic of the Stalinist version of communism.

After Stalin's death in 1953, however, Mr. Djilas came into sharp conflict with
Tito, attacking the Yugoslav bureaucracy and particularly Tito's failure to
pursue ''liberalization.'' He wrote articles developing ''democratic socialist''
ideas in a Marxist context, was expelled in 1954 from the party's Central
Committee and in 1956 was jailed for three years for his heretical views. His
term was extended after publication abroad, in 1957, of his famous book, ''The
New Class,'' which pointed out that Marxism surely was not leading to a
classless society. In all, he has spent nine years in jail.

Mr. Djilas, now 71, resides with his wife, in quiet ostracism, in a modest
art-filled apartment in central Belgrade. He lives on his war-time pension and
foreign royalties from his books. His passport has been revoked and he cannot
publish a word in Yugoslavia, not even his translation of Milton's ''Paradise
Lost'' into Serbo-Croatian. Recently, the Yugoslav press vehemently attacked him
for an analytical criticism of Tito, which he was able to publish only abroad.

Mr. Oakes spoke with Mr. Djilas in his apartment. Excerpts from their
conversation, which was in English, follow.  Question. What is the condition of
Yugoslavia today?

Answer. Yugoslavia is going through a constitutional as well as an economic
crisis. Without Tito, the Titoist system is disintegrating.  The controlling
force Tito represented does not now exist. The central Government is not
efficient, and there are all sorts of contradictions between the (six) republics
and the central Government and also among the republics themselves.

A weakening process is going on and I don't know how it will end.  This is not a
police state - it never was - but the regime now in power remains both
monopolistic and authoritarian.

A democratic alternative is not permitted. If it were, Yugoslavia would not be
endangered. But without some liberalization of the system, the country is in
serious danger of falling into chaos.

Q. Is the constitutional crisis, as you call it, brought about by any effective
opposition to the current regime?

A. No, this regime is in difficulties not because of the opposition, which is
very weak. In fact, there is no such organized body - just a few people like me
who are known as dissidents.

It's rather a crisis within the ruling system. It's most sharply revealed by the
disagreements among the republics. They can't agree on foreign trade, on what to
import and export. Each republic earns its own foreign exchange. Slovenia is the
most prosperous, earning more hard currency than the others from its exports,
Croatia (which includes most of the Dalmatian coast) from its tourism - and they
don't want to lose control of their funds for benefit of the others.  If the
central Government has to resort to extraordinary measures to enforce its will,
serious disturbances will come about.
'Titoism Steadily Weakening'

Q. What's the prospect?

A. The tendency toward more autonomy for each republic will continue, which
means that each republic will slowly develop its own internal system, more and
more distinct from the others. It is already happening.

Q. What does this mean for socialism?

A. Well, what is and is not socialism is not so clear to me today as when I was
young. Certainly this means a beginning of change in this system, with greater
differentiation among the republics. The organization of industry and the form
and power of workers' management councils will have to change from republic to
republic - and also at the top. So will the structure of the Communist Party
itself. Even now the Communist Party is not ideologically all that united.

Q. Isn't it held together by loyalty to Tito - that is, to Titoism?

A. Titoism is steadily weakening. As I say, the cult of Tito is disappearing.
That doesn't mean that Tito won't survive as a historical figure, like Mao, but
his authoritarian style of rule is disappearing. You can see it already
happening, especially in Serbia, where he is held to be guilty of what happened
in Kossovo (an autonomous province of the republic of Serbia with a large
Albanianspeaking majority) - as indeed he was.

Q. How could Tito be guilty of the Albanian nationalist rioting in Kossovo, when
he had long ago granted the Albanian Moslems almost complete self-rule there?

A. That's just the point. It was only when the rioting by Albanian students
broke out last year that we in Serbia realized what had been happening, though
the central Government of the party knew about it all the time. For at least 15
years, the Albanian Communists in control of Kossovo had been squandering the
money poured in from the rest of the country. They had been pressuring the
Serbian minority to leave the area, which thousands of them did. But Tito
tolerated the Albanians; they tricked him. Nobody could write a word about what
was going on -though everybody 'in the know' was aware of it. Then, when the
explosion occurred - the Albanians demanding a republic that would permit them
under our constitution eventually to secede from Yugoslavia - suddenly the lid
was off. Newspapers were suddenly allowed to write about what happened and to
uncover the kinds of mismanagement that brought it about. I don't know how
Yugoslavia is going to resolve this problem. Certainly, to give the Albanians of
Kossovo quasi-independence would be catastrophic for the unity of this country.

Q. Does the Solidarity movement in Poland have any significance for Yugoslavia -
or for the rest of Eastern Europe?

A. The Soviet Union is losing prestige in Yugoslavia as a result of its
pressures on Poland - even more so than during the Czech crisis of '68. I don't
believe that Solidarity can provoke any similar movements in the other countries
of the Warsaw bloc.

Here, it has raised great sympathy. The Government was not too enthusiastic
about Solidarity's demonstrations in Poland, but it has allowed the Yugoslav
press to write very thoroughly and seriously about the situation.

Poland is really going through a revolutionary change. Solidarity is basically a
democratic movement, even though some of its major participants are not
democratic. The military Government in Poland is very weak, and it cannot
succeed. While in some countries, as in Argentina, military dictatorship does
have some popular support, that's not the case in Poland.

No social group supports the military, and even only a part of the governmental
bureaucracy does so. No, this military Government cannot continue for a long
time. It's clear that the Polish top leaders are under Soviet control and are
using the Polish army in place of Soviet intervention to maintain their power.
This is like selfoccupation.
Warsaw Pact Weakened

However as long as this abnormal, insane situation continues, there will
continue to be strikes and disturbances. The Soviet Union cannot consolidate
Poland as it did Czechoslovakia. In Czechoslovakia in '68 the rebellion was of
the party intelligensia. In Poland, Solidarity has been able to create a mass
movement, a rebellion of the working class with the support of the
intellectuals, the church and even the peasants.

This is a revolution but not by violence, and it is a process that cannot be
stopped except by serious reforms or the most brutal means. But this Polish
government is for neither reform nor massacre, so it is living from day to day
with Soviet support. It has no legality.

Q. What about the rest of Eastern Europe?

A. It will have some influence in Czechoslovakia and East Germany because of
their strong working class tradition, but not on Hungary, Rumania or Bulgaria.
But the greatest influence will be on the military strength of the Warsaw Pact,
because now the Soviet Union can no longer count on Poland.

Q. How do you account for Solidarity's rise in Poland?

A. It started in intellectual circles, on a strictly theoretical basis, but the
key to its success is that somehow the intellectuals managed to make contact
with the workers and to inspire them to create a viable organization. Never
since the war has such a thing happened in a Communist country.

Many theoreticians thought of the working class as without initiative. Now we
see that that's not completely true and that in some countries the working class
may be the most important element in changing the system.

Q. What does this mean for Yugoslavia? A. The Polish example really doesn't
apply here. In the first place, we have no church or trade unions as a rallying
point. Even more important, national tendencies in Yugoslavia are stronger than
class tendencies. People here are not oriented toward class conflict as in
Poland. We have had plenty of strikes, but no working class movement. It would
be a good thing if we had trade unions or even independent groups of
intellectuals.

The Communist Party here insists that the voice of the worker is very important.
Workers do have some say in management, but still they aren't free and trade
unions play no role at all. Not a single strike in recent years has been
initiated by a trade union - and that I always thought was the essential job of
the union.

The strikes, by the way, have always been short, usually successful, and no one
has been arrested.  Q. You spoke earlier of economic crisis. How serious is
that?

A. The standard of living has clearly lowered in the last three years. Inflation
is high - at least 40 percent last year.  Unemployment is at 12 percent, and
going up, especially among highly qualified workers and intellectuals.

Q. What can be done about that?

A. A little more free enterprise would help, more emphasis on the market economy
and private sector.

Q. That doesn't sound much like Marxism.

A. Marxism is in error in many ways - for example, in believing that it would
end international conflicts. Just look at Vietnam and Cambodia, Ethiopia and
Somalia, and so on. It taught withering away of the state; but the state is
getting even stronger and more privileged - at least the bureaucracy is. Here in
Yugoslavia, we have one bureaucrat for every three or four productive workers.

Q. What about Yugoslavia's relations with the Soviet Union and the other members
of the eastern bloc?

A. Well, if our crisis continues indefinitely, probably the U.S.S.R. will
intervene through Bulgaria. While Bulgaria constantly proclaims that all of its
borders are settled, it also constantly insists that Macedonia (one of
Yugoslavia's six republics) should be part of Bulgaria. That's like saying,
'That's my suit you're wearing but I won't take it from you.'

'1,000 Political Prisoners'

The Soviet Union, by the way, is tending to become more active here in
Yugoslavia, just because we are in difficulties. Yugoslav trade is turning more
to the east. The Russians are sending more artistic groups here, to Serbia, as
distinct from the other republics, to underline their historic sympathy with the
Serbs and accent the isolation of Serbia in Yugoslavia. And note that I said
Russians; it's not the Soviet Union as such that is doing all this cultural
activity, it's the Russians. It's not getting very far with us, however. Well,
Soviet painting may be momentarily popular with the petite bourgeoisie here, but
it's really very banal.

Q. What about civil liberties?

A. I believe there are some 6,000 people in Yugoslavia deprived of their
passports for political reasons, like me. As to political prisoners, I'd guess
there are at least 1,000, including the Albanians arrested as a result of the
Kossovo disturbances.  Proportionate to population, this makes us not much
better than the Soviet Union, which with 10 times the number of people that we
have is supposed to have some 10,000 political prisoners. But the situation here
is certainly a lot better than there.

Q. What do you think of United States policy in Eastern Europe?

A. The United States acted correctly in Poland, but without great efficiency.
The sanctions haven't had much effect, but they were better than nothing.
Generally, I think the Reagan Administration's foreign policy is better than
Carter's. Carter was good only on human rights.

Present U. S. policy is more practical, more realistic, more critical of the
U.S.S.R. Carter underestimated the Soviet danger; even Nixon did.

I'm for abolishing all nuclear weapons, but as long as the Soviet Union has
them, I think the U. S. should too. Conventional arms are more important anyway.
What would happen if the Soviet Union attacked Europe with conventional forces
and at the same time warned the U. S. that it would use nuclear arms against the
United States? I'm not at all sure the U. S. would come to the rescue of Europe
with its own nuclear weapons.

At any rate, with the Reagan Administration, we Yugoslavs feel more secure. If
the Soviet Union intervened here, at least the U. S.  would not be indifferent.
Carter would have only protested and prayed to God to save Yugoslavia.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Milovan Djilas

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              297 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

TOPICS;
Washington Veterans;
Out of Step

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 232 words


Robert Nimmo, director of the Veterans Administration, was supposedly hired to
carry out retrenchments in the agency forced by budget cutbacks. In the process
he has earned a reputation for astonishing insensitivity, if not hostility, to
the people his agency is supposed to serve.

Mr. Nimmo, seems to have a special grudge against Vietnam veterans. Though many
of them feel damaged by service in areas where the defoliant Agent Orange was
used, Mr. Nimmo compares the chemical's effects to teen-age acne.

He spent $50,000 to refurbish his office while cutting benefits and health
programs. He even prompted an official complaint from some veterans groups after
he began parking his leased Buick Electra in spaces reserved for the disabled.

He refused to grant his employees an hour off to attend groundbreaking
ceremonies for the Vietnam veterans' memorial, although he was off playing golf
during the event.

Charles Hagel, a Vietnam veteran and deputy director of the agency, has
threatened to resign because of policy differences with Mr.  Nimmo. White House
officials persuaded Mr. Hagel to give the President a month to consider what to
do about the situation.

It shouldn't take a month to figure this one out. Veterans deserve a better
voice in Washington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: editorial

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              298 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

New York Times Magazine June 20, 1982

SECTION: Section 6; Page 4, Column 3; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 184 words


William Safire 8 On Language

Sherpa Run-Up
Russell Baker 14 Sunday Observer

Fathering
Michael Wright 16 The Marine Corps Faces the Future

World tensions and new weapons are helping the Marines overcome the severe image
- and enlistment - problems they suffered after the Vietnam War.
Alex Ward 20 They Also Serve

Standing in the wings of big-time tennis are hundreds of players who brave the
rigors and torments of qualifying matches in order to challenge the stars.
John Russell 24 Lincoln Kirstein: A Life in Art
Susan Chira 28 Against the Japanese Grain

Prosperity has spawned a small but significant number of Japanese who want more
out of life than a self-sacrificing work ethic provides them.
June Weir 62 Fashion

The Italian Missed Connection
Marilyn Bethany 64 Design

Barking Up the Right Tree
Deborah Blumenthal 68 Beauty

Taking a Pasting
Craig Claiborne 71 Food with Pierre Franey

When Eggs Are Hot Stuff
76 Puzzles

Answers, Page 80
86 Letters Cover: Photograph by Herman J. Kokojan/Black Star
Copyright 1980, The New York Times

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: contents

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              299 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE MARINE CORPS FACES THE FUTURE

SECTION: Section 6; Page 16, Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 6779 words


Michael Wright, an editor of The New York Times Week in Review, is a former
naval officer. By Michael Wright fter years on the defensive, the Marine Corps,
that all-American anachronism, has come charging back. Though the corps may not
yet have made it all the way up there with mom, apple pie and Lite beer, it has
been transformed into a place where even Lieut. Col. Bull Meechum, Captain Flagg
and Sergeant Stryker, those renowned Hollywood leathernecks, would probably feel
right at home.

In the anti-interventionist mood of the 1970's, the marines were held held in
low regard by many Americans. But a combination of events has given new currency
to the Marine Corps and its first-tofight traditions: the Iranian hostage
crisis; the election of a conservative commander in chief with an avowed
interest in pursuing a global ''maritime'' strategy, and the wars this spring in
the South Atlantic and in Lebanon.

After all, dispatching Old Glory and a few good men to faraway places was the
Marines' stock in trade not so many years ago, and it served well in bloody
battles from Guadalcanal in World War II through the decisive Inchon landing in
Korea. Then, as now, the corps' specialty was landing on a beachhead and
clearing out the defenders, thus opening the way for a larger flow of men and
materiel. The corps' ''gung-ho'' legacy still reverberates through Marine drill
fields and boot-camp barracks from South Carolina to Southern California.

But many civilian analysts and the Marines' rivals in the other military
branches have long belittled such esprit de corps as a poor substitute for armor
plating, maintaining that the corps' hallowed John Wayne-style
amphibious-warfare doctrines and tactics are as outmoded as trench warfare.
However, the Marines are now seeking to re-establish themselves firmly as the
nation's premier fighting force by acquiring the complicated and extraordinarily
deadly weapons of the electronic age.

In the process, the corps, whose no-nonsense cost efficiency has long been
popular on Capitol Hill, is winning new friends in Washington. ''Among many
members of Congress, the corps is regarded as a model of what the rest of the
military should look like one day - lean and fast moving,'' says Stephen D.
Goose, a senior research analyst with the Center for Defense Information, a
private research organization.

Even Congressmen who are firmly opposed to any American military involvement in,
say, El Salvador agree that given the ever-present potential for conflict in
such unstable places as the Middle East, and such surprising places as the
Falkland Islands, it makes sense to have a well-trained naval infantry on
standby. And the Marine Corps is not an insubstantial force. With 192,100 men
and women, the corps, a semiautonomous service attached to the Department of the
Navy, receives a mere 3 percent of the Pentagon's annual budget. But it is still
larger than the entire British Army and its 1,200 helicopters and airplanes
constitute the seventh biggest air force in the world.

Thanks to Capitol Hill's largess - Congress gave everybody in uniform a
substantial pay raise last year - and a civilian economy that has for some
months provided few opportunities for young men with strong backs and no
particular skills, the corps is swearing in all the recruits it needs. In recent
months, nearly 80 percent of all eligible Marines who have completed at least
two tours of duty have been re-enlisting, as have almost half the young
first-termers.  In fact, Marine re-enlistments in the second half of 1981 were
at their highest levels ever. The corps' officers continue to be regarded as
among the best in the world. One author-ity, Richard A.  Gabriel, a professor of
political science at St. Anselm's College in Manchester, N.H., and co-author of
''Crisis in Command,'' ranks only the officers of the French Foreign Legion and
the commanders of some elements of the West German Army as better.

As always, the Marine Corps seems to think that protecting its image on the home
front is as important as projecting military might along some foreign littoral.
In fact, former President Truman may have only slightly overstated the case when
he referred to the corps as ''a propaganda machine that is almost equal to
Stalin's.'' So it was a staggering blow when the Reagan Administration failed to
designate the corps as the rapid-deployment force, a multiservice command
established by the Carter Administration to defend the United States' interests
in the Persian Gulf oilfields. ''Nothing grieves the Marine Corps more,'' says a
Congressional defense specialist, ''than to see all those front-page pictures of
Army paratroops drifting down over Egyptian sands.''

Still, according to Martin Binkin, senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, a
Washington research organization, ''the corps seems to have come out of the
1970's in better shape than the Army. Marines seem to feel good about
themselves.''

Says Gen. Robert H. Barrow, commandant of the Marine Corps, like many of the
corps' senior officers a soft-spoken Southerner: ''There's reason to say we are
in a golden age. We're not being neglected. We're not being pushed aside. We're
not being ignored.  It's very encouraging. Very encouraging.'' ow effectively
the corps would employ its new confidence and its new weaponry on a battlefield
of the 1980's remains to be seen. But there is considerable speculation around
Marine Corps headquarters - a scruffy, low-slung building that overlooks
Arlington National Cemetery - and elsewhere about how the corps would have fared
if it had been attacking the Falkland Islands instead of British marines and
paratroopers.

In the view of Edward N. Luttwak, senior fellow with Georgetown University's
Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Falkland Islands campaign for
the United States would have been ''a piece of cake.'' Under the Navy and Marine
Corps' best-case scenario - which assumes that there would be no other demands
for the Navy's scarce amphibious ships elsewhere in the world and that the Army
would not immediately rush in with a splashy airborne attack - a force of 15,000
Marines, loaded aboard 15 to 20 cargo and troop ships, would have sufficed.

A major lesson learned in the Falklands action was that smart weaponry can give
even a military underdog awesome firepower against a numerically impressive
naval force. The British lost several modern warships in the process of invading
the islands, leading some critics of amphibious warfare to conclude that the
Marines would have many casualties under similar circumstances. According to
Navy and Marine sources, however, an American amphibious force would have been
escorted by a large-deck aircraft carrier, which would itself have been
shepherded by perhaps as many as three cruisers, four destroyers and five
frigates, all armed with surface-to-air missiles.

But an American aircraft carrier's mix of airplanes would have included
long-range radar patrol planes that would have directed Navy and Marine Corps
fighters to intercept incoming Argentane attack planes well before they were
within missile-launching range. Before Marines made their way ashore, the beach
would have been softened up if undefended landing zones could not be found.
Scouting parties would have cleared mines and charted Argentine gun emplacements
and other defenses.

Navy ships have not had much in the way of conventional firepower since the last
of the heavy cruisers were retired - which is why Barrow and his generals
lobbied so hard to have the battleships brought back - so ship-to-shore
bombardment would have to consist of shells pumped toward the beach by the
single gun mounts of some of the carrier's escorts. Weather and the antiaircraft
weaponry of the Argentines permitting, planes launched from the carrier and jump
jets carried on some of the amphibious ships would conduct their own bombing and
strafing runs.

The Marines, once they were brought ashore by landing craft and by helicopters,
would be under some pressure to wrap up the campaign in a hurry. For one thing,
as the corps' planners acknowledge, if the battle dragged on, the Army would
probably demand to get involved.  For another, the corps is still so lightly
armed - one analyst compares the present-day might of many of its infantry units
to ''the Turkish Army's in 1917'' - that it might have trouble breaking out of a
beachhead, if the entrenched enemy was able to bring up armored units. Air
superiority provided by planes from an aircraft carrier might eliminate this
risk.

''The Marine Corps is suitable for intervention in areas where there are no
Soviet forces or in terrain where mechanized armor is not to be found,'' says
Luttwak, voicing the opinion of many uniformed and civilian analysts. ''The
Marine Corps can make a forceable entry and then build a very powerful coastal
enclave.  However, they aren't equipped to move inland against a mechanized
opponent.''

It is a problem that the corps has acknowledged and hopes to resolve with its
new weapons. And it is just as clear that the British experience on the
Falklands - barren islands far from the mainland bases of an enemy - cannot be
an appropriate model for the kind of situation the Marines may one day
encounter. Says one colonel: ''We know we're long past the day when we'll be met
on the shore by people carrying spears.'' It was Vietnam, the bitter, unwon,
perhaps unwinnable war that very nearly left the Marine Corps a burnt-out case.
Its men and materiel had been squandered in I Corps; 13,066 Marines were killed
in action, another 51,392 wounded. Race riots raged in barracks and along the
back alleys of garrison towns at home and abroad. Rates for desertion and
unauthorized absences soared. So did the number of experienced Marines who took
their dogtags off for good. And the corps' carefully cultivated image suffered
from prominently displayed reports of excesses by boot-camp drill instructors
and downright fraud by recruiters. The Army was probably in even worse shape,
but that was not much consolation to the corps.  After all, there would always
be an Army. The first of many attempts to do away with the corps came early in
President Washington's first term, and the Marines have been standing constant
watch over their political flanks ever since.

Throughout much of the 1970's, the corps was engulfed in one of its frequent
identity crises. ''After Vietnam, there was a general malaise in all of the
services,'' says Goose. ''But it probably struck the Marine Corps hardest
because people began to question the need for the corps. It was seen as our
force for intervention when intervention had a bad name.''

Pentagon planners began regarding the corps, which had long had more of a
Pacific orientation, as reinforcement chaff for the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization. Brooding about the Marine Corps became something of a cottage
industry along the banks of the Potomac. The Library of Congress conducted a
two-day whither-the-corps workshop; think tanks spewed out their own studies.
Much of the analysis focused on the corps' nearly fanatical embrace of the
theories and practice of amphibious warfare.

Ever since the 1950's there had been questions about the effectiveness and
vulnerability of sea-borne invasion forces. In 1976, an analysis that Binkin and
an associate prepared for the Brookings Institution - titled ''Where Does the
Marine Corps Go From Here?'' - suggested that, while a division and a half or so
of Marines might be held in reserve for that unlikely day when the United States
staged another amphibious attack, the rest of the corps might just as well turn
in its waders and pick up some of the Army's slack.

Admist all the soul-searching, the corps began to take its first strides back.
In the summer of 1975, Gen. Louis H. Wilson, a gentlemanly, jug-eared native of
Brandon, Miss., took command.  Wilson, who as a 24-year-old company commander
won the Medal of Honor on Guam in World War II, proceeded to pick the Marine
Corps up by the scruff of the neck and give it a good shake. He raised
enlistment standards and had more than 5,000 ''undesirables'' discharged; he
began the policy of assigning top-notch officers and enlisted people to
recruiting duty, and to improve morale, he reduced the number of unaccompanied
tours (12-month stretches without family) that marines had to serve on bases in
the Western Pacific.

Barrow, commandant since July 1, 1979 has continued many of Wilson's personnel
policies. Now 82 percent of the male recruits who double-time their way through
10 1/2 weeks of hell on earth at Marine training depots are high-school
graduates; in 1975, only half had their diplomas. But the corps still has a way
to go. Though the proportion of marines who log brig time or face court-martial
proceedings every year has dropped considerably, ''indiscipline'' rates for the
corps' enlisted grunts and wing wipers remain startlingly high. The corps
attributes the rowdiness to the fact that its troops are by far the youngest in
the American military.

Even more dramatic changes stemmed from two events late in 1979: the seizure of
the American hostages in Tehran and, a few weeks later, the Soviet invasion of
Afghanistan.

The Carter Administration took steps to give the United States, on paper anyway,
the capability to insert military muscle into the Persian Gulf, and the Marines
were made the primary shock troops of the new Rapid Deploy- ment Force. For a
time, there was barely subdued jubilation in the corps, even though the R.D.F.
has from the start struck many authorities as a force whose success would
require an extraordinary measure of good luck.

For a time, a three-star Marine general, Paul X. Kelley, was the force
commander. After a bitter struggle with the Army, the corps was bumped from that
pre-eminent role, in large measure because of the fact that, as one
Congressional aide put it, ''the Marines have only one vote on the Joint Chiefs
of Staff.'' (Kelley, for his part, did not make out too badly. Replaced by an
Army general, he was subsequently given a fourth star and named the corps'
deputy commandant. He may replace Barrow, whose term ends next June.) But,
headquartered in the Mojave Desert at Twentynine Palms, Calif., the corps still
has a 12,000-man brigade on call prepared to file aboard jet transports for the
Persian Gulf, if necessary.

The brigade's supplies, 30-days' worth of beans, bullets and bandages, are
stored in the dehumidified holds of seven cargo ships moored at Diego Garcia in
the Indian Ocean. The island is 2,500 miles from the Strait of Hormuz, the
strategically important channel that separates Iran and the Arabian peninsula.
Current Pentagon planning calls for the creation of at least two other sea-borne
caches to supply two additional Marine brush-fire brigades. ''Now the corps is
back in the business of thinking about and doing things in that part of the
world in which it was designed to fight - outside Europe,'' says Jeffrey Record,
now a senior fellow with the Institute for Foreign Policy Analysis and the
co-author of the Brookings study.

To a far greater extent than its recent predecessors, the Reagan Administration
seems to appreciate the corps' special capabilities and its traditions - up to a
point, of course. Under the Pentagon's plans for fighting a protracted nuclear
war, two Marine divisions and air wings would be among the forces dispatched to
the Persian Gulf.  With the newfound respectability, or at least plausibility,
of intervention has come a renewed interest - smart weaponry or no - in the
over-the-beach style of attack in which the corps excelled four decades ago.

''Iran gave amphibious warfare a new lease on life,'' says Senator William S.
Cohen, a Republican from Maine who is a leading member of the Congressional
military-reform caucus and chairman of the Senate Seapower and Force Projection
subcommittee. ''It made us more aware of our vulnerabilities.'' The Navy now has
but 67 amphibious ships in its active fleet, half as many as were available in
1968. Even if they were not dispersed all over the world as they are now, that
is only enough to transport a bit more than one of the corps' three 50,000-man
amphibious assault forces and an assortment of helicopters and fighter-bombers.

Things may improve. Last August, work began on a new LSD (landing ship dock),
the U.S.S. Whidbey Island, the workhorse of amphibious operations that can haul
nearly 1,000 troops, armor and other heavy equipment and supplies to within
striking range of a beach. It was the first keel-laying for an amphibious ship
in five years. As part of its plan for beefing up the Navy, the Administration
wants Congress to approve the construction of 10 more amphibious ships during
the next five years. Also on the way, after a decade on the drawing boards:
air-cushioned landing craft, similar to those already used by Russian marines,
that can skim across reefs and shoals, hauling 60 tons at speeds of 50 knots.
The first six, which cost $10.8 million apiece, are due to join the fleet in
1986.

New weapons have just started turning up in Marine Corps armories; many more are
on the way, assuming Congress, under the pressure of huge deficits, does not
turn its guns on the Pentagon budget: a fleet of light-weight armored vehicles,
quick-moving troop carriers and cannon platforms that helicopters could haul
across a beachhead or a desert; deadlier, more accurate antiaircraft and
antitank missiles and machine guns that can pierce the other sides' armored
vehicles, all designed to give the corps' 27 infantry battalions 25 percent
greater firepower. Marine aviators, who have always fared better on
appropriations than the corps' ground-combat units, are due for a few new
baubles as well. In April, a fighter-attack squadron began turning in its F-4
Phantoms, among the oldest airplanes in the Department of the Navy, replacing
them with brand-new F-18 Hornets.  By 1985, the corps hopes to begin phasing in
advanced Harriers, longerrange models of the jump-jets the British deployed in
their war with Argentina.

Some old-line Congressional conservatives and many members of the bipartisan
military reform caucus have been sharply critical of the Defense Department's
plans to build a dry-land headquarters in the Persian Gulf region for what is
now called the Rapid Deployment Joint Task Force. They would prefer having more
American troops afloat - i.e., marines, unaffected by a host country's caprice
and, at least in the early going of a skirmish, not tied to airfields. ''An
amphibious task force,'' observes Barrow, who would certainly second the motion,
''is a formidable weapon. Landing where the enemy is least heavily defended is
where you see its real usefulness. Using the oceans as highways to get to
troubled places, the Navy and the Marine Corps can be effective deterrents.''
But many analysts maintain that the Marine Corps could not handle the job alone.
''It doesn't have the right kind of airplanes - it would have to depend on the
Air Force to transport most of its troops,'' says the Library of Congress's John
Collins. ''It has no parachute air-assault capability. The corps is a very good
assault team at the brigade level - that's about a third of a division -but
clean out of business for larger elements. If the name of the game is rapid
deployment, then the Marine Corps just isn't up to it.'' Late on a bright, windy
spring morning, three Marine recruits, their shaved heads protected by helmets,
maneuver like wary gladiators around ''Madison Square Garden,'' one of Parris
Island's two pugil-stick pits. It's two on one. This is their third session with
the padded sticks, which are roughly the length and weight of an M-16 rifle.
Surrounding the pit - a 35-foot-wide sand pile encircled by painted-red
automobile tires - 150 other recruits are screaming, ''Kill! Kill!'' A
half-dozen drill instructors, grim-faced sergeants in broad-brimmed Montana peak
hats, yell more pointed intructions.

The recruits in the pit are wearing heavy gloves. Protective padding is strapped
around their necks and across their groins. One recruit stumbles and falls to
his knees, but he's only lost his footing. He wasn't put down by a simulated
killing blow of a rifle butt to the temple or the slash of a bayonet across his
throat, so the match continues. Fighting like veterans - these recruits have
endured the sand fleas and 0500 reveilles for nine weeks so far - it takes a
full two minutes before the match is whistled to an end by a referee-instructor.
After everyone has had his turn in the pit, a first lieutenant tallies the
injuries: three jammed thumbs.

Not too long ago, life in the pits at Parris Island and at the Marine Corps's
West Coast recruit training depot in San Diego, was considerably riskier. In
1976, a young man named Lynn E. McClure was fatally beaten with pugil sticks at
San Diego. A few months earlier, a recruit at Parris Island was accidentally
shot in the hand by a drill instructor (D.I.). ''The D.I.'s were under
tremendous pressure,'' recalls Maj. Gen. Robert E. Haebel, who was Parris
Island's commanding general until June 10, when he left South Carolina to take
command of the Marine division based on Okinawa.  ''We had a ceiling on
attrition and we thought we could make Marines out of anybody. Part of the
excesses here were due to just plain old frustration.'' The corps has since
initiated reforms that have significantly changed the way recruits are
transformed into marines.

Nineteen-eighty-two model recruits are shown films on how to go one-on-one with
carnivorous used-car dealers or shark-like bank officers; special units hve been
createdto assist the overweight or undermuscled.

Drill instructors are more carefully screened; fully 29 percent of those who
sign up for eight weeks of D.I. training do not make it.  Those who do must
abide by a number of don'ts once they are in charge of recruit platoons.
Profanity is out. So is physical exertion in the white-hot heat of the summer.
No more making a recruit smoke a pack of cigarettes while standing at attention
with a bucket on his head.  Except for adjusting a uniform, touching a recruit
is forbidden.  During orientation lectures, recruits are encouraged to report
abusive conduct by D.I.'s. Once left largely to their own devices, D.I.'s are
now constantly supervised by officers. A drill instructor who plays by the rules
can do very well for himself; advancing two pay grades within a single two-year
tour is not uncommon. Many D.I.'s, however, either buckle under the pressure or
bend the rules; some get caught. During the last year and a half, approximately
10 percent of Parris Island's 525 D.I.'s have been relieved for not adhering
precisely to the letter of the the corps' training manuals.  Four drill
instructors were charged with assaulting recruits and found guilty in
court-martial proceedings. One, a sergeant, was busted two pay grades to lance
corporal and sentenced to 30 days in the brig for kicking a private in the leg
and for punching another in the stomach - and for using a Government telephone
to make personal calls.

For all the complaints about pampering by former marines and not a few D.I.'s,
Parris Island could never be mistaken for a resort. It is home for some of the
biggest diamond-back rattlers anywhere - 7,800 acres of towering moss-draped
oaks and stubby palmettos surrounded by marshes and creeks that form a kind of
alligator-infested moat. Of the 28,000 male recruits who took the bus ride last
year across the mile-long, two-lane causeway that links Parris Island with the
mainland, 15 percent were sent away civilians. Twenty-five hundred of the
recruits were women, carefully isolated in their own enclave, complete with mess
hall, chapel and beauty shop.

Near the end of their ordeal, recruits move out of their barracks and into
two-man tents. ''By then, the momma's boys have gone back to their Friday nights
at Gino's,'' says Capt. Richard Carter, a 28-year-old native of Laurel, Miss.,
with arms like a longshoreman, the officer in charge of the Field Training Unit.
Recruits learn the telltale signs of boobytraps and chemical weapons (''Look for
dead birds or a point man who starts flopping around like a chicken with a wrung
neck''). They toss grenades, break camp soundlessly in the dark, rappel off a
47-foot-high tower (''If a man is scared of heights, he might be scared of
bullets''). They crawl under barbed wire between live dynamite charges and
through tidal pools full of muck washed in from Port Royal Sound. All in all,
says Captain Carter, ''somebody's gonna have their hands full when they grab
ahold of us.''

Why does anyone volunteer for a such a regimen? And in a service that does not
offer all that much in the way of preparation for a civilian job? Some enlisted
recruits are former high-school athletes attracted by the corps' elite
reputation. Others are young men who do not have any great yearnings for combat
but who do want a steady paycheck. (A single marine private living in the
barracks earns $6,616; a married staff sergeant 10 years down the road earns
$18,309, a lieutenant colonel with a family who has been in the corps for more
than 20 years earns about $43,400.) Many are from bluecollar, big-city
backgrounds. Corps studies find that many make their way to Parris Island or San
Diego precisely because they want a stiff dose of discipline, that there is
nothing accidental about the fact that D.I.'s often find themselves acting,
reluctantly, as surrogate fathers.

''All over the country, you see kids who don't have any sparkle in their eyes,''
says General Haebel, a man of disarming enthusiasm.  ''But down here, you see
the pride. You see that they've finally gotten their teeth into something that
they can identify with.'' His words come tumbling out in a rapid-fire stream,
not always controlled. ''Mom and dad turn a kid's body, mind and spirit over to
us and they say, 'Make me a marine.' And that's a special responsibility we
have. You know, a lot of bleeding hearts ... uh, I should't say that. A lot of
people say we put people in a meat grinder down here. That's not what it's all
about. We do love our country, and we are interested in these young people.'' He
adds: ''We're preparing these kids for the brotherhood of marines. That's
something special, something only marines can understand.'' Once a brand-new
marine leaves the cloistered routine of boot camp or an officer-training school,
he finds that the corps can be a tense brotherhood. The corps' elders, men with
stacks of ribbons over their hearts, fret a lot about the men and women nearer
the bottom, the recent arrivals from the fickle civilian world out there beyond
the base perimeter.

For one thing, there are all those W.M.'s - the 7,700 women marines whose
numbers have doubled since 1977. Their training - down the road from the men at
Parris Island - lasts eight weeks and includes a goodly dollop of exercise and
close-order drill as well as lectures on military law and ''personal health,
hygiene and sanitation.''

By Department of the Navy directive, women marines are restricted to units that
normally would not come under enemy fire. Unlike the other services, the corps
does not allow women to pilot its planes, but they may serve as enlisted crew
members of small-passenger craft. Women can not serve at all in infantry or
artillery units. But they can draw duty in behind-the-lines weapons-repair
depots. For many M.M.'s, the idea of leathernecks in skirts posted to anything
but clerical duties is clearly distressing. Some M.M.'s, especially those old
enough to have 18- or 19-year-old children, are quick to ask: ''Well, would you
want your daughter standing guard duty by herself in the middle of the night?''
As their contingents of W.M.'s grow larger, base commanders worry more about
fraternization. What do you do, for instance, when an enlisted W.M. and an
enlisted M.M. marry and one becomes an officer? Can the enlisted mate boldly
walk into the officers' club, same as any other officers' spouse? Many W.M.'s,
for their part, believe that the corps, forced to accept them in ever-greater
numbers since Congress lifted the 2 percent ceiling on females in uniform, does
not quite know what to do with them.

''We're supposed to be equal but we're not,'' says one woman, a major and a
marine for more than 15 years. ''We're the new minority.  Wilson did so much for
us; before him we didn't even have a maternity uniform. He opened up new jobs.
We got to wear green and khaki like everyone else. Then Barrow took command. He
pushed everything absolutely backward. He has a very paternalistic attitude. And
I don't especially need another father.''

Barrow has been lukewarm, at best, about all those women in uniform (he has twin
daughters who are married to Marine officers and a son who is a first lieutenant
commanding a rifle platoon at Camp Lejeune, N.C.). While allowing that the
performance of his W.M.'s has been ''super,'' he adds with some conviction:
''War is a man's work.  Biological convergence on the battlefield would not only
be dissatisfying in terms of what women could do, but it would be an enormous
psychological distraction for the male who wants to think that he's fighting for
that woman somewhere behind, not up there in the same foxhole with him. It
tramples the male ego. When you get right down to it, you have to protect the
manliness of war.''

A remnant of the bad old days, there are also worries about race relations, with
blacks currently making up 22 percent of the corps.  In recent years, frictions
between blacks and whites have rarely reached the killing point, as they
sometimes did in the 1970's, but questions about how well they would coalesce on
a battlefield remain.

The concerns stem from subtle and not-so-subtle signals. In a few mess halls,
black and white enlisted marines almost never mix. Not many months ago, a white
marine put a traffic cone on his head, draped a white sheet over himself and
barged into a retirement party for a black sergeant. ''They nearly tore him
apart,'' recalls an officer who investigated the affair. The episode was
dutifully reported to Marine Corps headquarters as an incident, not a riot.

Marine spokesmen deny emphatically that the corps has racial quotas or has ever
considered implementing them. But here and there officers talk hopefully of a
gradual ''bleaching out'' process that will reduce the percentage of blacks to a
''more manageable'' 12 or 13 percent. Only 4 percent of the Marines' officers
are black. The prospects for the proportion increasing any time soon seem slim.

''The absence of black officers probably makes a difference to young black
enlisted men,'' says a black sergeant major who has logged more than a quarter
century in the corps. ''Many young blacks think that only another black will
listen to their problems. But when you've been around for a while you realize
that a sharp black who could be an officer can probably make a lot of money in
the civilian world. He doesn't need the corps.''

''Recruiting black officers is one of our major problems,'' says Brig. Gen.
Donald J. Fulham, former director of the headquarters' personnel procurement
division and now about to take command of the Marine base at Camp Lejeune. ''We
haven't been very effective at it.  We haven't recruited from the minority
schools because we had a problem with them passing our current entrance tests.
We will not change our minimum requirements for any group.''

Among many young officers, there are two central worries: One is that they will
not get to go to war any time soon. Because of the importance of commanding in
combat - it is all a part of having your ticket punched, advancing your way up
the M.M.'s career ladder - there is a discernible yearning among young marines
for a chance to mix it up in Nicaragua, Aden, anywhere. ''It's like going to
medical school and studying anatomy for years but never even getting near a
cadaver,'' says one. Another fear is that they may draw recruiting duty. It is
all well and good that Barrow has decreed that a recruiting tour, three years or
so of making the rounds of college and high-school campuses, is the peace-time
equivalent of combat.  But for an up-and-coming officer, it can be a
double-edged sword.  ''If you don't do well,'' says one captain, ''then you've
got a black mark on your record; if you do too well, it may become your
specialty. You'll be stuck in it forever.''

Many enlisted marines, young and old alike, are not happy about the corps'
crackdown on drugs, which commenced on Feb. 1. Almost half the marines who were
surveyed in a 1980 Department of Defense study admitted that they had used drugs
(marijuana, mostly) within the previous year, more than a third within the past
30 days.

Marines are to undergo urinalysis testing at least once a year.  Gate searches
are increasing, as are inspections by search-dog teams. Under guidelines handed
down early this year officers who are caught get no second chance; they are to
be discharged immediately. With an enlisted marine, a second chance is possible,
depending on his record and his commanding officer's dispositon. As of the end
of March, 2,000 marines, most of them suspected marijuana users, were enrolled
in drug-rehabilitation programs pending further laboratory testing.

The response on many bases has been a certain inventiveness.  Marines tell one
another than if you bury your marijuana in a plastic bag along with a container
of peanut butter the dogs will never find it.  Over the years, looking good and
talking straight on Capitol Hill have been the Marine Corps' forte - and maybe
the keys to its survival. ''The Marines are unique among the services,'' says
William S. Lind, a legislative assistant for military and defense issues for
Senator Gary Hart of Colorado. ''The defense traditionalists like their short
hair; reformers like the fact that the corps is open to new ideas. And it
doesn't cost the country all that much.'' Some of the corps' biggest boosters
have always been former marines serving in Congress. Though the number of
Congressmen who have spent a day in any service is steadily dwindling, the corps
can still muster eight Senators and 25 Representatives. Influential personal and
legislative aides are methodically cultivated. Almost anyone who wants to hop
down to Camp Lejeune, headquarters of the Second Marine Division and a hotbed of
interest in German and Israeli battle tactics, and spend a weekend out in the
woods bouncing around on M-60 tanks is welcome.

For whatever reason, Congress nearly always comes through. One especially
critical juncture for the corps came in the standing-down years immediately
after World War II, when there was a rush to unify or otherwise streamline the
armed services. The Marine Corps - always regarded by the Army and its friends
as essentially a landing party that got out of hand - had already shrunk from a
V-J Day peak of 485,833 to just over 100,000, still five times its 1939
dimensions.

A holding action by such former leathernecks as the late Senator Paul H. Douglas
(a 50-year-old private at Parris Island in 1942) and Mike Mansfield, then a
Representative, and the outbreak of the Korean War saved the corps from being
merged outright with the Army or reduced in size to not much more than a
regiment or two. Further, a law pushed through by Douglas and Mansfield mandated
that the corps could never shrink below three ground divisions and three air
wings; no other service has such a charter.

During the corps' most recent siege of institutional depression, Congress
overrode the Defense Department's civilian brass and the Office of Management
and Budget's green-eyeshade marauders from time to time to give the Marine Corps
a helping hand. Such was the case with the AV-8B Harrier. The corps, which
already has three squadrons of an older-model Harrier, likes the plane because
with its vertical-takeoff capability it does not need a paved runway or a
carrier flight deck. It can be based nearer front lines and thus can make more
bombing runs in support of the grunts on the ground. The Air Force and the
Navy's carrier admirals don't want anything to do with the Harrier, and that
suits the Marine Corps just fine because of its experience in Korea and Vietnam,
when it lost operational control of most of its aviation units.

''The corps will probably always be a bit paranoid,'' says another Congressional
defense specialist. ''They've always likened themselves to Israel surrounded by
Arabs.'' Sure enough, with its R.D.F. wounds barely healed, there is already
talk around the Marine Corps about a possibly decisive political battle in the
near future. Since the end of the Vietnam War, the Army has consistently
received a smaller share of the Pentagon pie than the Navy and Air Force, but it
is now moving toward creating mobile ''high tech'' combat units that in many
ways resemble Marine Corps outfits. Says one analyst: ''A year or two ago it
dawned on the Army that the Persian Gulf was the new kid in town. That
projection of forces was the name of the game, the rationale for expanded
budgets. And being tied to a heavy force in Europe wouldn't get the Army any of
those new rapid-deployment dollars.''

Meanwhile, many of the corps' senior generals believe that Barrow's being passed
over this year as the successor to the Air Force's Gen.  David C. Jones,
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, may have staved off just such a conflict.

Barrow, the pride of West Feliciana Parish, La., and the corps' 27th commandant,
would have become the first marine to chair the Joint Chiefs. But instead the
job went to John W. Vessey Jr, an Army general with a reputation for being as
plain-spoken as Barrow.

Some of the Marine generals, whose distrust of almost anyone who is not a member
of the brotherhood seems unshakeable, maintain now that maybe it is just as
well. ''It might have brought harm to the Marine Corps,'' says one. ''There is a
certain tolerance for us as long as there is plenty of money to go around. The
bitterness might accelerate with small defense budgets at some point in the
future.  There is latent opposition to the Marine Corps having its own air force
and a big ground force. It's true that we have friends in Congress to look after
us. But the other services might say having a marine as chairman of the Joint
Chiefs is too much. Then it would be the night of the long knives; the Marine
Corps would suffer.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of marines on maneuvers photo of a Marine Corps
Harrier jump-jet photo of a marine in a gas-mask photo of a marine on an
obstacle course

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              300 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

OUR RECORD ON RACISM

BYLINE: By CLAUDE SITTON; Claude Sitton, who reported on the civil-rights
movement in the South from 1958 to 1964 for The New York Times, is editorial
director of The News and Observer and The Raleigh Times in North Carolina.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 8, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 915 words


HEARTS AND MINDS The Anatomy of Racism from Roosevelt to Reagan.  By Harry S.
Ashmore.  512 pp. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co. $15.95.

HARRY ASHMORE believes America's struggle against racism demonstrates that
hearts and minds can be changed - ''not by exhortation, or coercion, but through
governance that recognizes the possibilities, as well as the limitations, of our
pluralistic heritage.'' But, for all of the optimism of this thesis, he sees the
progress of the last three decades now threatened by the Reagan Administration's
''radical reordering of the governmental process.''

More than most Americans, Mr. Ashmore is qualified to pass judgment. A native of
Greenville, S.C., he spent the first twothirds of his life in the South as
reporter, editor, author, dabbler in Presidential politics and director of
projects to better race relations. Then, from 1969 to 1974, he was president of
the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions in Santa Barbara, Calif.

Mr. Ashmore's dual role of observer and participant influences this book's
style, which swings back and forth from personal reminiscence to impersonal
analysis, somewhat in the manner of Theodore H. White's ''In Search of
History.'' Some readers may be left with the feeling that they are watching a
literary tennis match and the thought that an editor might have divided the book
in two.

No matter. Mr. Ashmore and the staff of The Arkansas Gazette won two Pulitzer
Prizes for the newspaper's coverage of and commentary on the Little Rock
school-desegregation controversy in 1958.

The courage, care and candor that marked Mr. Ashmore's opposition to segregation
and segregationists are still with him, qualities that make his book a valuable
historical analysis of the last halfcentury of America's struggle with the
racial issue. He locates the genesis of the civil-rights movement in the
segregation practiced in the pre-World War II South. From that period, he traces
the movement through its flowering in the 1950's and 60's to its foundering on
the diverse shoals of white resistance, black separatism, urban violence and the
Vietnam War. In a chapter entitled ''Of Liberties and Rights,'' he notes that
''the delusion that segregation was a peculiarly Southern institution blinded
most Americans to the fact that the United States as a whole was, by any
institutional test, a racist society.'' The nation came to grips with that
reality with great reluctance and little stomach for the needed corrective
actions.

The reformation that the civil-rights movement inspired was, of course, far more
than regional in nature. The book catalogues major shifts in practices, policies
and even philosophy among supporters and opponents of the movement -
individuals, organizations, the courts, the Congress and occupants of the White
House. Even the movement shifted its focus from desegregation and equality of
opportunity to integration-by-the-numbers and equality of results.

, Mr. Ashmore offers this summary of ''the black side'' of the American dilemma:
''Segregation trapped the minority race in a vicious circle: the deficient
social background used to justify exclusion of blacks from the larger community
created an environment which perpetuated the deficient social background.''
Despite all the changes made in recent decades, the effects, if not the forms,
of segregation linger still.

One reason for this may be the inability of whites to adjust their response to
reality. ''The unreality of conservatives was manifested in their insistence
that there really was no occasion for government action to meet problems that
would take care of themselves in the natural, Darwinian order,'' Mr. Ashmore
writes. ''It was matched in reverse by that of liberals who believed that they
had learned what should be done from social studies and could produce instant
progress if only the Federal purse were unsnapped.''

Knowledgeable readers will find some regrettable omissions in the book. Lengthy
accounts of the role played by scores of individuals and institutions in the
process of desegregation omit any discussion of the firm but dispassionate
leadership provided by the United States Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals under
Chief Judge Elbert P.  Tuttle in the 50's and 60's. There is scant mention of
the desegregation of colleges and universities, which was a much more difficult
task than desegregating the public schools and which in some critical respects
was botched beyond belief.

Mr. Ashmore dismisses the highly charged issue of quotas - he eschews the word -
in a brief two pages. Perhaps many of the complaints against this form of
affirmative action are specious.  Nevertheless, the fact that affirmative-action
programs in the workplace cost the civil-rights movement much valuable support
seems worthy of at least a chapter. Equality of opportunity was a popular cause.
Equality of results was not popular and is not popular now, if the public
opinion polls are accurate.  But, whatever its shortcomings, this book offers
excellent insights into the problems of race; the governmental, social and
economic forces working toward solutions to them; and the failures and successes
of the massive national effort to achieve racial equality.  Anyone who is
interested in understanding the painfully slow progress that has been achieved
so far can learn from the book, especially in this day when leaders in
Washington insist that social Darwinism can solve whatever racial problems
remain.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              301 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE BUYING OF THE PRESIDENT

BYLINE: By LARRY SABATO; Larry Sabato is on the faculty of the University of
Virginia. His most recent book is ''The Rise of Political Consultants: New Ways
of Winning Elections.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 9, Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1311 words


THE REAL CAMPAIGN How the Media Missed the Story of the 1980 Campaign.  By Jeff
Greenfield.  319 pp. New York: Summit Books. $15.95.

A great political scientist, V.O. Key Jr., once suggested a fundamental
principle of good election analysis: ''Voters are not fools.'' If Key's
proposition tends to startle, it may be because we have heard for so long and so
often how easily we are manipulated by the press, by the politicians and by the
political consultants.

Jeff Greenfield performs a valuable and necessary service in his new book, ''The
Real Campaign,'' by reminding us of the powerful truth in Key's axiom. Relying
on news accounts, columns and broadcasts, Greenfield convincingly argues that
the print and electronic press and paid political advertising ''made almost no
difference in the outcome of the 1980 Presidential campaign.'' What produced the
result, not only of the November election but also of the convention selections,
were issues, ideas and substance rather than style, hoopla, television
commercials and staged events.

Greenfield's compelling, if not altogether original, observation is that there
was a ''real campaign'' of competing political beliefs going on in 1980, in
addition to the ''media campaign'' of candidate gaffes, momentum and airwave
advertising. As Greenfield argues by going step by step through the major
campaigns and events of election year 1980, the voters were, reassuringly,
paying more attention to the real thing than to the obsessions of observers
(especially television's).  He documents the way, after George Bush's victory in
the Iowa caucuses in January, the news media - in this case CBS television,
newspapers such as The Boston Globe and magazines including Newsweek - gave the
candidate the ''Big Mo'' (big momentum) of coverage. But Bush's empty and
indistinct campaign couldn't support it. Being ''up for the 80's,'' as Bush
described the essence of his candidacy, wasn't enough to warrant the voters'
support, particularly when Ronald Reagan's campaign was predicated on a clear,
relatively consistent philosophy dear to the hearts of most Republicans.

Journalists viewed the messy Reagan-Ford negotiations about the
Vice-Presidential nomination as the most significant event of the Republican
National Convention, while voters remembered Reagan's carefully crafted and
superbly delivered acceptance speech. The themes Reagan outlined swayed
millions; if one single American voter cast his ballot on the basis of those
titillating Reagan-Ford discussions, it has escaped the attention of both
parties' psephologists, their pollsters. Similarly, at the start of the national
election campaign in September, reporters concentrated on a series of Reagan
gaffes (''Vietnam was a noble cause,'' ''evolution is only a theory,'' etc.). In
an age when such blunders are supposedly fatal, Reagan survived because voters
saw them as insignificant compared with his central message.

Given Jeff Greenfield's recent stint as in-house ''media critic'' for CBS News,
one would expect an insider's review of the press from him. But his rebuke of
Presidential-election journalism is extraordinarly severe and telling. In his
view, while the press is generally evenhanded in its treatment of candidates, it
is deeply cynical about the substance of campaigns, has little respect for the
power of ideas and is comtemptuous of the political parties.  Repeatedly citing
specific examples from newspapers, television, magazines and syndicated columns,
he argues that journalists view speeches and issues as tinsel, proposals and
platforms as bids for votes and nothing else. They look upon politics primarily
as gamesmanship, and as a consequence they cover a Presidential election as
''move and countermove'' in a never-ending shell game.

Elections in any democracy are far more than that, of course, and the ''real
campaign'' seeps through to voters in many ways. According to Greenfield one
method of transmission, surprisingly enough, is through advertising (especially
on television), which sometimes ''provided much clearer arguments about the
nature of the choice than did the overal coverage ofthe campaign on television
and in the mainstream press.'' Reagan's ads were dismissed by savants as being
''dull canned speeches.'' Nothing at all happened in them, except the
communication of the candidate's message. He praises the Reagan ads as the most
substantive and least flashy of the 1980 campaign, an effective counterpoint to
the Bush commercials, filled with music, enthusiasm, cheering crowds, a
personality-plus candidate - everything except content. In the national
campaign, Greenfield argues, Carter's and Reagan's advertising stuck mainly to
issues and each made a good case for the party nominee, though Carter's spots
(like his Presidency) had no cogent theme.

GREENFIELD, a former employee of media consultant David Garth, is right on
target when he dismisses the advertising ''wizardry'' of the consultants as a
significant factor in the 1980 election. I agree that the press has long
lionized consultants and overestimated their power and effect. The questionable
relationship between the press and consultants has been an enduring one, fed in
part by the press's desire for inside information and the media professionals'
need for good publicity. Moreover, the two groups tend to get on well together,
because they both subscribe to the game theory of politics.

The press preoccupation with ''horse race polling'' comes in for its share of
deserved criticism. Greenfield neatly suggests the worth of the ''Who's ahead?
Who's gaining?'' fixation by asking simply, ''If a Presidential election can
swing from a nip-and-tuck battle to a landslide within forty-eight hours, then
what is the point of the constant reporting of state and national polls weeks
before the election, complete with the unwittingly arrogant disclaimer that the
polls are 'subject to a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percent'?'' Not to
mention the money and labor squandered on such foolish enterprises when so many
worthwhile subjects go unexplored.

Greenfield has a trained eye for appealing anecdotes and revealing illustrations
of important concepts. But his style tends to be too breezy, and his writing has
been infected with an irritating tendency toward excessive italicization. Oddly,
too, there are only a handful of footnotes in a book crammed with quotations.

BEYOND the stylistic inadequacies, it is by no means certain that Greenfield's
conclusions about 1980 are valid for other Presidential contests, much less
state and Congressional elections. Advertising and the press had a greater
impact on the results of the ideologically fuzzier Ford-Carter race in 1976. And
in most state and local contests, where voter interest is lower and less
information is available, the ''real campaign'' is far less distinct from the
press's version. The influence that the press and political consultants have on
election results is normally inversely proportional to the importance of the
office sought.

As far as the 1980 election goes, though, Greenfield is convincing and
perceptive. If past practice is any indication, most of the press, particularly
television, will not react kindly to the sort of charges Greenfield levels at
it. Nevertheless, there is already some evidence that criticisms voiced by
Greenfield and others are having an effect. In the 1972 and 1976 Presidential
elections, the television networks focused increasingly on polls, predictions
and ''horse-race'' stories as Election Day approached. But in 1980 the coverage
in the campaign's final weeks became considerably more issue-oriented and
substantive than in previous years, according to at least one recent study. Let
us all fervently hope that - in the pollsters' slang - we are seeing not a
''blip'' but the beginning of a trend.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              302 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 20, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

LONG ISLANDERS;
PART-TIME WORK: A WRITER'S REPORT

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE VAN GELDER

SECTION: Section 11; Long Island; Page 2, Column 5; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 676 words


''GOOD part-time jobs exist in any field in which there is great demand for
qualified people,'' said JoAnne Alter of Great Neck.  ''Where there are skilled
or trained or experienced people, parttime opportunities exist simply because
employers - even in a period of high unemployment - are desperate to find
them.''

What lies behind the 35-year-old Mrs. Alter's authoritative tone is a great deal
of research - research that has resulted in the publication of her first book,
''A Part-Time Career for a Full-Time You'' (Houghton Mifflin, $15.95 clothbound,
$8.95 paperback), a 394-page volume billed as ''the first comprehensive guide to
an alternative workstyle.''

Mrs. Alter said, ''The orientation is not toward dead-end, lowlevel jobs but
jobs that pay well, that offer opportunity for promotion and that are, in fact,
career-oriented positions.''

Among alternatives to the customary sort of work scheduling, Mrs.  Alter lists
permanent part-time work (''which would mean a steady job of under 35 hours a
week, be it three days a week or four hours a day''), temporary work (''which
might be a 35-hour or even 40-hour-aweek job, but for a very limited amount of
time''), job sharing (''whereby two people split a job according to time and
responsibility'') and freelancing.

Among the industries receptive to such alternatives, she lists data processing,
banking, accounting, health, education - ''anything technical.''

With that in mind, she said: ''Anybody looking for a good job would be wise to
make sure you are well-skilled. And there are certainly plenty of places in
which to get the training, whether it is volunteer work, whether it is
entry-level jobs that teach you in the field or whether it is temporary work
where you get paid while you are training. There are work-study programs in
school, and, of course, particularly on Long Island, the fabulous availability
of continuing education.

''The opportunities for people to get training on Long Island are really
abundant, and that is the key to getting a good part-time job. Be the exact
person that the employer needs, and that employer will accommodate your need for
a reduced schedule.''

For some 10 years now, Mrs. Alter herself has been the sort of person she has
written about. As a freelance writer, she has seen her work published in
numerous periodicals, and since 1974 she has been a contributing editor of
Family Circle magazine. It was the magazine's editor in chief, Arthur Hettich,
who suggested her book a few years ago after Mrs. Alter had written several
articles about careers. At first, she said, ''I just laughed it off.'' But ''the
idea kept growing in the back of my mind,'' until finally she sent off a
proposal for a book and swiftly received offers from publishers.

Mrs. Alter, who grew up as JoAnne Bresler in East Meadow, came out of its high
school in 1964 and graduated from New York University in 1968 as a political
science major. ''It was the time of the Vietnam War and tremendous social
upheaval,'' she said, ''and I was very much of a mind to do some good. I just
wanted to do things that helped people.''

She became a social worker for about a year, switched to the American Civil
Liberties Union and then joined the staff of the consumer magazine Moneysworth
as a researcher. There the opportunity to write developed and, she said, ''I
discovered I liked writing. I enjoyed the consumer orientation. The old
do-gooder instincts were being fulfilled.'' The next stop was a freelance
writing career.

Mrs. Alter, who is the wife of Francis Alter, a sound mixer, and the mother of a
son, Jeffrey, who will be a year old on July 10, is planning her next book. Its
subject: ''Some of the problems that working women are all too familiar with.
And I'm hoping to offer some solutions.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of JoAnne Alter

TYPE: interview

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              303 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 1982, Monday, Late City Final Edition

3 CAMBODIAN GROUPS FORMING COALITION

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 2, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, June 20


Three Cambodian groups are expected to announce the formation of a coalition
government-in-exile this week, and a report here suggests that the Pol Pot
faction may be given more power than the coalition's sponsors hoped it would
get.

But the fact that a coalition has been arranged at all is being hailed in some
Southeast Asian capitals as a victory and was called an important and
''welcome'' development this week by Deputy Secretary of State Walter J.
Stoessel Jr. and other high-ranking Western diplomats.

Vietnam, which has as many as 200,000 soldiers in Cambodia, invaded the country
in December 1978. It said its action had liberated Cambodia from the Pol Pot
regime, which has been accused of killing several million Cambodians. Vietnam
has defended its continued military occupation as a necessary defense against
China. The Pol Pot guerrillas, strongly backed by Peking, have long opposed the
Vietnamese-backed Government from strongholds along the Thai border.

According to what was described as a draft of the coalition agreement, first
published Saturday in The Nation Review, a Bangkok daily, the former Cambodian
head of state, Prince Norodom Sihanouk, would be the exile government's
president; Khieu Samphan, the Prime Minister of the Pol Pot faction, would be
vice president in charge of foreign affairs, and Son Sann, Mr. Sihanouk's Prime
Minister, would be the new prime minister.

'Consensus' on Major Decisions

Although the formula for sharing power would require ''consensus'' on all major
decisions, the Pol Pot group would continue to control diplomatic representation
for the next six months, which would take it through the United Nations vote on
whom to seat in the General Assembly next September.

The United Nations, to protest Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia, gave Cambodia's
General Assembly seat to the Pol Pot group rather than to the Vietnamese-backed
Government.

The new government would be called Democratic Kampuchea. Cambodia is also called
Kampuchea.  In the event of unresolved conflicts among the partners, who would
retain their independent identities, ''the current state of Democratic Kampuchea
will have the right to resume its activities as the sole legal and legitimate
state of Kampuchea and as a member state of the United Nations.''

The Pol Pot group is by far the largest force of Cambodian insurgents, numbering
up to 30,000.  Malaysia's Foreign Minister, Muhammad bin Shafie Ghazali, said
Friday in Kuala Lumpur that he expected a ceremonal signing on Monday or
Tuesday.

Visits From Vietnamese Official

News of an apparent compromise among long-hostile factions came on the heels of
an announcement in Singapore last week that several members of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations would receive visits this summer from Vietnam's
Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, to discuss Cambodia's future. The Asean
nations are Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.

The prospects for an accord improved further after several Western and Asian
countries began hinting that they planned to abandon their earlier support for
the Pol Pot representative at the United Nations.

The prospective coalition has already been greeted with cautious favor by the
United States, Japan, Australia, Canada and the European Economic Community in
addition to the Asean nations.

Prince Sihanouk, who has had no power in Cambodia since his overthrow by Gen.
Lon Nol in 1970, planned to fly to Peking today en route to Malaysia for the
signing.

The name of Pol Pot almost never appears in Southeast Asia's newspapers or in
non-Communist diplomatic comments on the Cambodian resistance. His group is
referred to regularly as the Khmer Rouge or Democratic Kampuchea, or by the name
of the group's Prime Minister, Khieu Samphan.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Prince Norodom Sihanouk and Kieu Samphan

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              304 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 22, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Cambodian Exiles Plan To Sign Accord Today

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 161 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, June 21


Leaders of the three main Cambodian factions opposing Vietnam assembled here
today to sign an agreement establishing a government in exile. The signing was
expected to take place Tuesday.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former Cambodian chief of state and soon to be
declared president of the exile organization, said at a news conference tonight
that he thought a ''stubborn'' and ''increasingly powerful'' force of Cambodian
guerrillas could ''succeed one day in compelling the Vietnamese to abide by the
United Nations resolutions on the Kampuchean issue.''

The regime of Pol Pot, which ruled Cambodia until its ouster by Vietnamese
forces in early 1979, still controls Cambodia's seat at the United Nations.
Khieu Samphan, Mr. Pol Pot's longtime associate, who is scheduled to be the new
coalition's vice president in charge of foreign affairs, flew here from Bangkok
this evening.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              305 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 22, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

SENATE PANEL INCREASES LEBANESE AID PROPOSAL

BYLINE: By BERNARD WEINRAUB, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 8, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 21


The Senate Foreign Relations Committee today increased the size of the Reagan
Administration's proposal of emergency aid to Lebanon to $50 million, from $20
million, amid expressions of anger toward Israel by traditional Senate
supporters of that nation.

Speaking heatedly, Senator Paul E. Tsongas, Democrat of Massachusetts, said that
the Israeli attack against Palestinian strongholds in Lebanon was a
''watershed'' in terms of American public opinion. ''Israel is flirting with a
backlash in this country and around the world,'' said Mr. Tsongas. ''At what
point does the U.S. say, 'This is wrong,' to say, at some point, 'For God's
sake, enough is enough.' ''

''I know what many Senators feel privately,'' Mr. Tsongas said, ''but I don't
hear it expressed publicly.'' The liberal Democrat, in an interview after the
hearing, said he had ''never voted against Israel in my life.'' He declared that
there was ''a lot of unhappiness'' in the Senate about the ''excessiveness'' of
the Israeli invasion and the number of civilian deaths after the initial days of
the Israeli strike against Palestinian bases.

'A Lot of Strong Feeling'

He said, for example, that he had stood in the Senate cloakroom with other
Senators recently watching Prime Minister Menachem Begin on television, and
''there was a lot of reaction, a lot of strong feeling.''

Another strong supporter of Israel, Senator Claiborne Pell, Democrat of Rhode
Island, also spoke critically of the Israeli attack. ''Every child's life lost,
every building reduced to rubble, has been done with American weapons,'' he
said.

During today's hearing, in which officials from the State Department and the
Agency for International Development appeared, Mr. Tsongas raised the question
of Israel's alleged use of United Statessupplied ''cluster bombs'' near Beirut.
The powerful antipersonnel weapon, which was developed for American troops in
Vietnam, releases hundreds of steel bomblets to kill and maim.

Press reports from Lebanon said that cluster bombs were dropped on a Palestinian
refugee camp near Beirut and the Armenian hospital at Azzuniye, above the Bekaa
Valley. The United States supplied the weapons to Israel in the early 1970's
with the stipulation that they were to be used for defensive purposes.

Inquiry Made to Israelis

Asked about the possible use of cluster bombs by the Israelis, a State
Department official, Wat T. Cluverius, Deputy Assistant Secretary in the Bureau
of Near Eastern and South Asian Affairs, said the United States had already
''inquired'' of Israel if the weapon had been employed. Mr. Cluverius said ''a
legal determination'' would be made on whether Israel had used the cluster
bombs.

''They have the impression we're concerned,'' the State Department official
said. ''They're certainly looking into it.'' Mr. Tsongas said that he would
personally ask Prime Minister Begin if Israel had deployed the weapon when the
Israeli leader, who is in Washington, meets with the Foreign Relations Committee
Tuesday morning. ''My objection is the unnecessary killing of civilians,'' Mr.
Tsongas said after the hearing. ''The cluster bomb is a weapon used to do
that.''

The Reagan Administration initially proposed $20 million in emergency aid to
Lebanon, but added a total of $15 million in recent days. The Foreign Relations
Committee's move to increase aid to Lebanon to $50 million was sponsored by Mr.
Tsongas and Mr. Pell. It was approved without objections, and Senators indicated
they would approve more emergency funds once the State Department assessed the
full scale of the damage.

Full Toll Not Yet Known

Mr. Cluverius, as well as officials of the Agency for International Development,
emphasized that it was still impossible to detail the extent of death and damage
in Lebanon. Fred Cole, assistant director of the Office of Foreign Disaster
Relief, and Bradshaw Langmaid Jr., an A.I.D. administrator for the Near East,
said that so far as they knew, food supplies were adequate and most emergency
medical needs had been met in southern Lebanon, although the situation near
Beirut remained unclear.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              306 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 22, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 41 words


A dispatch from Ho Chi Minh City on June 7 about a visit there by Vietnam
veterans gave an incorrect date for a meeting the veterans had with John H.
Holdridge, Assistant Secretary of State for East Asia and the Pacific. It took
place May 13.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Correction

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              307 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 22, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

NEW STUDY SUPPORTS THE SOCIAL SCIENCES

BYLINE: By JAMES P. STERBA

SECTION: Section C; Page 2, Column 3; Science Desk

LENGTH: 1617 words


MUCH conventional management wisdom (often meaning whatever the boss thinks) has
it that an outfit that is tightly controlled from the top works best. Take up
the slack, cut out the fat, get everyone in step, streamline the goals and the
result is success, vitality, profits, winning, or whatever else allows the boss
to sleep well at night.

The trouble with this, and a great deal of other conventional wisdom, according
to social scientists, is that it is wrong - at least some of the time. But some
managers do not like to hear that decentralized and loosely controlled
organizations are often better at adapting, or that slack, foolishness, and some
insubordination often provide new ideas and innovations.

This is an example, from a major new national study, of one of the dilemmas of
the social scientist: Many people with large investments in their own
conventional wisdom resist being told that it is wrong, especially by outsiders
armed with scientific methods but usually not with uncontestable scientific
proof.

Social Scientists Feel Abused

One result, social scientists complain, is that when they are not under attack
as a pack of howling charlatans in dogged pursuit of the obvious, they face
unfair abuse from guardians of things-as-they-are, bent on branding the social
scientists as frivolous, reducing their scientific status, or taking away their
research funds.

While acknowledging that they sometimes turn black and white into gray, drown
simplicity in a sea of otherhandedness, and camouflage common sense in verbal
chintz, the study says that social science as a whole has taken a bum rap.

Designed as something of a counterattack, a 102-page report on the three-year
study by the National Academy of Sciences finds that basic social science
research has, in fits and starts and through trial and error, provided a much
more various and useful armory of knowledge than it is generally given credit
for, and therefore deserves continued Government support.

The report says social and behavioral scientists have made ''an impressive array
of accomplishments,'' ranging from data collection, survey research, and
analytical methods, to changing perceptions about race and ethnic minorities, to
greatly increased general knowledge of how people, societies and institutions
behave. It adds that ''there is every reason to expect the yield from future
research to be as least as great,'' and concludes:

''Basic research in the behavioral and social sciences is a national resource
that should be sustained and encouraged through public support.''

Effect on Public Perceptions

According to Frank Press, president of the academy, the committee's report
''cites important shifts in conventional wisdom that can be traced to
fundamental research in these fields over the last 60 years.''

The report gave social science research credit for:

- ''The reformulation of lay understanding in areas such as racial
differences.''

- Increasing productivity through knowing how human well-being and organization
affects it.

- Invention of information-gathering technologies, such as survey research, that
let politicians and officials know what the public really wants.

''Considerable lags occur between specialized advances in knowledge and their
wider employment,'' the report said.  The committee said its ''most fundamental
conclusion'' is that basic social science research should be thought of as ''a
long-term investment in social capital.'' It went on:

''The benefits to society of such an investment are significant and lasting,
although often not immediate or obvious. A steep reduction in the investment may
produce short-run savings, but it would be likely to have damaging long-term
consequences for the wellbeing of the nation and its citizens.''

Results Are Adopted Slowly

As with basic research in the natural sciences, the fruits of social science
research are often not usable immediately. Work on human evolution, families,
and communities turns up insights that cannot be applied in public policy for
decades, the report said. It is often ''loose, uncertain, incomplete, and
slow,'' and it often turns out to be more of an ally than enemy of common sense.

''Just as a telescope is an extension of the power of the eye, social science is
really an extension of the power of common sense,'' Kenneth Prewitt, a committee
member who is president of the Social Science Research Center, said in an
interview.

Still, social and behavioral research has been viewed as something of a
scientific stepchild by a variety of detractors. One result has been a
continuing need for self-analysis and self-justification by social researchers
themselves. Since 1968, six major national studies have been commissioned to do
one or the other, or both.

''Social scientists have debunked a lot of myths,'' said David Goslin, executive
director of the National Academy's commission on behavorial and social sciences
and education. ''A lot of people don't like to see their myths exploded. When we
say things are a little more complicated than you think, they don't like it.''

Some Findings Are Ignored

Social scientists were used, and praised, by the Government for mapping the
social trends of the Great Depression. But their discovery, from interviews with
Japanese and Germans after World War II, that saturation bombing increased
rather than diminishing civilian morale and resistance was largely ignored
during the Vietnam conflict.

Their techniques for testing abilities were quickly absorbed by business and
industry. But some politicians thought ''social science'' sounded too much like
''socialism'' to warrant embrace, and believed social scientists oversold the
potential fruits of the social engineering involved in the Great Society
programs of the 1960's. And for decades, natural scientists resisted including
social scientists as equals in the National Academy of Sciences. The National
Science Foundation, the Government funding arm, didn't create a social sciences
division until 1968.

The academy's committee, which included a physicist, a former Congressman, a
former Cabinet member, and a journalist as well as distinguished social
scientists, drew on a wide range of outside experts to assess a wide range of
accomplishments.

They reported, for example, that survey research had debunked the early notion
that the typical voter makes a rational decision based on candidates' records
and positions on issues. Most decide early, often even before they know who the
candidates are.

''The myth of the factory as a stronghold of depersonalization has also been
debunked,'' the report said.  Ideas about social stratification have been
''radically transformed.'' the panel found. The role of education in social
mobility has been tested and found to be strong.

The panel said that the development of sample surveying was ''perhaps the single
most important information-gathering invention of the social sciences.'' Of the
development of the standardized ability test, it said ''probably no other
invention of the social sciences has had as far-reaching an impact on American
life.''

On economics, the panel said ''It is hard to imagine how the economies of the
United States and other industrialized nations could function today without the
kind of economic information that is routinely available.''

Perceptions on Ethnicity

Perhaps the most dramatic example of altered public perceptions for which social
researchers take partial credit regards concepts of race and ethnicity. The
Encyclopaedia Britannica, whose succeeding editions provide a continuing history
of available knowledge in summary form, said this about blacks in its 1911
edition:

''In certain ... characteristics ... the negro would appear to stand on a lower
evolutionary plane than the white man, and to be more closely related to the
highest anthropoids. ... Mentally, the negro is inferior to the white.''

The 1929 edition quotes social researchers as concluding that ''there seems to
be no marked difference in innate intellectual power. The differences are rather
differences in disposition and temperament.''

By 1974, the encyclopedia talks not of ''Negroes,'' but rather of ''minorities
and ethnic groups,'' saying that differences in scores on intelligence tests are
almost certainly related to environmental influences and that the lower scores
of blacks probably ''reflect persistent social and economic discrimination.''

While not negating the role of civil rights struggles, the report cites several
classic studies by social researchers, such as Gunnar Myrdal's 1944 report, ''An
American Dilemma,'' as key influences on changing perceptions. In it, the
Swedish sociologist said blacks were victims of continuing discrimination by the
white majority.

Similar studies have dramatically changed ideas about child development, aging,
mental illness, alcoholism, foreigners and foreign cultures, and behavioral
differences in men and women, the report said, adding:

''It is fair to say that as a result of such research Americans today have a
very different view of human behavior and social institutions than their parents
did a generation ago.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              308 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 23, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

3 CAMBODIANS SIGN ACCORD ON EXILE REGIME

BYLINE: By COLIN CAMPBELL, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6, Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 656 words

DATELINE: KUALA LUMPUR, Malaysia, June 22


A new Cambodian government in exile was signed into existence today by three
men, once bitter enemies, who now see Vietnam as their common foe.

Prince Norodom Sihanouk, former Prime Minister Son Sann and Khieu Samphan, a
still shadowy figure from the years of Pol Pot's Communist rule, now constitute
the ruling ''inner cabinet'' of what has been named the Coalition Government of
Democratic Kampuchea.

The three leaders promised to intensify their military opposition to the
presence in Cambodia of up to 200,000 Vietnamese soldiers.They also announced
that they would meet again very soon, ''inside Cambodia,'' to work out the
details of their delicately balanced resistance.

The ceremony of signing the coalition's five-page declaration took only seven
minutes here this afternoon, and was followed by embraces and broad smiles under
many television lights. The news that the Cambodian factions had agreed to get
together despite their differences was disclosed last week by diplomats in
Bangkok and at a ministerial conference in Singapore of the five-member
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, which had long urged more Cambodian
unity against the Vietnamese.

Yet signs of the merger's underlying strains emerged as well. At one point
Prince Sihanouk - Cambodia's king for nearly 15 years and later its chief of
state and foremost political force - attacked Mr.Pol Pot for the great
''misery'' and many deaths that he and his followers caused between 1975 and
1979.

The Prince and his two new colleagues, however, maintained that Cambodian
patriots must now join forces to prevent their country from becoming ''a
province of Vietnam.''

At a long news conference after the signing, both Mr. Khieu Samphan and Prince
Sihanouk said that, despite the Cambodian people's evident fear of Mr. Pol Pot
and their initial relief at his Government's overthrow, most Cambodians now
wanted to be rid of the Vietnamese.

Guerrilla Struggle to Be Pursued

While the coalition's future may be uncertain, it does represent the first
formal grouping of Cambodia's anti-Vietnamese factions. Its dual purpose,
according to today's declaration, is to ''mobilize all efforts'' in the
guerrilla struggle against Vietnam and against the Vietnamese-backed regime in
Phnom Penh, and to carry out various United Nations declarations calling for the
withdrawal of Vietnamese troops and the holding of free elections.

As anticipated, the coalition's partners have named Prince Sihanouk President,
Mr. Khieu Samphan Vice President in charge of foreign affairs and Mr. Son Sann
Prime Minister.

The coalition's immediate purpose is to reverse a falling away of support for
Mr. Pol Pot's ousted Government in the United Nations.  Belgum's Foreign
Minister, Leo Tindemans, said during last week's meeting of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations that seven members of the European Economic Community
-whose Council of Ministers Mr. Tindemans heads - had recently said they might
abstain from the United Nations voting next September rather than vote again to
seat Mr. Pol Pot's ''Democratic Kampuchea.''

---- Coalition Welcomed by U.S.

WASHINGTON, June 22 (UPI) - The Administration today welcomed the formation of a
coalition of Cambodian groups opposing the Vietnamese, but the State Department
said that the United States would not offer any military assistance to any group
that included the Pol Pot organization.

In Hanoi, the Vietnamese Government immediately denounced the coalition, calling
it a ''corpse'' whose appearance was the work of China and the United States.

The State Department said in a statement: ''We are very pleased to learn of the
formation of a coalition. It is a positive step forward in providing the
framework for leadership and for ultimate selfdetermination for the Khmer.''

The department held open the possibility of ''political and moral support'' for
the group, as well as financial assistance.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              309 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 23, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

VIETNAMESE BOATS REPORTEDLY FIRE ON U.S. SHIP IN SOUTH CHINA SEA

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10, Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 446 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 22


The United States Navy destroyer Turner Joy, which figured in an incident
critical to American involvement in the Vietnam War 18 years ago, was fired on
again Sunday night by Vietnamese ships, the Defense Department disclosed
tonight.

The Turner Joy and three other American warships were passing through the South
China Sea from Thailand toward the Philippines when the Turner Joy was fired on
by a machine gun mounted on a large Vietnamese fishing vessel, officials said. A
second Vietnamese vessel also reportedly fired on the Turner Joy.

One shot pierced the ship, officials said, but no one was hurt and no damage was
done. When another American destroyer, the Lynde McCormick, fired shots from a
50-caliber machine gun over the top of the Vietnamese vessel, the Vietnamese
stopped shooting, the officials said.

The officials said the four ships were 70 miles south of the nearest point on
the Vietnamese mainland and 20 miles south of the island of Con Son. Vietnam
claims a 12-mile territorial limit and an additional 12-mile security area,
according to the Defense Department. The United States recognizes a three-mile
territorial limit.

Tonkin Gulf Incident Recalled

In the summer of 1964, the Turner Joy and another destroyer were reported to
have been fired on by North Vietnamese patrol boats as they were steaming in the
Gulf of Tonkin, off North Vietnam.  President Johnson used that incident to
persuade Congress to adopt the Gulf of Tonkin resolution that empowered him to
mount a largescale military intervention in Vietnam.

The latest sea skirmish began Sunday evening at about 9:30, according to
officials here. The Vietnamese vessel fired two red flares across the bow of the
Turner Joy, then opened up with a machine gun. The Lynde McCormick immediately
came up to investigate and fired back with what naval officers said was a
minimum use of force.

The ships, which included the cruiser Sterett and a third destroyer, the
Benjamin Stoddert, remained in the area during the night to determine the
identity of the hostile vessels during daylight Monday morning.

When the light was sufficient, the Sterett closed to about 3,000 yards from one
of the Vietnamese vessels, which fired with a machine gun. The American ships
then moved out of range and made two full circles of the Vietnamese vessels.
They reported seeing a Vietnamese flag being hauled down.

Shortly after, the four ships broke off and steamed toward the United States
Naval base at Subic Bay in the Philippines.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              310 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 23, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

CORRECTION

SECTION: Section B; Page 1, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 54 words


A dispatch from Ho Chi Minh City on June 5 about children of American-Vietnamese
background incorrectly gave the number of such cases documented by the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and the American Embassy in Bangkok. It
is 2,000, although the High Commissioner believes the children number about
4,000.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: correction

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              311 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 23, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

WHO REALLY REPORTS NEWS ON TELEVISION?

BYLINE: By TONY SCHWARTZ

SECTION: Section C; Page 21, Column 1; Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1264 words


When Mike Wallace appeared in January as the correspondent on a hard-hitting CBS
documentary about Vietnam - the reporting methods for which have been called
into question by TV Guide - the average viewer might have logically assumed that
Mr. Wallace was the person responsible for digging up the story.

Mr. Wallace was featured on camera interviewing the key figures in the
documentary, among them Gen. William C. Westmoreland, and he was its narrator.
But in truth, ''The Uncounted Enemy: A Vietnam Deception'' was more than a year
in the making, and Mr. Wallace's intermittent involvement amounted to less than
three weeks all together, and did not even include editing the interviews he had
conducted.

In effect, Mr. Wallace was chiefly a performer on a documentary that had been
reported, written and edited by its producer, George Crile. Indeed, the general
rule in television news is that the longer the broadcast the smaller the role of
the on-camera correspondent.

Titles 'Are Misnomers'

CBS News is investigating the specific challenges made to the credibility of its
documentary. But the program also raises anew broader issues, including whether
audiences are misled about how news programs are produced, what role the star
system plays in television news and whether that system affects the journalism
that grows out of it.

Don Hewitt, executive producer of ''60 Minutes,'' the top-rated CBS News
program, acknowledges that the audience may misunderstand how stories are put
together. ''I've felt for a long time that titles like 'producer' and 'executive
producer' are misnomers,'' he says.  ''When TV news was just starting in 1948,
they didn't know what to call us, so they borrowed from theater and movies. But
I think it's caused great confusion and I think it's about time we eliminated
those titles. I'm really more an executive editor than an executive producer.
The man who we call a producer is really a reporter.'' However, they do not
ordinarily appear on camera.

In turn, the people who are called correspondents - Mr. Wallace, Morley Safer,
Harry Reasoner and Ed Bradley on ''60 Minutes'' - often serve more as performers
who conduct the major on-camera interviews but do not participate in much of the
research on their stories and frequently do not write their own scripts.

Editor's Role

Indeed, given the system, it could scarcely be otherwise. An average story for
''60 Minutes,'' takes a producer six to eight weeks to complete, and each ''60
Minutes'' correspondent appears on three stories every four weeks.

''It's quite apparent that we can't do all, or even a lion's share of the
reporting,'' says Mr. Wallace, who is generally credited with doing more of his
own reporting than most. Mr. Wallace says that he serves in an editor's role on
his stories - reading material as it comes in, suggesting interviews and talking
with the producer about the direction of the story. ''By the time you arrive at
the filming stage, you're pretty well prepared,'' he adds.

Along with several colleagues, Mr. Wallace points out that television is a
collaborative process by nature. ''I love the process of working with a producer
and a camera crew and an editor.  That's what television always was, and always
will be, and I think in general the system works well.''

Impact on Credibility

By contrast, Dave Marash, a former correspondent for ''20/20,'' ABC News'
magazine, who now works as a reporter and anchor for WCBS-TV News in New York,
believes that a correspondent suffers from not being intimately involved in a
story.

''I don't think it's possible for anyone to know 26 stories a year at any
sophisticated level,'' he says. ''There is something inherent in the
observation, digestion and reporting of a story that depends on one definable,
responsible person. Once it gets around that the correspondent on the screen is
not the guy who is responsible, I think it will have a very severe impact on the
credibility of television news.''

Mr. Marash also believes that the star system skews journalistic priorities.
''The money spent on star salaries is pre-emptive,'' says Mr. Marash. ''To buy
one star, you may be giving up five reporters you could get for the same price.
Journalistically, you'd probably get more out of the five reporters. I don't
think you can ignore the need for stars in television news, but in the past
couple of years it's gone too far.''

Indeed, Mr. Marash himself remains a product of that system. While he is
actively involved in all phases of the stories he does for WCBS, his own
six-figure salary might well pay for at least several top reporters and
researchers.

'Reality' of the Business

The star system is also frustrating to some producers. ''A lot of really
substantive journalists don't get to follow through through the stories they've
reported,'' says an ABC producer, who asked not to have his name published. ''A
correspondent with good 'pipes' and good looks is brought in at the last moment.
There has to be room for correspondents who don't fit the Ted Baxter mold.''

Av Westin, executive in charge of ''20/20,'' characterizes the
producer-correspondent relationship as ''a reality'' of the business. ''In
television, stardom is born of credibility, and that comes not only from being
able to elicit information from reluctant sources, but also from being able to
communicate an idea clearly. Credibility in television is translatable into
stardom, which translates into ratings, and ratings are not unimportant, even to
broadcast journalists.''

Indeed, Mr. Hewitt has often ascribed the success of ''60 Minutes,'' at least in
part, to the fact that the audience identifies so closely with the four
correspondents whom they see on the program week after week. Moreover, he cites
a distinction between the capacity to report a story and to deliver it on
camera.

''I know some producers who are great at finding out things but couldn't
communicate their own names,'' says Mr. Hewitt. ''I also know some guys who are
good communicators but couldn't find out where the men's room is, much less
report a story. All the correspondents on '60 Minutes' can do both.''

Limit to the Amount of Work

The same ABC producer who laments the network's failure to use more producers as
on-air correspondents acknowledges that ''star quality'' has some journalistic
advantages. ''There's no question that in the case of someone like Mike Wallace,
his presence can make a story. He may get involved in a story that is thin in
terms of visuals and do such an extraordinary interview or create such a strong
presence that the story suddenly works.''

In the case of ''60 Minutes,'' however, there is a limit to how many stories any
of the four star correspondents can work on, even when their producers do most
of the reporting and writing. As a result, television's most popular and
successful news program effectively shuts down for several months each summer,
running just one original segment a week.

By contrast, ''20/20'' uses twice the number of regular correspondents as well
as occasional outside correspondents and runs original episodes virtually all
year long. But the program is also considerably less popular than ''60
Minutes.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Mike Wallace

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              312 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 25, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

Vietnam Denies Navy Attack

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 79 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, June 24


Vietnam denied today that fishing boats fired on three American warships on
Sunday about 70 miles off the southern tip of Vietnam. The Vietnam News Agency,
in a broadcast monitored in Tokyo, said the American charges were a
''fabrication.'' The United States Navy said Tuesday that the destroyers Turner
Joy and Lynde and the cruiser Sterett had been fired on ''by a vessel believed
to belong to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              313 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 25, 1982, Friday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. EFFORTS TO HELP AMERASIAN CHILDREN

SECTION: Section A; Page 30, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 288 words


To the Editor:

Your June 9 news article on Amerasian children in Vietnam described them as
''adrift in a sea of indifference.'' We assure you this Administration is far
from indifferent to their fate.

Legislation drafted by the Administration has been submitted to Congress. That
legislation would deal with the plight of children born in Korea, Indochina and
Thailand since 1950 of U.S. citizen fathers and Asian mothers, by granting them
special status to come to the United States as immigrants.

We are exploring possible immigrant status for these children because at present
none are eligible for entry into the U.S. as refugees.

We have been especially concerned about American children in Vietnam because the
already difficult circumstances of life there are even worse for them. Reports
on their situation led the State Department to conclude in December 1981, that
the Amerasian children in Vietnam could be considered as refugees within the
terms of the Refugee Act of 1980 and the Orderly Departure Program from Vietnam.

Consultations were initiated with the Immigration and Naturalization Service and
the judiciary committees of Congress on this interpretation but have been
suspended pending Congressional consideration of the legislative proposal, which
would afford relief to all these Amerasian children.

It is our fervent hope that this heart-wrenching human problem will be solved
soon by adoption of this legislation.
DIEGO C. ASENCIO, ELLIOTT ABRAMS, RICHARD D. VINE, Washington, June 18, 1982

The writers are, respectively, Assistant Secretary of State, Bureau of Consular
Affairs; Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Human Rights and Humanitarian Affairs;
Director, Bureau for Refugee Programs.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              314 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

EX-SOLDIER ENDS BATTLE TO GUIDE FOREIGN POLICY

BYLINE: By DAVID SHRIBMAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1275 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 25


The announcement today of the resignation of Secretary of State Alexander M.
Haig Jr. ends, for the time being at least, the stormy Washington career of a
West Point soldier who guided one President's exit from office and who battled
for the right to guide another President's foreign policy.

His departure, which sent shock waves through the White House, State Department
and Capitol Hill this afternoon, came just 10 days after Mr. Haig seemed to have
won a major engagement in his 18-month struggle for control of the
Administration's foreign policy. Mr. Haig had been at President Reagan's side
throughout his tour of Europe this month, briefing the press, speaking easily
with European leaders at the summit meeting and even pausing amid the humbling
splendor of Versailles to muse, ''I feel like I've come a long way.''

His career had taken him to occupied Japan, where he was at Gen.  Douglas
MacArthur's side as a junior aide, to combat in Vietnam, where he was awarded
the Distinguished Service Cross for his actions in the Battle of Au Gap, and to
Europe, where he was the commander of the forces of the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization.

It was, however, in the relatively peaceful setting of the White House, where he
was the chief of staff in the final days of the Nixon Administration, and in the
State Department, where he fought a bureaucratic guerrilla war, that Mr. Haig, a
retired four-star general, faced his toughest battles.

Open Feuds and Veiled Disputes

Only a handful of Secretaries of State, in fact, have had such tumultuous tours
of duty. Since taking office under Mr. Reagan, Mr.  Haig has fought openly with
Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the chief American representative at the United Nations,
and has had barely veiled disputes with Secretary of Defense Caspar W.
Weinberger, as well as with the former national security adviser, Richard V.
Allen, and Mr.  Allen's successor, William P. Clark. He had struggled with these
advisers and others over such issues as American policy in Central America, arms
negotiations and, most recently, American peace efforts in the Falkland war, the
Israeli invasion of Lebanon and the Soviet gas pipeline to Europe.

In the end he said in his letter to President Reagan that he had resigned
because American foreign policy was ''shifting from that careful course of
foreign policy that we laid out together.''

Mr. Haig's tenure as Secretary of State was controversial from the start, with
perhaps his most debated act coming in his third month in office, only moments
after Mr. Reagan was shot outside the Washington Hilton. As Vice President Bush
was flying back to Washington from Texas, Mr. Haig appeared on television and
announced that he was ''in control here in the White House.''

Mr. Weinberger, sitting in the White House Situation Room, said, according to a
first-hand account: ''I can't believe that. What is that guy doing, and under
what authority?''

Job Followed Heart Surgery

At times the ups and downs of the Haig era at the State Department seemed to
come with stunning swiftness. Mr. Haig, who reportedly once shunned a position
as Army Chief of Staff because he was unwilling to risk a confirmation battle on
Capitol Hill, returned to Washington with renewed vigor and with new
combativeness after triple-bypass heart surgery and a stint as president of the
United Technologies Corporation in Hartford, Conn.

He recoiled when the Administration decided that Mr. Bush, and not Mr. Haig,
would head crisis management. He fumed when President Reagan deferred to Mr.
Weinberger and decided to press on with production of the neutron warhead. He
threatened to resign repeatedly, at times suggesting that others in the
Administration were trying to undercut him.

Throughout the Reagan Administration, the commentators, specialists and
officials who monitor the vital life signs of foreign policy wondered whether
Mr. Haig, who tended to plead for restraint, or Mr.Weinberger, who stressed the
Soviet threat, was prevailing at that particular moment.

Mr. Haig often clashed with Mr. Allen, another contender for foreign policy
influence. Mr. Allen's position as national security adviser provided an
institutional rivalry to buttress an already explosive personality clash. Before
he formally took office Mr. Haig dismissed the foreign policy transition team
that Mr. Allen had assembled. A high-ranking Administration official once said
that Mr.  Haig's personality and Mr. Allen's personality ''were simply meant to
explode like matter and antimatter.''

Clashes With Mrs. Kirkpatrick

Mrs. Kirkpatrick's position as a Cabinet member in her own right created
ambiguities in the heights of the Administration's organization chart that also
lead to antagonisms. Mr. Haig's difficulties with Mrs. Kirkpatrick began in
earnest last summer, when aides to the Secretary of State, apparently acting on
his instructions, criticized the way Mrs. Kirkpatrick handled behind-thescenes
negotiations leading up to the Security Council vote condemning Israel for its
attack on a nuclear reactor in Iraq. Mr.  Haig later disavowed the comments.

Then, late last month, the two engaged in what Mrs. Kirkpatrick characterized as
''a lively exchange'' over American policy in the Falkland Islands. Mr. Haig had
switched the American position on a United Nations cease-fire resolution without
awakening Mr. Reagan, who was on his European tour. Mr. Haig said that he had
passed his instructions through Washington instead of presenting them directly
to Mrs. Kirkpatrick, who had been critical of the Administration's handling of
the Falkland dispute, because, as he put it, ''you don't talk to the company
commander when you have a corps and a division in between.''

Before the 10-week war in the South Atlantic got under way, Mr.  Haig undertook
a tiring bout of interhemispheric negotiating, speaking separately with British
and Argentine leaders and urging them both to avoid an armed conflict. He later
admitted that his efforts had failed.

Even in these negotiation efforts, which won the applause of much of the
onlooking world, Mr. Haig emerged as a center of controversy, with White House
officials complaining of Mr. Haig's ''grandstanding'' and with Mr. Haig accusing
the White House of ''sniping'' at him because of a disagreement over which plane
he should have used for his first trip.

This is the second time Mr. Haig has left a position in part because of policy
disagreements. He resigned the NATO post in June 1979 because of what he
described as ''profound personal disagreement with the policies'' of the Carter
Administration.

Mr. Haig once told William Ruckelshaus, then the deputy attorney general, that
he must dismiss Archibald Cox, the first Watergate special prosecutor, because
his ''commander in chief has given you an order.'' Mr. Ruckelshaus resigned
rather than carry out the order.

At his confirmation hearing Mr. Haig was asked why he did not resign himself in
the Nixon Administration. ''If everyone were to indulge in the option of
refusing to serve in a unique period when our Republic, I think, was in danger,
heaven help us all,'' he answered. ''I felt an obligation to do the best I
could. I did that.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photos of Haig with Begin, Thatcher, Kirkpatrick photo
of Haig in White House after Reagan was shot

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              315 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

REFUGEES FLEEING BEIRUT FOR ISRAELI-HELD SOUTH

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section 1; Page 7, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 818 words

DATELINE: SIDON, Lebanon, June 24


Thousands of refugees are pouring out of Beirut and heading south along the
coastal road into Israeli-held territory.

They travel in Volvos and Mercedes-Benzes, pickup trucks and battered cars. They
pile mattresses, tables and television sets precariously on the roofs of their
vehicles and jam the back seats with small children who peer out anxiously at
the Israeli soldiers along the route.

Fuad Assad, who works for a book publisher in Beirut, waited through a long
Israeli siege of the capital and through repeated aerial and artillery attacks
before deciding reluctantly to pack his wife, daughter, mother, brother and
sister into his old Renault this morning and head south.

He had hesitated because his job and his house were in beleaguered west Beirut,
where the Palestinian guerrillas have their headquarters. Although his job may
be waiting for him when he returns, his house may not. The guerrillas have taken
over many buildings in the city, making them targets for the Israelis, whose
planes, tanks and artillery have caused severe destruction in many
neighborhoods.

'We Are Afraid'

''There is a war,'' Mr. Assad said in a simple explanation of his decision to
leave. ''We are afraid.'' The Israelis are allowing residents to leave, hoping
that the population will thin out to minimize civilian casualties if and when
they move in against the Palestinians.

But there is also some concern by the Israeli authorities that guerrillas may
try to sneak south and infiltrate areas held by the Israeli military. To prevent
this, the Israeli Army has set up frequent roadblocks and checkpoints along the
narrow, blacktop road.

The vehicles of the refugees, combined with the wide trailer trucks carrying
tanks and armored personnel carriers, and hundreds of trucks and buses ferrying
troops and supplies, are causing truly monumental traffic jams.

Distant Rumbling of Shelling

Long lines of cars have been backing up at several spots amid the dusty rubble
and sweltering humidity. The distant rumble of shelling to the north is
punctuated by babies crying in the heat.

But the Israelis appear to have chosen their nicest officers and enlisted men to
supervise the checkpoints. Potentially nasty and suspicious encounters between
frightened Lebanese and cautious Israelis seem, for the most part, to be
cordial, low-key and courteous.

Sometimes, women reach through the windows and present inspecting officers south
of Beirut with red or white carnations, which end up incongruously in the
buttonholes of green battle fatigues.

One smiling intelligence captain at a checkpoint held his red flower for a
while, then, spotting a carload of children, handed it through the window to a
small girl, who smiled sheepishly.

Delays Are Minimal

The captain asks a few quiet questions about origins and destinations, looks the
passengers in the eye, examines documents and occasionally searches a car. But
the delays are minimal, for the Israelis are anxious to maintain good relations
with the Lebanese civilians.

Many of those on the road are former residents of the south who left for Beirut
after the Palestine Liberation Organization took over their towns and villages
in 1976, bringing what the travelers describe as a reign of terror to the area.

Some officials in Jerusalem are flattered that so many Lebanese should choose to
flee into the Israeli-controlled zone, taking it as testimony of trust in the
Israelis. There is something reminiscent of the American contention during the
Vietnam War that refugees were ''voting with their feet'' when they fled to
Government-held zones instead of Vietcong areas.

But the phenomenon in Lebanon appears no more politically significant than the
one in Vietnam. Here, as there, civilians run from fighting. They go to the
Israeli side because the Israelis have the more powerful weapons and the
capacity to devastate their Beirut neighborhoods.

Often, their destination is determined by old family or property ties. Mr.
Assad, for example, has a summer house in the village of Zeita. Hassan Birjawi
was heading for relatives in Nabatiye, now under Israeli control. He had left a
village in central Lebanon because of Israeli air and artillery strikes, not
because of the presence of Syrian troops nearby, he explained.

He put his cousin behind the wheel of his battered truck, his stout wife in the
middle with two small children, and seven smiling children in the back with
mattresses and furniture, and sputtered off southward. By the time he was clear
of the shooting and well into the Israeli-held area, his face had a happy, tired
look of relief.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of refugees fleeing the fighting in Beirut

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              316 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 26, 1982, Saturday, Late City Final Edition

A FIFTH SUSPECT HELD FOR AIDING COCAINE AIRDROP

BYLINE: By WILLIAM G. BLAIR

SECTION: Section 2; Page 28, Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 445 words


A fifth person was arrested yesterday in connection with the seizure on Thursday
of 610 pounds of pure cocaine in an airdrop smuggling operation on Long Island.

Charles E. Rose, an assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of
New York, identified the most recent suspect as John O'Neill, the 40-year-old
operator of the Westhampton Airport, who lives at 202 Hillrise Avenue in
Calverton in Suffolk County.

Mr. Rose said Mr. O'Neill filled up illegal extra fuel tanks in the airplane
that was purportedly used by the other suspects to smuggle the cocaine - said by
United States Customs Service officials to have a street value of $200 million -
from Colombia in South America.

Meanwhile, some new information emerged on the two residents of New York City -
David L. Silbergeld and Bernard J. Monaghan - who were among the four suspects
held following Thursday's dawn raid by law enforcement officers at Brookhaven
Airport, also in Suffolk County.

Ronald P. Fischetti, the lawyer for the two, disclosed that Mr.  Silbergeld, a
45-year-old computer consultant who lives at 39 East 75th Street in Manhattan,
had been tried and convicted in 1979 of obtaining unemployment insurance checks
when he was actually employed.

Silbergeld on Probation

Mr. Silbergeld, divorced and the father of two young sons, was sentenced in
Federal District Court in Manhattan to four years on probation, a sentence still
in effect at the time of his arrest Thursday.

Mr. Fischetti said Mr. Silbergeld had been a captain in the United States Army
Special Forces, better known as the Green Berets, in the late 1960's during the
Vietnam War and had been awarded the Silver Star.

Mr. Monaghan, who calls himself Brian and has no previous criminal record, is a
naturalized United States citizen from Ireland, according to Mr. Fischetti.

Mr. Fischetti said Mr. Monaghan, a former part owner of the nowclosed
All-Ireland Bar at 81st Street and Third Avenue, lived at 185 East 85th Street.
But according to Mr. Rose, Mr. Monaghan said that he lived in Brooklyn with his
father.

Mr. Fischetti said Mr. Monaghan and Mr. Silbergeld were former acquaintances of
Howard (Buddy) Jacobson and John Tupper, who was murdered by Mr. Jacobson in
1978 in a love-triangle case. Mr.  Jacobson was convicted of the murder in 1980.
Mr. Monaghan was a partner with Mr. Tupper in the All-Ireland Bar and Mr.
Silbergeld formerly lived in the same building, at 185 East 81st Street, as Mr.
Jacobson and Mr. Tupper.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              317 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

PHOTOGRAPHY VIEW;
CHARLES PRATT'S VIEW OF NATURE;
WASHINGTON, D.C.

BYLINE: By Andy Grundberg

SECTION: Section 2; Page 25, Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 1222 words


Fate is just as fickle, and fashion just as fleeting, in photography as in
everything else. Lately a great deal of effort has been spent dusting off
forgotten or overlooked photographers from earlier eras and burnishing them with
fresh appreciation; at the same time, however, certain more recent reputations
have lapsed into obscurity. Since memory is selective, the reasons for these
lapses tell us as much about the state of the medium as do the current fashions.

Before his untimely death in 1976 at age 50, Charles Pratt was a well-known and
widely published landscape photographer. His detailed renditions of the natural
world were admired for revealing, with economy and delicacy, a phenomenological
order of spiritual import.  Even when his subject was a mere lump of dirt in a
field, he could imbue it with significance. What makes his death seem especially
untimely today is that he was, at mid-career, still getting better, still
refining his craft and vision in formally innovative ways.

Pratt's photographs were seen frequently in the 60's and early 70's, hung in
exhibitions and reproduced in magazines such as Audubon, Aperture and Popular
Photography. His work also found its way into several books, including three
written by Rachel Carson and his own ''Here on the Island'' (1974). However,
after 1976 his photographic presence faded rapidly. Even the publication in 1980
of a monograph, ''The Garden and the Wilderness'' (Horizon Press), together with
an exhibition at Witkin Gallery, seemed insufficient to restore much enthusiasm
for his work. So it is somewhat surprising that the Corcoran Gallery, inspired
by its associate director, Jane Livingston, and guest curator John Gossage,
should now mount a 53-print exhibition called ''Charles Pratt: Photographs'' -
Pratt's first museum show and, according to the Corcoran, the first exhibition
ever to include his color work.

Certainly by the evidence of the exhibition (which runs through July 4) and of
the amply illustrated catalogue that accompanies it, Pratt's photographs deserve
more attention that they have gotten recently. They have an authoritative
presence that, for all their echoes of Minor White, Eliot Porter and Paul
Caponigro, seems unique and original. Pratt was a masterful printer in black and
white, and used this skill with precision and restraint, not bombast. The color
prints on display are equally successful, showing Pratt's painterly knack for
limiting each composition to two or three syncopated hues.

Much of Pratt's photography is about contrasts -contrasts as they exist in the
natural world and contrasts elicited by the medium's impingement on that world.
Several of the images in the exhibition combine moving and stationary elements
(water against ice or rock, usually), which Pratt has translated into the
camera's vocabulary of blurred against sharp. Shadows contrast with sunlight.
The scale of the objects depicted can seem at once big and small, and the
viewpoint either straight ahead or straight down: in ''Mosier Island, Maine,''
what looks to be a distant mountain ridge proves to be a rock at the waterline
near the photographer's feet. Complexity and simplicity are shown to coexist: an
unruly sea of grass below a clump of trees is also an organized wedge of silvery
highlights against a dark backdrop. According to Pratt's eye, the textures,
tones, shapes and colors of nature reveal a universal order, one that is based
on the reconciliation of opposites.

Despite the depth of conviction of these photographs, however - and however much
we might admire them for it - it remains to be said that Pratt's work seems
terribly old-fashioned. Primarily, I suspect, this is a consequence of its
implicit values. Pratt seems to have believed, as did most photographers who
paid attention to the theorizing of Minor White in the 50's and 60's, that the
world of appearances (which is all that is available to photography) is
sufficient for deciphering the fundamental order of life. Moreover, the
recognition of this order was felt to be essentially personal - that the
photographer could find ''equivalents'' for his own feelings by closely
examining the natural world.

Pratt did not believe in symbolism - he could take a picture of a jellyfish and
not have it stand for ambivalence, thank goodness - but he did believe in
equivalence. In a ''Statement about Photography'' printed in the exhibition
catalogue, he says, ''There are certain moments in which I see parts of the
world most clearly as themselves and as important to me.'' It is this idea of a
simultaneous revelation - that the world makes itself known in conjunction with
some personal epiphany of the photographer's - that makes Pratt's material seem
vintage.

Today the ironic landscape, seen from a distance and including evidence of man's
intrusion upon it, seems much more to mirror the contemporary situation. We live
in the age of Robert Adams, not Ansel Adams, which is to say an age in which
nature seems in as much disarray as culture. Nature and man are assumed to be
separate, with separate aspirations. Some, such as Linda Connor, may continue to
seek vestiges of spiritual continuity in the landscape, but the order in their
photographs is at once more hard-won and more friable than that found in the
work of White, Porter, Caponigro or Pratt.

There are many in photography who would argue that Pratt's work is old-fashioned
on another count. Pratt did not regard the camera as an instrument of the
culture, necessarily forced to picture things via a code imposed by historical
circumstances - a view much in vogue at present - but as an instrument of
ultimate truth, in service only to the artist at the controls. Thus he was able
to erect what the exhibition shows us: a hermetic, self-sufficient universe of
considerable beauty and meaning on its own terms, but one that does not question
the ideology of the image. According to such an argument, the work's apparent
apolitical stance - its selfcomplacency, some might say - is in fact political.
For example, the dates of the pictures in the exhibition roughly correspond to
the dates of United States involvement in Vietnam; one looks in vain for any
sign of unrest or dismay that would reflect this.

I hope I am not alone in believing that photographs need not be politically
engaged or otherwise utilitarian to be appreciated. But if we look back in
retrospect at photographs that have stood the test of time, they invariably seem
to be of their time. The issue is not whether the subjects are politicians or
trees, or whether the photographer was in the Photo League or in a monastery,
but whether the pictures define the particular historical consciousness of their
era. As of today Pratt's photographs seem like the tailings of a world view
pioneered by Alfred Stieglitz early in the century and long promoted by the
culture of modernism, but time will tell.  History has its fashions, too.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of untitled photograph by Charles Pratt

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              318 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

THE WORLD IN SUMMARY;
The Better to Battle Hanoi

BYLINE: By Milt Freudenheim, Barbara Slavin and Katherine J. Roberts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 276 words


It was all hugs and smiles last week as three unlikely allies formed a Cambodian
government-in-exile to fight a common foe, Vietnam.

The Coalition of Democratic Kampuchea comprises the factions of Prince Norodom
Sihanouk, who was overthrown in 1970; his former Prime Minister, Son Sann, an
anti-Communist who broke with him in 1967; and the Khmer Rouge, which, during
its reign of terror from 1975 to 1978, persecuted both men and killed members of
their families.

The alliance, the result of nine months of delicate talks, has something for
everybody. The Khmer Rouge, reviled for its barbarous rule in which an estimated
three million Cambodians died, wants to be respectable - and keep its seat in
the United Nations. It has dropped its Communist organization, moved its
infamous leader, Pol Pot, into the background, and called for parliamentary
government and free elections.

The coalition gives Prince Sihanouk and Son Sann some military muscle in the
form of Pol Pot's 30,000 insurgents. Although they are no match for Hanoi's
occupation force of 200,000, Prince Sihanouk hopes guerrilla harassment will
bring the Hanoi-backed regime to the negotiating table. Until recently, he had
said the Cambodian people prefered the current rulers, in power for the last
three years, to Pol Pot.

The United States called the coalition a welcome development.
---------------------------------------------------------------------

Milt Freudenheim, Barbara Slavin and Katherine J. Roberts

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              319 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SOME ISRAELIS FEAR THEIR VIETNAM IS LEBANON

BYLINE: By DAVID K. SHIPLER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


- The main question being debated within the Israeli Government last week was
whether to move militarily against the Palestine Liberation Organization in
Beirut and suffer the wrath of the United States, or to maintain the siege,
continue the political effort with Lebanese leaders and hope for Palestinian
surrender.

Resignations last week in Washington and Beirut seemed to tilt the odds in favor
of military action. Prospects for a political resolution suffered a blow in
Lebanon when Prime Minister Shafik al-Wazzan said he was stepping down and
leftist leader Walid Jumblat withdrew from the ''national salvation committee.''
The departure of Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. cost Israel its
strongest supporter in Washington, the man most trusted to carry through
American efforts toward a diplomatic solution that might achieve Israel's goals
in Lebanon. The Secretary-designate, George P.  Schultz, is regarded in
Jerusalem as pro-Arab because of his business dealings with Saudi Arabia; it was
feared that he might team up with Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger to
threaten Israel with curtailment of military aid. Consequently, some Israeli
policymakers were arguing for a rapid military move before the pressure built.

Ariel Sharon was reportedly among them. The campaign had already amounted to ''a
very great achievement for the security and for the peace of Israel,'' the
Defense Minister said, adding that ''the P.L.O. is on its way to complete
destruction in Lebanon.'' Mr. Sharon insisted that Israel ''should not be
affected by any political provocations, internal or external, that exist and
that may threaten our military and political achievements.'' Some officials who
agreed with Mr. Sharon argued that delay encouraged the Palestinian hierarchy in
beleaguered west Beirut and strengthened the P.L.O.'s political status
internationally while foreign pressure on Israel to disengage was mounting. As
the efforts of the Lebanese to form a strong central government flagged, and the
P.L.O. resisted appeals to lay down its arms, an impression has developed that
the Palestinians have stiffened their resolve to fight and that Israel's pause
at the edge of Beirut may have been a tactical error.

Still, officials insisted yesterday no decision had been made by Prime Minister
Menachem Begin for an all-out assault on west Beirut.  The current approach
appeared to favor a tightening military noose, with intensive air strikes,
shelling and shore bombardment - alternating with cease-fires, such as the one
declared Friday after days of pounding - to break the P.L.O. leadership without
sending the Israeli Army into the city.
Pressures From Within

One of the principal inhibitions was the risk of high casualties that could
result from house-to-house fighting. Although dwarfed by Palestinian and
Lebanese casualties, Israeli deaths and injuries were already relatively high -
more than 260 killed, 15 missing, one taken prisoner and more than 1,200
wounded, according to official army figures - and the losses weighed heavily on
a population not entirely convinced of the justice or the unavoidability of the
war.

Some Government officials were aware that further casualties, coupled with a
failure to achieve the ambitious goals, could be severely divisive, bolstering
the standing of the opposition Labor Party chairman, Shimon Peres, and others
arguing for restraint and caution. These internal political calculations were
evidently more important to Mr. Begin than admonitions from Western Europe, the
United States and Egypt to spare Beirut. The Prime Minister does not want this
war to end as the 1973 war did, with recriminations and commissions of inquiry.

Some protests were already being heard. The Peace Now movement, founded to
advocate more Israeli flexibility in negotiations with Egypt, has placed antiwar
advertisements in newspapers. A protest demonstration was held yesterday in Tel
Aviv. ''Lebanon is liable to become our Vietnam,'' said Prof. Shmuel Ettinger of
Hebrew University. Raaya Harnik, whose son Giora was a major killed in the
hand-to-hand battle for Beaufort castle, issued a statement condemning the
invasion. ''If we want to continue to be a humane, just and incorruptible
society,'' she wrote, ''we must make sure that our sword is clean and drawn only
in defense.''

Because of the casualty consideration, Israeli officials here tended to think
that a military assault would have to involve intensive air and artillery
bombardment to knock out as many Palestinian guerrillas as possible before
Israeli troops went in.  This would add to the devastation in west Beirut. Many
Israelis feared it would stain the national honor, obliterating recent boasts of
having the world's most humane army.

An early plan to place Lebanese Christian Phalangists at the forefront of any
house-to-house assault on the Palestinians was apparently abandoned as
impractical. The Christians were said to be unwilling and their strength
insufficient to accomplish the task without crippling losses. Israel still
wanted to establish a Christian-led government willing to sign a peace treaty.
For that, a strong, intact Phalangist militia would be required after the battle
was done.

How this would come out was an open question. But it was already clear that
Israelis would judge the entire war not by its character thus far, but by its
final outcome. If Messrs. Begin and Sharon achieved their ambitious goals of
bringing quiet to Lebanon, the war would be remembered as brilliant, even
altruistic, for having purged the Middle East of a malignant nest of terrorists.
But if the expanded objectives proved unrealizable, or the residents of west
Beirut were slaughtered in the process, this war would go into the Israeli
conscience as a mark of shame.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: Photo of Israeli soldiers

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              320 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

SALVADORAN TACTICS ARE CALLED INTO QUESTION

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2, Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1019 words

DATELINE: SAN SALVADOR


Last August, rebel forces held Perquin, a village in Morazan province, for nine
days. This month, they held it for two weeks and also took nearby San Fernando,
reportedly overcoming 250 Government troops. It took three American-trained
battalions to dislodge the rebels, and there is still fierce fighting in the
mountains.

Progress in guerrilla warfare is hard to measure because of its sporadic nature
and the difficulty of confirming losses and gains.  Nevertheless, cumulative
evidence suggests that the guerrillas are stronger today than when the civil war
began two and a half years ago.

There has been no real change in the army's conduct of the war since the March
elections. In a recent interview, President Alvaro Magana spoke about
''pacification'' programs and a need to change people's attitudes toward
violence as a way to end the civil war.  But he offered no specifics on how to
do it.

The United States has given El Salvador some $125 million in military assistance
in the past 20 months - about $6,000 per Salvadoran soldier. In addition, the
Reagan Administration spent $15 million training 1,400 Salvadoran infantrymen
and officer candidates in the United States. There are also about 50 American
military advisers in El Salvador; last week, several were encountered in a
combat area in apparent violation of the terms governing their presence.

The Salvadorans have 20 American-supplied helicopters and recently obtained six
American jets. The day after the planes arrived, rebels reported, they bombed
San Fernando and Perquin.

The Salvadoran Army has conducted several search-and-destroy operations in
northern Morazan, forcing the rebels to flee temporarily. When they return, they
find their fields have been burned and mud brick houses destroyed. But although
the Government's total military strength is about 30,000 troops compared to the
4,000 to 6,000 guerrillas, the army offensives have not broken the rebels'
ability or will to fight. Government losses during the recent heavy fighting in
Morazan are widely believed to have been the most severe in the war.

In a recent broadcast over their clandestine radio station, Venceremos (we shall
overcome), the rebels read the names and units of 36 soldiers they claimed to
have killed. They also identified by name most of the 43 soldiers they claimed
to have captured, including a young officer who had been trained at Fort
Benning, Ga.

Finding and silencing the radio station, which operates from an underground
bunker near Perquin, was a key objective of an army sweep in December. Having
failed, the Government now tries to jam the radio's short-wave frequency.

When the Reagan Administration increased military aid to El Salvador, it
apparently thought the rebels could be crushed relatively quickly. El Salvador
is about one-eighth the size of South Vietnam, with no dense jungle. Honduras is
the guerrillas' only land sanctuary and supply route, but the Hondurans are
allied with the Salvadoran Government and their army has had nearly 100 American
Green Beret advisers assigned to it.
Few Prisoners Taken

A principal objective of the American training has been to impress on the
Salvadorans ''that five men have a much higher survivability than 30 men in a
group,'' said a Western military observer here. Yet an estimated 6,000 soldiers,
most from three United States-trained battalions, are slogging through the
mountains of Morazan in search of the guerrillas.

''It's like a covey of quail up there,'' said the Western military observer.
''Somebody starts shooting into the middle of our group and everybody spreads
out 360 degrees.'' Similarly, soon after their return from Fort Bragg, N.C., the
green-bereted soldiers of the Ramon Bellose battalion launched a massive
operation in the rebeldominated province of Chalatenango. ''They telegraphed it
down the line to get out,'' the Westerner said. But there were reports that the
Salvadoran soldiers did utilize some small patrols and night ambushes.

The tally from the Chalatenango operation was 135 rebels killed.  The government
acknowledged that many of the victims were unarmed women and children. Civilian
deaths, the Western observer said, are ''one of the costs of this kind of war.''

The Americans have tried to impress on the Salvadoran officers the importance of
taking prisoners to obtain intelligence and to provide the guerrillas with some
incentive to surrender. But the army has taken very few prisoners. According to
a Red Cross worker here, army officers have said that taking prisoners is a
''luxury'' that imposes too great a burden on the Government side.

Asked why the rebels have not been defeated, Reagan Administration officials say
it is because they have received assistance from Cuba and Nicaragua.

Rebel leaders reply that they do not have helicopters, jets or trucks, but ''we
will win because we have the support of the people,'' in the words of a
19-year-old commander. Like many other guerrilla leaders, he received his
training in the Salvadoran Army.  He said the Government soldiers were fighting
because ''they are paid to, are forced to.'' Government officials counter that
the peasants are intimidated by the rebels. Whether the rebels have established
''liberated zones,'' as they claim, is debatable, but in a significant portion
of the country, their socialistic system of organization appears to function
except when the army enters.

The Reagan Administration wants to train two more battalions in the United
States, and it has budgeted $166 million in military assistance for El Salvador
next year. Even with this additional assistance, the most optimistic prediction
of Salvadoran officials and community leaders is that it will take two more
years to defeat the guerrillas.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              321 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

DOUBLE-STANDARD FOR SELF-DEFENSE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 3; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 331 words


To the Editor:

Mike Keefe's political cartoon depicting an Israeli armored vehicle patrolling
the polar icecap (Week in Review, June 20) is indicative of the basic American
inability to understand the Jewish state. Suffice it to say that a British tank
parked several thousand miles from Liverpool in a Falklands marsh seems no less
ludicrous. The difference is that the latter is reality, as is the bloodshed
involved, yet here our judgmental nerves remain unfrayed.v.e reserve privileges
for Britain and ourselves for which Israel must continually atone. English
soldiers cruise around the globe for an archaic colonial principle and emerge as
seasick heroes. Israeli soldiers cross the next valley to remove civilian-bound
Ketushya rockets and are branded as expansionist barbarians. Enthusiasm for
British adventurism rivals contempt for Israeli self-defense.

Do we Americans really have a moral prerogative with respect to Israel? Can the
civilization which systematically vaporized the Indian peoples on this continent
make suggestions? Can the society which formalized black bondage and segregation
assume an absolute historical right of doctrine? Can the ethnocentric generation
of Vietnam be critical of anybody's foreign policy? In this specific era of
short-term, rejected Presidents, can we single out any foreign leaders for
truancy when we are so irreverent of our own? Has not Hiroshima bound us to any
thoughtfulness?

Mr. Keefe, Israeli tanks are not heading for the North Pole or even Nagasaki.
But, save your pen. You may yet sketch American jeeps being fueled in San
Salvador.  (Rabbi) BENJAMIN A. KAMIN North American Director World Union for
Progressive Judaism New York, June 20, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              322 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

WHAT'S WRONG WITH ONE-TERM PRESIDENTS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 20, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 359 words


To the Editor:

Prof. Henry F. Graff's Op-Ed article ''Presidents: Hired, Mired, Fired'' (June
20) misfires.  With Ronald Reagan likely to become the fifth President in a row
to be discarded after one term in office, Professor Graff is understandably
concerned about the effect of this ''eerie picture'' of successively rejected
Presidents on the future of the Republic.v.ithout pausing to examine the merits
of the men or the reasons for change, however, he skims lightly over ''the
larger question'' of whether any President can gain ''popular re-endorsement''
and blames our ''fickleness and improvidence with political talent'' for
denigrating the Presidency and thereby endangering the nation's ''stability and
concord.'' (Were we not only recently cautioned about the danger of the
''Imperial Presidency'' and chided for re-electing Franklin Delano Roosevelt
again and again and again?)

Professor Graff is not alone in his anxiety about the succession of ''failure in
the White House.'' But where he finds ''political talent'' in the men who gave
us Vietnam and Watergate and are now giving us unemployment, El Salvador and a
nuclear arms race, I (and evidently a majority of polled Americans) see only
mediocrity, incompetence - and less.

Where he would give White House failures a second term, we believe they have
already done the nation sufficient harm and would not compound the folly. Where
he is concerned that the failure to reelect men demonstrably not qualified for
the office undermines ''continuity'' of national policy, we would be appalled by
their reelection or continuation of their policies.

Despite Professor Graff's gloomy forebodings, the Republic has already survived
13 of 39 Presidents who were denied re-election (14 if you count

Cleveland, who was defeated in 1888 but elected four years later).  We would do
well to make it 14 of 40. And instead of lamenting our refusal to re-elect
proven failures to the world's most important office, Professor Graff - and the
nation - would be better advised to examine how they got to the White House in
the first place.
HERMAN LIEBERMAN, Cranford, N.J., June 21, 1982

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: letter

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              323 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

AFRICAN WINS AND LOSSES

BYLINE: By JENNIFER SEYMOUR WHITAKER; Jennifer Seymour Whitaker is the associate
editor of Foreign Affairs and the author and editor of ''Africa and the United
States: Vital Interests.''

SECTION: Section 7; Page 7, Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1949 words


THE CONGO CABLES The Cold War in Africa - From Eisenhower to Kennedy.  By
Madeleine G. Kalb.  466 pp. New York: Macmillan Publishing Co. $19.95.
FROM THE CONGO TO SOWETO U.S. Foreign Policy Toward Africa Since 1960.  By Henry
F. Jackson.  324 pp. New York: William Morrow & Co. $13.95.

THE trouble with United States policy toward the third world is that we keep
changing our minds about how much of it matters to us and why. Apart from oil,
only the overweening interest of the Soviet Union - in some spot or other of
hitherto distant relevance - has succeeded in focusing our attention. Thus we
experience our thirdworld concerns like an episodic rush of adrenaline. Suddenly
aware, we jerk into reaction, plotting not to gain advantage but to lay claim to
whatever available spaces may remain on the board.

Two decades ago, in the Congo conflict, we moved into a position opposite the
Soviet Union that has since become ritualized. Our subsequent duel has not been
fought over territory and not even over resources -but rather over influence in
the third world. Madeleine G. Kalb's historical narrative, ''The Congo Cables,''
shows the United States at the height of its international influence at the
start of the 1960's, wheeling and dealing with confidence and gusto. Henry F.
Jackson's ''From the Congo to Soweto'' catalogues the failures of insight and
action that in his view have hobbled the United States in Africa ever since. In
both books the recurring dilemmas and patterns of response that have dogged our
reactions in subsequent skirmishes are unmistakable.

The Congo story has been told many times. Mrs. Kalb's version, however, throws
the United States' role into new relief by astutely mining a rich lode of State
Department cables made available under the Freedom of Information Act. A
foreign-policy specialist, she tells the story well. Carefully placing the
three-year struggle in the international context that includes the Bay of Pigs
and the Cuban missile crisis, Mrs. Kalb both educates and stuns the reader with
a flood of detail that is sometimes as dizzying as the Congo's complexities were
to a series of Western diplomats. Through it all, however, the consuming focus
of United States policy makers was on Soviet subversion; and the extravagant
expenditures of American diplomatic and political resources in achieving this
one-of-a-kind victory in the third world emerge clearly.

As Mrs. Kalb's account shows, the United States was drawn into the Congolese
maelstrom with the first eruption of violence (less than a week after
independence) because the Eisenhower Administration viewed the anticolonial
outbursts of the country's first Prime Minister, Patrice Lumumba, as evidence of
dangerously radical tendencies.  Clearly he was not ''our man.'' In the
situation of near-anarchy that soon prevailed in the new state, Lumumba might be
expected to give away the country to the Soviets. (Strikingly, this fear of
Soviet fishing in troubled waters loomed as powerfully in 1960, when the Soviet
Union was hard put to project force all the way to Africa, as it does now, after
the military events in Angola and Ethiopia.)

In this early third-world confrontation the United States and its Western allies
eventually ''won out'' over the Soviet Union because they still wielded control
over the United Nations as well as over most other levers of international
power. The United Nations peacemaking effort, which was unparalleled, deployed
phalanxes of United Nations and Western diplomats - and 19,000 troops - to
reshape the Congo's destiny. Definitions of their mission, however, shifted with
the changing tides in United Nations and Congolese politics.

Summing up Mrs. Kalb's intricate tale is something like trying to convey the
terrors of a gothic novel by relating the unending (and to the listener tedious)
twists and turns of its plot. You had to have been there.

Reduced to its simplest terms, the conflict evolved along preordained fault
lines. Lumumba struggled frantically, within the Congo and at the United
Nations, to get rid of the former colonial power, the Belgians, who were trying
to hang on to the mineral-rich province of Katanga. The United States, Great
Britain and, for a time, the United Nations supported Belgium in maintaining its
hold on Katanga through ''its man,'' Moise Tshombe. The Soviets lost ''their
man,'' Lumumba, early in the game when he was overthrown by the C.I.A.-backed
Colonel Joseph Mobutu and brutally murdered by Tshombe. Thus Western/United
Nations operatives easily turned aside Soviet military aid, requested by
Lumumba. Eventually the Western powers, after ousting Lumumba and installing a
''reliable'' regime, forced the end of the Katanga secession.

As this scenario moved toward its resolution, an institutional problem for the
West emerged to mar the rosy prospect. The pronounced pro-Western tilt of the
United Nations Secretariat cemented the anticolonial alliance between the the
Soviet Union and the Afro-Asian bloc, which from then on continued to hector
Western statesmen on a variety of fronts. The murder of Lumumba, six months
after independence, triggered an outpouring of anti-Western and anti-American
feeling in Africa and at the United Nations. As Mrs.  Kalb's extensive
documentation indicates, allegations of United States culpability are not
entirely off the mark. Although not directly involved in his death, the C.I.A.
had been dabbling in plans for ''eliminating'' Lumumba, and knew in advance when
he was being delivered into the hands of his enemy, Tshombe.

Moreover, both before and after these dramatic events, American unwillingness to
oppose the Belgians helped to prolong the endemic instability that brought down
Lumumba and then threatened his pro-Western (and American-backed) successor as
Prime Minister, Cyril Adoula, as well. Although the Kennedy Administration's
increased sensitivity to African nationalism contrasted sharply with the
straight cold-war reactions of Eisenhower, most of the Kennedy team gave
priority to the imbroglio in the Congo and spent enormous wit and energy trying
to influence the players there. Withal, it still took them two years to break
away from their British allies - and the United States' Katanga lobby - by
supporting sanctions against Katanga. In fact, the Americans were still dragging
their feet when the United Nations troops finally forced Tshombe's capitulation
and the successful climax of the United Nations effort in January 1963.

NONETHELESS, when the smoke cleared, the United States had indeed ''outfoxed the
Russians.'' And 20 years later, ''our man,'' Mobutu, is still ruling Zaire (as
he has renamed the Congo). Certainly the Congo's outcome can be viewed as a
decisive cold-war victory for the United States, of a sort that has largely
eluded us in the third world since Vietnam: that is, one achieved by directed
United States efforts rather than by Soviet blundering or by the vicissitudes of
internal politics. Only Mrs. Kalb's afterword indicates how thoroughly this
success was mined with future difficulties.

American scholar and journalist Henry F. Jackson's analytical account drives
home this point, emphasizing how that victory entangled the United States in a
web of mutual dependency with a corrupt regime, one that has presided over the
steady decline of its people into ever more abject poverty and held together its
territorial fragments only through direct interventions mounted by its Western
friends. Further, he argues, the basic elements of the United States' African
strategy as seen in the Congo - its overriding anti-Sovietism, its search for
reliable pro-Western clients, its Euro-centrism, its interventionism and,
conversely, its pervasive indifference except at times of crisis - have steadily
eroded American influence in Africa ever since.

In additional case studies of Angola and Egypt, Mr. Jackson reiterates his
point, showing how anti-Sovietism led the United States to superimpose its own
version of reality on various intractable African situations. In Angola, he
says, the United States tried to re-enact the Congo, backing the pro-Western
insurgents against the Soviet-supported Marxists. But the odds had shifted
greatly in the intervening years; the Soviet Union (and Cuba) now could
transport their forces to the far-flung reaches of Africa with relative ease,
while the Americans had lost their zest for arcane manipulations in little-known
corners of the world.

Mr. Jackson contrasts what he sees as a declining American ability to influence
African events with a growing American need for Africa's minerals and military
facilities. He also vividly chronicles the continuing, and growing, concern with
Africa on the part of its main domestic constituency, American blacks. Touching
the important bases, he delineates sharply the cycles of indifference and
anxiety that have marked American attention to Africa.

But his energetic analysis tends to ride its theses roughshod over contrary
facts. On the Congo, he asserts that the Kennedy Administration saw that country
as a potential ''beachhead'' for lasting American influence, an interpretation
supported neither by his account nor by Mrs. Kalb's massive documentation.
Rather than constructing a positive instrument for asserting long-term American
power in the area, embattled American policy makers saw themselves chiefly as
staving off the Communist hordes.

MR. JACKSON depicts the Africa-oriented regionalists of the Carter
Administration, led by Ambassador Andrew Young, as succumbing early to Zbigniew
Brzezinski's cold-war line, and even as adopting a ''pro-apartheid position'' by
the end of 1977. Young and his fellow Africanists in fact were able to attract
more interest to Africa at the highest levels of the Carter Administration than
any other area commanded, giving it more play than in any previous
Administration.  They continued to shape policy on the crucial southern African
issues through 1980, working on a Namibia settlement and successfully backing
the international agreement that brought Robert Mugabe to power in Zimbabwe.

Mr. Jackson largely ignores a pivotal African event that helped to steer the
Carter Administration and the general American public away from detente - the
large-scale deployment of Soviet and Cuban forces in Ethiopia in early 1978.
With the earlier emplacement of Cuban troops in Angola in 1975 and the invasion
of Afghanistan in 1979, this shift in the superpower balance presented the
United States with real strategic dilemmas in addition to ongoing cold-war
phantasms.  Yet when the United States has directly intervened to prevent such a
shift, it has too often ended up shooting itself in the foot.

The Congo was an exception, but those were the glory days.Unfortunately, or
fortunately, we can no longer afford the kinds of intervention that succeeded
there. Now as then, however, anti-Sovietism is more likely than anything else to
concentrate the American mind on Africa. Thus, perhaps, we would do best to make
the most of that situation with the means we have. It is, in fact, highly
unlikely that the Reagan Administration would have given early priority to a
Namibia settlement in the absence of the Soviet threat or that the
Administration would have accepted the possibility of a government led by
insurgent ''radicals'' if that didn't seem at least better than prolonged Soviet
mucking about in a military conflict.  Eschewing globalist remedies -like the
installation of reliable pro-Western clients - while responding to cold-war
dilemmas may give us our best shot at effecting policies that advance both
American and African interests.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of jungle

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              324 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 27, 1982, Sunday, Late City Final Edition

CLASS AND WELFARE IN THE UNITED STATES

BYLINE: By CHARLES PETERS; Charles Peters is the editor of The Washington
Monthly.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 11, Column 3; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1615 words


THE UNDERCLASS By Ken Auletta.  348 pp. New York: Random House. $17.50.

THIS book is not about poor people in general. It's about the underclass, those
at the bottom - the long-term welfare recipients, street criminals, addicts and
drifters who live outside the world of work and whose problems are not likely to
be solved simply by the offer of a job. They are the hard core of poverty. Can
these people be saved? That's the question Ken Auletta addresses in his new
book, which is important and impressive but also exasperating.

The author, a New York journalist, studied job training and supported work
programs run by the Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, an organization
funded by foundations and the Federal Government. He spent seven months with one
group of 26 trainees in New York City attending classes designed, in his words,
''to instill the habit of work and to expunge bad habits.'' He also visited
M.D.R.C. programs in Mississippi and West Virginia and has read widely in the
literature of poverty.

Mr. Auletta is admirable in refusing to be limited by the mindlessly anecdotal
approach that is characteristic of so many journalists or blinded by the
conventional liberal bias toward poverty (''It's all society's fault''). He
combines more than 250 interviews and the personal observations that give life
to journalism with a scholar's systematic discipline and diligence. His mind is
equally open to Oscar Lewis, a liberal anthropologist, and to Edward Banfield, a
conservative political scientist, though he clearly does not accept the
mythology of the extreme right that depicts the underclass as composed entirely
of lazy, vicious, oversexed criminals. He sees these people as human beings,
real and whole, and his empathy for even the most incorrigible of them is
contagious.

As he told the story of the New York class of welfare members, exconvicts,
addicts and dropouts, I found myself rooting for Willy Joe, a 24-year-old former
convict, and the others to make it. After 10 weeks, the program has a kind of
graduation ceremony at which the most likely to succeed are given certificates
and promoted to a more advanced class. Willy Joe was not one of them. He had
been late too often and had missed too many classes. Yet when he said, ''It
would be good for me to be asked to go on,'' I ached for him. It is clear how
desperately Willy Joe needs some badge of success to break the chain of defeat
in his life, to give him the confidence to get out of bed in the morning. Mr.
Auletta says this lack of selfconfidence is characteristic of the underclass
generally and is ''the biggest impediment to success'' of welfare mothers.
Knowing how paralyzing low self-esteem can be for even the most materially
advantaged in this society, think of the complex terrors that bewilder a Willy
Joe or a welfare mother who has hardly been out of her tenement since she had
her first baby at age 16.

STILL, according to the M.D.R.C., the welfare mothers are the easiest to bring
into the world of work. The passivity that seems to be part of their problem
also makes them coachable, especially when they have some pride and
stick-to-itiveness. In the right circumstances some of them can be persuaded
into the self-assertion necessary to seek and hold a job.

The hostility of the ex-convicts makes them much less likely to succeed than the
welfare mothers, or for that matter the drug addicts. Addicts can be helped into
the world of work, but not - not by M.D.R.C., at least - into giving up their
addiction.  Surprisingly, Mr. Auletta says that M.D.R.C.'s success rate with
addicts is considerably higher on a cost-benefit basis than with school
dropouts, although the reasons are not clear.

This is where the book is exasperating. The author does not give us many
answers. It is possible that he is a victim of the tendency of The New Yorker
(where portions of this book first appeared) to separate reporting and analysis.
Certainly there is evidence in his non-New Yorker work - most notably the
chapter of his book ''The Streets Were Paved With Gold'' that was called ''New
York: The Liberals' Vietnam'' - that he was capable of considerable analytical
boldness. But that talent is not exercised here. Instead he asks a lot of
questions, beginning one list of them saying, ''The questions one might ask are
inexhaustible,'' and concluding four pages later with the discovery that ''the
questions are endless.''

ONE factor in the pathology of the underclass that the author does identify
clearly is the female-headed household. In 1979, about 55 percent of all black
children born in the United States were born out of wedlock, and today one in
three families headed by women is poor compared to one in 10 headed by men. But
having identified poor households headed by women as a problem, Mr. Auletta has
no answer beyond changing welfare policies that divide families. I wish he had
explored the possible explanations provided by Howard Smith, the 39-year-old
teacher of the New York M.D.R.C. class who himself had risen out of poverty:

''The difference between my generation and the majority of my class is that even
though we may have had a female-oriented family, the average mother in the
forties and fifties had different values...  Welfare was wrong. Drugs were
wrong. Every Sunday morning you had to put on a blue-serge suit and a pair of
shoes and go to church. You may not have been getting the best education in a
segregated school, but you had to go to school. .. You respected your elders and
didn't talk back. Today it's a whole new ball game. The kids aren't taught those
same values... The traditional institutions that taught them what was good and
bad, church, schools, the family unit itself - there's an entire generation out
there that has not had the benefits of family, church, or school.''

Mr. Auletta has nothing to say about the role of religion. He doesn't say what
can and should be done about the bureaucratic and personnel problems of the
institutions like the schools and the poverty programs that are supposed to help
the underclass. He mentions bad teachers (''The teacher wasn't teaching nobody
nothing, so I just stopped going''), but suggests no remedy in a brief
discussion of education that leans heavily on such statements as ''there is no
consensus'' and ''on the other hand.''

My own guess is that the problem of what to do about the underclass will prove
no more difficult than the problem of what to do about the incompetent teachers
and inept bureaucrats who have contributed to keeping the underclass in its
place. Indeed, it can be said that the enemy of the poor today is less the
wealthy than the middle class from which these teachers and bureaucrats come.
Mr.  Auletta cites the growth in income-transfer payments from $73 billion in
1965 to $394 billion in 1978 as evidence of the extent of the war on poverty. He
does not seem to realize that the majority of these payments, Social Security
and Medicare among them, went to the middle class instead of the poor.

THERE are other areas where Mr. Auletta still wears the blinders of the
conventional liberal. Violent crime is one. He sees the harm the violent can do,
from disrupting the classroom to terrorizing the streets, but his solutions
-keep the violent students ''under surveillance'' and ''track'' career criminals
to make sure they don't get away with a light jail sentence -don't go far
enough. He can't quite bring himself to advocate expelling the violent student
or to explore the crucial question of how long prison sentences should be.  He
recoils from the subject of preventive detention. Yet when the District of
Columbia police recently tried the tracking of multiple offenders and arrested
24 of them, over half were out on bail within one week, ready to intimidate or
murder the witnesses against them, or to commit other crimes or flee the
jurisdiction before the trial.  To most liberals, preventive detention suggests
the methods of Himmler and Hitler, but what it should mean is a way for society
to protect itself from the clearly dangerous criminals between the time of their
arrest and the time of their trial.

It seems to me that until we learn how to reform the dangerous criminals, and
there is no evidence that we have yet discovered that secret: they must be kept
in jail in order to protect the rest of us - most of all, the poor, who comprise
such a disproportionately large number of the victims today. Mr. Auletta worries
that there won't be enough room for all of the dangerous criminals. But the
answer to that is to find forms of punishment other than jail for the
nonviolent. A great day will dawn when we begin to act on the distinction
between violent and nonviolent crime and to see the importance of being tough on
the former, very tough, and lenient toward the latter, particularly the
''victimless'' criminal and the first offender.

Until then, until the underclass is protected from its own worst element, how
can we expect it to improve its lot? As things stand now in many underclass
neighborhoods, it can be frightening for a welfare mother to stick her head out
of the door, much less to set out across the city to attend some training
program. Mr. Auletta makes us realize and admire the courage of the mothers who
kept coming to the M.D.R.C. class. He also makes us admire the M.D.R.C.'s
training and its remarkable success rate. Considering the fact that convicts and
delinquents were mixed in with the welfare mothers, the M.D.R.C. still moved
one-third of its trainees into the world of work. A footnote: The Reagan
Administration terminated Federal funding for M.D.R.C. on Dec. 31, 1981.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing of boots

TYPE: review

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              325 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 29, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

AROUND THE WORLD;
Vietnam Announces Shift In Its Top Leadership

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 145 words

DATELINE: HONG KONG, June 28


Vietnam announced a shuffle today of its Council of State, including the
dismissal of Xuan Thuy from the posts of deputy chairman and general secretary.

The agency said that Le Thanh Nghi, another deputy chairman of the Council, now
assumed the post of general secretary. Huynh Tan Phat was named a deputy
chairman, succeeding Mr. Thuy in this function.

Under the 1980 Constitution, the Council of State serves as a collective
presidency, acting on behalf of Vietnam in domestic and foreign affairs through
its chairman. It also supervises the work of the Cabinet.

Mr. Thuy was for many years the country's top representative at international
gatherings. He served as Minister of State heading North Vietnam's negotiating
team at the Paris peace negotiations with the United States from 1968 to 1973.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              326 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 29, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

U.S. PREPARATION FOR A DRAFT URGED

BYLINE: By RICHARD HALLORAN, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 21, Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 433 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 28


A panel of 55 prominent citizens urged President Reagan and Congress today to
prepare for a resumption of the military draft in the near future.

Gen. Andrew J. Goodpaster, a retired Army officer who was cochairman of the
group, said at a news conference that there was a ''substantial consensus''
within the panel that the United States would probably need more manpower to
prepare for the possibility of simultaneous wars in Europe, the Persian Gulf and
Northeast Asia.

In addition, General Goodpaster said the Army needed more middleclass white
youths and fewer black soldiers, especially in combat units, to make it more
representative of the racial mix in the American population and make sure that
casualties in any conflict would not fall disproportionately on members of
minority groups.

The Army's enlisted force is 33 percent black today, as against 13 percent of
the overall population, the panel said.  The panel, which included former
Secretary of Defense Robert S.  McNamara, former Secretaries of the Army Stanley
R. Resor and Elvis J. Stahr Jr., former Secretary of the Navy Edward Hidalgo and
a former Ambassador to South Vietnam, Frederick E. Nolting, was gathered by the
Atlantic Council.

The council is a nongovernmental foreign-policy study foundation largely made up
of educators, business executives and former Government officials. The other
co-chairman is Lloyd H. Elliott, president of George Washington University here.


Limited Draft Authority Urged

The panel did not set a date by which conscription should be resumed. But it did
recommend that ''the President be given limited authority to induct a limited
number of men and women into the armed forces in a situation in which there is
an emergency short of the outbreak of general war.''

President Reagan has said that he opposes resumption of the draft in peacetime.
The Administration has, however, pursued a program providing for peacetime draft
registration.

The panel's report was sharply criticized by the Defense Department's senior
official on manpower, Assistant Secretary Lawrence J. Korb, who called the
recommendation on the draft ''both naive and bad policy.''

''Much more should be considered in a decision to return to conscription than
simply the failure to meet an arbitrary set of quality standards over an equally
arbitrary time period,'' Mr. Korb said.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              327 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                June 29, 1982, Tuesday, Late City Final Edition

IN THE NATION;
HAIG AND ISRAEL

BYLINE: By Tom Wicker

SECTION: Section A; Page 23, Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 869 words


In the last days before President Reagan accepted his resignation, Secretary of
State Haig was out of step on at least two critical issues:

* He opposed the extension of the Administration's ban on American parts for the
Soviet-West European natural gas pipeline - and European reaction to that move
indicates that he was right.

* He also opposed a harder line against Israel's invasion of Lebanon and its
threatened ''decapitation'' of the Palestine Liberation Organization - but
history and realpolitik suggest that he was wrong, or at least over optimistic.

Right or wrong, such differences probably would not have brought about Mr.
Haig's departure; nor would the fact that he had become known as the Reagan
Administration's most moderate voice on security and foreign affairs. For he was
also its most volatile and demanding internal game-player, and that seems to
have contributed most to his downfall.

He brought no constituency that mattered much to the Administration - as, say,
Jeane Kirkpatrick brings the neo-conservatives - so Mr.  Haig urgently needed to
make one of the Reagan inner circle; instead, he demanded preference and kept
threatening to resign if he didn't get it. In sharp contrast, James A. Baker 3d,
who twice opposed Mr. Reagan's Presidential nomination, quickly became a
teamplaying member of his White House staff - one who finally recommended that
the President accept Mr. Haig's latest offer to resign.

Ironically, over the weekend, the Democratic national conference echoed Mr.
Haig's views on the Middle East, resolving that after the invasion ''a new
opportunity exists to build a lasting peace for the people of Lebanon and
greater security for Israel.'' Mr. Haig was already out before that could damage
him by association; but it's hard to see why either he or the Democrats think
that.

The Secretary apparently believed that the new opportunity would be found not
only by getting all foreign troops out of Lebanon and restoring there a
government that could govern; but also through a negotiated trade-off of greater
Palestinian ''autonomy'' for improved Israeli security.

This would require securing Israel's northern border with Lebanon from any
possibility of P.L.O. military emplacements or raids - perhaps by an
international force including American troops. Given such assurance, Israel
would be expected to move ahead with Palestinian ''autonomy'' on the West Bank -
not autonomy as Prime Minister Begin has interpreted it so far, but as American
and Egyptian officials envisioned it in negotiating the Camp David accords.

That sounds rational and balanced, but there's no reason to suppose that the
Begin-Sharon Government would make such a trade-off - certainly not without the
proposed American military presence in Lebanon. And if such a deal could be
struck, there's no more reason to suppose that Mr. Begin and Mr. Sharon would
interpret its ''autonomy'' guarantees any more generously than they interpreted
those of Camp David.

Because Mr. Begin failed - in the view of both the Carter and Reagan
Administrations - to keep his Camp David pledges, Israeli settlements on the
West Bank now are a powerful internal political obstacle to greater autonomy for
Palestinians living there; annexation seems more likely than any significant
autonomy. And why would Israel be more willing to yield on autonomy now, in the
wake of its crushing military overkill in Lebanon and its near wipe-out of
P.L.O. forces?

Besides, if the price of a new autonomy agreement for West Bank Palestinians is
the presence of American troops on Israeli borders, that price is too high. This
judgment is not the product of neoisolationism or ''post-Vietnam syndrome'' or
any other such convenient banality. It's a recognition that American interests
would be disastrously served if American troops were used in such a way that
Arab states - particularly Iran, Saudi Arabia and Egypt -viewed them as the
direct military protectors of Israel.

The Israeli invasion demonstrated, anyway, that Israel does not need American
protection as long as it has American weapons and leave to use them as it
chooses. That invasion almost certainly vindicated, within the Begin-Sharon
Government, its willingness to rely primarily on military solutions to deal with
its hostile Arab neighbors, save Egypt. It surely generated new hatred of the
Israeli presence and new suspicions of Israeli intentions among those neighbors,
perhaps even in Egypt. And if the invasion eliminated the P.L.O., it did not
eliminate the Palestinians.

If power is security, Israel may be gaining it. But that's a far cry from the
kind of ''new opportunity'' for peace that resulted only a few years ago from
Anwar el-Sadat's visit to Jerusalem and Menachem Begin's willingness to receive
him - a lesson in the uses of reason and good will that seems to have been lost
in the continuing thunder of arms and defiance in the Middle East.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-ed

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              328 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 30, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

'78 PACT SAID TO LIMIT ISRAELI USE OF CLUSTER BOMBS

BYLINE: By CHARLES MOHR, Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 709 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 29


Some United States officials said today that Israel had agreed in 1978 not to
use American-made cluster bomb units except in combat with two or more ''Arab
states'' and that Israel's admitted use of the weapons in recent fighting with
Syria and the Palestine Liberation Organization might constitute a violation of
the agreement.

However, this would have little practical effect unless President Reagan made a
formal legal finding that a violation was ''substantial,'' or both Houses of
Congress adopt a joint resolution declaring Israel ineligible to receive United
States arms. It is doubtful that Mr. Reagan will make such a finding and the
possibility that Congress would approve such a resolution is also in doubt.

Cluster bomb units is the name for a type of weapon in which hundreds of
bomblets are packed into a canister dropped from an aircraft. When a small
explosion opens the canister in midair, the bomblets are spread over an area
that is usually several hundred feet in diameter.

United States military experts said that the two types of American cluster bomb
weapons that Israel possessed were not designed as antipersonnel weapons and
would not be particularly lethal or suitable if employed in that role.

Use Acknowledged by Generals

One of the systems is an antitank cluster bomb, but the officials were unsure
whether this was the one used by Israel in the recent fighting in Lebanon.

Two Israeli generals have acknowledged in recent days that some cluster bombs
were used by the Israeli forces.  American officials said the 1978 agreement on
Israeli use of cluster bombs was the third such accord reached, each one more
tightly worded by the United States than the previous one. The agreement itself
is secret, but several officials said it contained the plural description ''Arab
states.''

Israel itself vigorously denies that the P.L.O. qualifies as a nation state, and
even Palestinian sympathizers would tend to agree.  Cluster bomb units were
developed in the 1960's, and the earliest American models employed in Vietnam
used powerful little bomblets with considerable power to kill personnel. Several
Western nations and the Soviet Union now make a variety of cluster bomb.

One Type No Longer Produced

One of the two American systems possessed by the Israelis, known as C.B.U. 58,
is no longer in production by the United States. The other, known as the Mk 20
''Rockeye,'' is an antitank cluster bomb.

The C.B.U. 58 system, which American officials suspect was the type used in
Lebanon, consists of an aluminum canister about seven feet long, hinged near the
the rear tail fins, and packed with 650 spherical bomblets 2.17 inches in
diameter - about half an inch larger in diameter than a golf ball.

A nose fuse on the bomb-shaped canister can be activated as a time fuse or as a
radar proximity fuse, which is detonated when near a radar transmitter. When the
small fuse explodes, air resistance opens the upper and lower halfs of the
canister like a clamshell and the bomblets are thrown out, falling to earth in a
doughnut pattern. The size of the impact area varies according to the altitude
from which the bomb is dropped, but would usually be about 400 feet long,
experts said.

The small bomblets have ribs or ''flutes'' on their surfaces that cause them to
spin rapidly. This arms the internal firing mechanism, allowing the bomblets to
explode on impact.

The Mk 20 antitank system contains 247 larger and much more powerful bomblets in
a similiar, but not identical, canister.  The C.B.U. 58 bomblets are meant
primarily to disable ''thinskinned'' vehicles and equipment such as trucks,
radar antennas, the radar vans typically used by surface-to-air missiles and
similar facilities. Although troops or civilians caught in the open could suffer
significant casualties from an attack, one American expert said, ''I would not
select this system as an antipersonnel weapon.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: diagram

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              329 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 30, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MAN IN THE NEWS;
A TOUGH-MINDED WEST POINTER

BYLINE: Special to the New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 14, Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 791 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 29


Nearly 20 years ago, Edward Leon Rowny poured after-dinner cognac for some
guests in his cramped rooms in a Saigon bachelor officers' quarters, put a
recording of his own harmonica music on a tape deck and settled back to ask
several reporters their impressions of how the Vietnam War was going in the
Mekong Delta.  Startled by the reporters' pessimistic views, a newly arrived
colonel who was also present objected that they must be mistaken. Mr. Rowny,
then a major general, interrupted in a gruff voice, ''Shut up dummy, you might
learn something.''

In the next 16 years General Rowny was given only one more general's star, but
he retained a reputation as a skeptical intellect, suspicious of official policy
lines, willing to listen to diverse points of view and with a strong dislike for
polishing apples.

New Treaty Is Aim

Today in Geneva, General Rowny, who retired from the army in 1979 to be free to
oppose the strategic arms limitation treaty signed that year, began the task of
attempting to negotiate with the Soviet Union a new treaty on reductions in
long-range nuclear weapons.

General Rowny spent the years 1973 to 1979 as the representative of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff to the United States strategic arms negotiation team in
Switzerland. He came not only to dislike the treaty ultimately signed in 1979
but also the American negotiating style.

In testimony before two Senate committees in 1979, General Rowny, who speaks
Russian, recalled evenings with his tough-talking Soviet counterparts, who he
said tended to exploit indications of American flexibility and
''reasonableness'' and to respond favorably to toughness.

Americans 'Success Oriented'

General Rowny was one of several witnesses that year who embraced the argument
that Americans tended to be too ''success oriented'' to negotiate well with
Soviet officials, seeking new formulas for agreement while the Russians stuck
tenaciously to the main elements of their original position.

No one thinks General Rowny will have an easy task in the months and, probably,
years ahead. He brings to the negotiating table proposals by President Reagan
for deep reductions in strategic, or intercontinental, nuclear weapons, not
simply ''limitations'' putting a cap on the growth in weapon inventories that
characterized previous treaties.

General Rowny has said he thoroughly approves of proposals for such relatively
sweeping reductions. But he seems to have few illusions that the Soviet leaders
will quickly or easily accept treaty proposals that require drastic changes in
national military acquisition policies.

Attended West Point

General Rowny, who plays classical and popular music on the harmonica, is
married to the former Mary Rita Leyko. They have five grown children, one of
whom is a rock-and-roll musician.

The son of a Polish immigrant who had lived under Russian rule and been forced
to speak Russian, General Rowny was born in Balitmore on April 3, 1917. After
graduation from Johns Hopkins University in 1937, he entered the military
academy at West Point, from which he graduated as a second lieutenant in the
Corps of Engineers in 1941.  He commanded both engineer and infantry battalions
in World War II and ultimately a regimental task force of the 92d Division in
Italy.

As a staff officer he helped plan the Inchon invasion during the Korean War and
later commanded the 38th Regiment in combat. He spent considerable time as a
staff officer and a former military comrade today called him ''an excellent
staff type, a thinker with an independent mind.''

He was sent to Vietnam in 1962, early in the American involvement, to establish
what was called the Army concept team in Vietnam. In that role he led a team
that studied new weapons, tactics and methods.

During his period as military representative to the arms negotiations, General
Rowny argued fervently that the Soviet bomber called Backfire in the West should
be counted as a strategic, intercontinental weapon, although the Russians count
it as a mediumrange bomber. His superiors on the Joint Chiefs of Staff
eventually came to accept a compromise under which the Soviet Union agreed to
limit production of the Backfire but did not count it in total weapons. This
apparently was a factor in General Rowny's resignation from the army.

The issue of the Backfire bomber may arise again and confront General Rowny and
his supporters with questions of consistency in the new negotiations.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: photo of Edward Rowny and Viktor Karpov

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company


                              330 of 330 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               June 30, 1982, Wednesday, Late City Final Edition

MENU IMPROVISATIONS FOR SUMMER NIGHTS

BYLINE: By CRAIG CLAIBORNE

SECTION: Section C; Page 1, Column 5; Living Desk

LENGTH: 2350 words

DATELINE: SUMMER, the season for relaxed, unhurried dining, has arrived,
bringing with it the annual flood of fresh garden items that add so much to the
dining experience: herbs such as basil and mint, chives and tarragon, greens
such as sorrel, arugula and scallions, deep


red ripe tomatoes and that consummately delicious seasonal delight, corn on the
cob. All are welcome and familiar tastes, of course, and mere anticipation of
them helps extend the pleasures of eating at this time of year.

For the curious and imaginative cook, however, something else is needed - an
ability to assess a proven dish and change it slightly to make it new or easier
to prepare. Summer may be a fine time to linger for hours at the dinner table on
a pleasant evening, but it is not a good time to linger for hours in a hot
kitchen.

The improvisations might simply involve a different slant to the flavor or
texture of a favored dish, something that can often be accomplished by the
merest nuance - a change in seasoning, for instance. Sometimes such alterations
might involve shortcutting the cooking procedure. A special favorite dish of
mine, which I first dined on years ago in Vietnam, is cha gio (it is pronounced
chah-jo), an appetizer of deep-fried meat and seafood that is served wrapped in
lettuce leaves. Cha gio seems to me an ideal start for a summer evening's meal,
something spicy and crunchy to set the diner up for a cold soup, an elegant
salad and the main course - all accompanied, naturally, by a chilled bottle of
wine.

The original recipe for cha gio is quite complicated, though. It calls for
wrapping the meat-and-seafood mixture in rice paper, spring-roll fashion, before
cooking it in deep fat - a great deal of effort. Pierre Franey and I thought
about it a bit and decided to streamline the procedure by cooking the meat rolls
over a charcoal grill and then serving them in lettuce leaves, along with fresh
mint leaves, fresh coriander and pieces of scallion.

In creating a summer salad, we fell back on one of our common practices: taking
advantage of a leftover. In this case it was a whole veal shank, which yields a
gelatin-rich broth that we had used in soups. We turned the meat from that shank
into a salad based broadly on a well-known (and, again, reasonably complicated)
Italian specialty called vitello tonnato. A veal roast is cooked for some time
in broth, along with tuna and anchovies, among other things, and served with a
mayonnaise sauce containing capers.

To make it easier we simply cubed the meat from the shank at hand - we could
just as easily have used any leftover or freshly cooked veal or chicken - and
tossed it with a well-seasoned mayonnaise that contained anchovy paste, capers,
scallions and a few basil leaves.  That, along with a salad of sliced fresh
tomatoes, french bread and a bottle of Soave, would make a fitting feast for any
summer's day.

We were so pleased with the results of our salad that we soon cooked another
veal shank, with which we made a variation, with a vinaigrette and garden-fresh
herbs.

Duck salads are another summer favorite. Some time ago we made a duck and mango
salad that met with a great response from those who sampled it. However, on this
occasion, rather than simplifying the cooking process, we elaborated on it
somewhat, using litchis instead of mangoes, plus kernels of corn fresh off the
cob, shredded basil, a bit of lime juice and a touch of chopped hot green
chilies.

As for summer soups, we had found a few bundles of fresh sorrel, or sour grass,
at an open-air market, so we prepared a classic potage germiny (cream of sorrel
soup), but with a difference. We decided to alter the flavor by adding curry
powder and, in view of the season, to serve the soup well chilled.

It seemed to us that a recipe for a second cold soup might be in order, so our
choice was a leek and potato soup - the familiar basis for vichyssoise. How to
give that old standard a new twist? Toss in a few chopped tarragon leaves and
there you have it.

Vietnamese Pork And Shrimp Balls In Lettuce Leaves
The rolls: 2 ounces of bean thread (cellophane noodles; see note) 1/2 pound
ground pork 1/4 pound raw shrimp, ground 2 teaspoons freshly grated ginger 1
tablespoon dry Sherry wine 2 teaspoons garlic, minced fine 1 teaspoon corn,
peanut or vegetable oil 1/2 teaspoon sugar
Salt to taste, if desired
Freshly ground pepper to taste The sauce: 3 tablespoons nuoc mam or nam pla (see
note) 3 tablespoons water
Juice of half a lime 1 tablespoon sugar 1 clove finely minced garlic 1/4
teaspoon hot dried red pepper flakes Garnishes: 12

Boston lettuce leaves 12 fresh coriander leaves 12 mint leaves 12

2-inch scallion pieces.

1. Soak bean thread in warm water for 30 minutes. Drain thoroughly. Chop into
small pieces and put in bowl.  2. Add pork, shrimp, ginger, wine, garlic, oil,
sugar, salt and pepper. Blend well with fingers.  3. Divide mixture into 12
portions and shape each into oval sausage about an inch thick.  4. When ready to
cook, prepare charcoal fire.  5. Combine sauce ingredients and ladle sauce into
six small serving dishes to be used for dipping.  6. Cook pork and shrimp rolls
over charcoal, turning them until thoroughly cooked, about 10 minutes.7. To eat,
use one lettuce leaf for each ball. Place on coriander leaf one mint leaf and
one piece of scallion in the center of the leaf. Add one meat ball and wrap
lettuce leaf to enclose fillings.  Dip end of filled leaf into sauce and eat.
Dip as often as necessary.

Yield: 4 servings as appetizer.  NOTE: Bean thread, nuoc mam and nam pla are
available where Asian groceries are sold.

Duck and Litchi Nut Salad

1 5-pound roast duck (using any standard recipe) 2 cups green beans, ends
trimmed, cut in 2-inch lengths 1 cup green peppers, cored, seeded and cut in
thin strips 3/4 cup tomato, peeled, seeded and cut into 1/2-inch pieces 1 cup
cooked whole kernel corn 3/4 cup drained, canned litchi nuts, each cut in half 1
to 2 tablespoons chopped hot fresh or canned chilies such as jalapenos 2
tablespoons lime juice 2 tablespoons vinegar, preferably fruitflavored such as
raspberry 6 tablespoons corn, peanut or vegetable oil 2 teaspoons sesame oil
(see note) 1/4 cup basil, shredded fine Salt to taste, if desired Freshly ground
pepper to taste.

1. Prepare duck and let cool.  2. Drop green beans into boiling water and let
simmer until barely tender, about 7 minutes; cooking time will depend on age of
beans.  Add green peppers and let them simmer about 30 minutes. Drain.

3. Remove skin from duck and flesh from bones. Cut flesh into bitesize pieces.
There should be about 3 cups.  4. Put duck in mixing bowl, add remaining
ingredients, blend well and serve.  Yield: 4 to 8 appetizer servings or 4
main-course servings.  NOTE: Use the sesame oil available in Chinese markets and
certain health food stores, but avoid the refined oil found on supermarket
shelves.

Salade de Veau et de Thon (Veal and tuna salad)

4 cups cooked, cubed veal such as veal shank (see recipe) or cooked, cubed
skinless, boneless chicken

1 cup drained tuna packed in oil 2 cups freshly cooked or canned chickpeas,
drained (if canned are used, rinse well and drain)

1 1/4 cups freshly made mayonnaise 2 tablespoons anchovy paste 1/4 teaspoon
Tabasco sauce Juice of 1/2 lemon 1/4 cup drained capers 1/2 cup loosely packed,
shredded fresh basil 1/4 cup finely chopped scallions, green parts and all.

1. Put veal, tuna and chickpeas in mixing bowl.  2. Blend mayonnaise, anchovy
paste, Tabasco, lemon juice, capers, basiland scallions. Pour over veal mixture.
Blend gently but well.  Yield: 6 to 8 servings.

Boiled Veal Shank

1 4 1/2-pound veal shank 20 cups water 1 cup coarsely chopped onion 1/2 cup
coarsely chopped carrots 1/2 cup coarsely chopped celery 2 cloves garlic, peeled
and left whole 1 bay leaf 1 teaspoon dried thyme 10 peppercorns 6 sprigs parsley
2 whole cloves Salt to taste, if desired.

1. Combine all ingredients in kettle and bring to boil.  2. Let simmer two
hours, skimming surface as necessary. Broth of this recipe may be used for soups
and sauces.

Potage Germiny Au Kari (Curried sorrel soup)

1 1/2 pounds sorrel (sour grass) 2 tablespoons butter 2 tablespoons shallots,
chopped fine 2 tablespoons curry powder 4 cups rich chicken broth 3 cups heavy
cream 6 egg yolks Salt to taste Freshly ground pepper to taste.

1. Carefully pull tender leaves from sorrel stems. Discard the tough stems.
There should be about 20 cups of leaves. Rinse leaves well and drain well.
Gather a few leaves and shred as fine as possible; there should be about 8 cups.

2. Heat one tablespoon of butter in heavy saucepan and add sorrel.  Cook,
stirring, briefly until wilted. Set aside.  3. Heat remaining butter in small
skillet and add shallots and curry powder. Cook, stirring, until shallots are
wilted. Add about half a cup or so of broth and stir to dissolve spice. Add
remaining broth.

4. Pour cream into larger saucepan and add egg yolks, stirring to blend.  5.
Place cream mixture over low heat and add curried broth. Add salt and pepper to
taste. Heat, stirring constantly with wooden spoon, until soup coats spoon
lightly. Do not let soup boil or it will curdle. It should at no point be
brought beyond the barely simmering stage. Strain soup into mixing bowl and add
sorrel. Soup may be served hot or cold; if cold it should be thoroughly chilled.

Yield: About 8 cups.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Illustrations: drawing

                   Copyright 1982 The New York Times Company
